
Paris, IL Code of Ordinances


CITY OF PARIS, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-13-2018
State legislation current through ILCS Pamphlet #1, 2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




OFFICIALS OF PARIS, ILLINOIS



 




Craig Smith, Mayor








Commissioners




Bob Boyer




Jerry Branson




Harry Hughes




Steve Kemper








Michael Martin, City Administrator








Dennis Thiel, City Treasurer








Bridget Anderson, Clerk








Fruin & Kash, Legal Counsel








Brian Gates, Fire Chief








Mike Henness, Police Chief





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 2, SERIES 2005




AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF PARIS, ILLINOIS




   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the Code of Ordinances of the City of Paris, which contains all
ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted by the City and
assembled for the first time since the last Code of Ordinances for the City
of Paris was prepared; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Illinois Complied Statutes; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of law in the State of Illinois.



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS,
ILLINOIS, as follows:



   SECTION 1:  That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Paris,
Illinois, as submitted by the American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, be and the same is hereby adopted as if set out in this
section in its entirety.



   SECTION 2:  Such Code shall be deemed published as of the date of its
adoption and approval by the City Council, and the Code of Ordinances shall
be kept on file in the Office of the Paris City Clerk.



   I move the adoption of this Ordinance this 24th day of January, 2005.



                        Jerry Branson /s/ 
                        Commissioner



   I second the motion.



                        Bob J. Boyer /s/ 
                        Commissioner



AYES:  Boyer, Branson, Morgan, Thomason, Smith



NAYS:  None



   I declare the forgoing Ordinance adopted this 24th day of January, 2005.



                        Craig Smith /s/ 
                        Mayor



ATTEST:



Cathy Higgins /s/ 
City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 28, SERIES 2005



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the first supplement of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to the sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS:



   Section 1:  That the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of
Paris is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by Council.



   Dated: July 25, 2005               Bob J. Boyer /s/   
                        Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion



   Dated: July 25, 2005               David Morgan /s/ 
                        Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES: Boyer, Branson, Morgan, Thomason, Smith



   NAYS:  None



   I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and approved
by me this 25th day of July, 2005.



                        Craig Smith  /s/     
                        Mayor 



ATTEST:    Cathy Higgins  /s/
      City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 32, SERIES 2006



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the second supplement of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to the sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS:



   Section 1:  That the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of
Paris is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by Council.



   Dated: October 9, 2006               Jerry Branson /s/ 
 



                           Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion



   Dated: October 9, 2006               David Morgan /s/ 



                           Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES: Boyer, Branson, Morgan, Smith



   NAYS:  None                                       
         



   ABSENT: Thomason



      I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and
approved by me this 9th day of October, 2006.



                                      
Craig Smith  /s/     



                                    Mayor 



ATTEST:    Cathy Higgins  /s/



      City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 12  SERIES 2007



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the third supplement of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to the sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS:



   Section 1:  That the third supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:  Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of
Paris is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by Council.



   Dated: August 13, 2007               Jerry Branson /s/ 
 



                           Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion



   Dated: August 13, 2007               Harry W. Hughes
/s/ 



                           Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES: Branson, Faulk, Givens, Hughes, Smith



   NAYS:  None                                       
         



   ABSENT: None



      I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and
approved by me this 13th day of August, 2007.



         Craig Smith  /s/     



   Mayor



ATTEST:    Cathy Higgins  /s/



      City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 24  SERIES 2008



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS, ILLINOIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the fourth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City of Paris to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date:



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS;



   Section 1:   That the fourth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the Council of the City of Paris and the City
Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by the
Council.



   Dated:  August 25, 2008      Frank A. Givens  /s/       



                  Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion.



   Dated: August 25, 2008      Roger Faulk  /s/             



                  Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES:  Branson, Faulk, Givens, Hughes, Smith



   NAYS:  None                                       
       



   I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and approved
by me this 25th day of August, 2008.



         Craig Smith  /s/     



   Mayor 



ATTEST:       Cathy Higgins  /s/



      City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 20  SERIES 2009



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the fifth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City of Paris to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date:



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS;



   Section 1:   That the fifth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the Council of the City of Paris and the City
Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by the
Council.



   Dated:  September 14, 2009            Frank A. Givens 
/s/       



Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion.



   Dated: September 14, 2009            Jerry Branson  /s/ 
         



Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES:  Branson, Faulk, Givens, Hughes, Smith



   NAYS:  None                                       
       



   I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and approved
by me this 14th day of September, 2009.



                        Craig Smith  /s/     



                        Mayor 



ATTEST:  Cathy Higgins  /s/ 



         City Clerk



ORDINANCE NO. 19    SERIES 2012



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF PARIS



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the seventh supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Paris, which supplement contains all the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City of Paris to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Illinois;
and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PARIS;



   Section 1:   That the seventh supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Paris as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of
Paris is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.



   I offer the foregoing Ordinance and move that it be adopted by the
Council.



   Dated:  October 22, 2012            Jerry Branson  /s/ 
     



                        Commissioner



   I second the foregoing motion.



   Dated: October 22, 2012            Bob J. Boyer  /s/   
       



                        Commissioner



ROLL CALL:



   AYES:  Boyer, Branson, Hughes



   NAYS:  None                Kemper and Smith absent 



   I declare the foregoing Ordinance adopted by the Council and approved
by me this 22nd day of October, 2012.



                        Harry Hughes  /s/     



                        Mayor Pro-Tem



ATTEST:  Cathy Higgins  /s/ 



         City Clerk



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   11.   CITY STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of cde



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the City of Paris shall be designated as
the code of Paris and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   CITY, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  The City of Paris,
Illinois, irrespective of its population or legal classification.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Paris.



   COUNTY.  Edgar County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board of Edgar County, Illinois.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT.  Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at
municipal elections.



(ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD, or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority
of the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   ILCS.  Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the City of Paris.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPAL CODE.  The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.12)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common
of the whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land
trust which owns property.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as
individuals.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers employed and in the service of the
City of Paris.  POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in
the employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as police officers.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes school districts; units of legal
government; the village, city, county, state, or federal governments,
officers and agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail, and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   STREET.  Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The city code hereby adopted,
and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of
new titles, chapters, or sections.



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in Section 1 of
Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing, electronic, and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required
by law, it shall be:



      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or
she is unable to write, his or her proper mark; or



      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Electronic
Commerce Security Act, ILCS Chapter 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq., except as
otherwise provided by law.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of 1 gender shall include the other genders.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the
context admits.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded.  If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to 3 or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor
and City Council may be fully carried out.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the
same as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of
the prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.



(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder;



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder;



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment.  The investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, subchapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof,
by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code
by the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of
ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a
new code of ordinances by the City Council.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.  These
references shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or
office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not
limited to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or
vacating streets, alleys, or other public places; improvement ordinances;
bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances) as well as any other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
City Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to those technical codes shall
automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available for
public inspection by the city.  Further, to the extent of any conflict
between the technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted
by reference, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same
as the statute.  Example:  (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)  (Ord. 10,
passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985).



      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act.



   Statutory reference:



      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Chapter 5, Act 140, §§ 1
et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
city for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1



   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   City seal



§ 11.01  CITY SEAL.



   The corporate seal of the city shall be circular in form with the
device of a hand holding a pair of scales balanced, with the inscription,
“The Corporate Seal of the City of Paris, 1869,” around the perimeter of
the seal.



(1969 Code, § 2-4)



Cross-reference:



   Seal; custody and use, see § 32.044



Statutory reference:



   Authority to have corporate seal, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 2-2-12



   Facsimile seal, see ILCS Chapter 30, Act 320, § 3



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   31.   CITY COUNCIL; MAYOR



   32.   CITY OFFICIALS



   33.   BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AND THE LIKE



   34.   CIVIL DEFENSE



   35.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



   36.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



   37.   FINANCE



   38.   TAXATION



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Administrative Provisions



   30.01   Fiscal year



   30.02   Datum



   30.03   Surety bonds; requirements



   30.04   Elections; procedures; time



   30.05   Illinois Freedom of Information Act



   30.06   Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment adopted by reference



State Gift Ban Act



   30.15   State Gift Ban Act adopted



   30.16   Ethics officer



   30.17   Complaints; State Legislative Ethics Commission



   30.18   Future amendments



   30.19   Effect if declared unconstitutional



Wages of Laborers



   30.30   General



   30.31   Prevailing rate of wages



   30.32   Public access



   30.33   Employers



   30.34   Certified copies



Equal Employment Policy



   30.45   Definition of minority



   30.46   Enforcement of federal and state acts



   30.47   Non-discriminatory practices; equal opportunity clause



   30.48   Officials and employees to carry out and adhere to plan



GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year for the city shall begin on the first day of May of
each year and end on the last day of April of the following year.



(1969 Code, § 2-1)



Statutory reference:



   Fiscal year defined, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2(5)



§ 30.02  DATUM.



   The datum for city levels shall be the datum point established by the
U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey situated in the County Courthouse yard, being
represented by a sunken post with a disc stamped “Paris (elevation 726.30
M.S.L.).”



(1969 Code, § 2-2)  (Ord. —, passed 2-3-1969)



§ 30.03  SURETY BONDS; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the city is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position or to the
issuance of a license or permit for the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on the bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in the state as a surety company, unless approved by the City
Council.



   (B)   Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional
surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the city against loss or
liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties, or
for any other reason, the City Council may order a new surety or sureties to
be secured for a bond.  If the new surety or sureties are not procured
within 10 days from the time the order is transmitted to the principal on the
bond, or his or her assignee, the Council shall declare the bond to be void,
and thereupon the principal or assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered
the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was required.



(1969 Code, § 2-3)



§ 30.04  ELECTIONS; PROCEDURES; TIME.



   Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by state law,
and at the time prescribed by state law.



(1969 Code, § 2-6)



Statutory reference:



   Primary and general elections in the commission form of municipal
government, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 4-3-5et seq.



   State Election Code, see ILCS Chapter 10, Act 5, §§ 1-1et seq.



   Time of election in the commission form of government, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-15-5,4-3-1



§ 30.05  ILLINOIS FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.



   (A)   The City Administrator is hereby designated as the person to
whom all requests for access to the records of the city are to be referred. 
Such requests are to be made at City Hall, 123 S. Central Avenue, Paris,
Illinois between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
In the event that the City Administrator is not available during the times
described above, the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk is designated as the person
to whom the initial requests are to be made.



   (B)   Any records which are the subject of a request under the
Freedom of Information Act shall be retrieved from such place as they are
stored, by the City Administrator, City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk, or by an
employee of the city acting under the direction of the City Administrator,
City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk. In no event shall records be retrieved by
the party requesting them or by any person who is not employed by the city.



   (C)   If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies,
whether certified or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the
City Administrator.  The City Administrator shall maintain a written
schedule of current fees in the Clerk’s office. The fees so charged shall
reflect the actual cost of copying the records, and the cost of certifying
copies, if certification is requested.



   (D)   In the event that a request to inspect city records is denied
by the City Administrator, City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk, the denial may be
appealed to the Mayor. Such an appeal must be made within 14 days after the
requesting party receives the written notice denying the request; or, in the
event that the denial is not by letter, the appeal must be made 14 days after
the request is effectively denied. In the absence of the Mayor, appeals from
denials of requests for access shall be made to the City Administrator in the
times set forth above.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall prepare:



      (1)   A City Information Directory;



      (2)   A block diagram of the functional subdivisions of the
city;



      (3)   A City Records Directory; and



      (4)   A Records Catalogue



all of which shall be substantially in the same form as the documents
attached to this ordinance and made a part hereof by reference.



(Ord. 2004-13, passed 5-10-2004)



§ 30.06  POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment is hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in full herein.



(Ord. 2017-19, passed 12-11-2017)



STATE GIFT BAN ACT



§ 30.15  STATE GIFT BAN ACT ADOPTED.



   (A)   The State Gift Ban Act  is hereby adopted.



   (B)   The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed
official or any employee of the city.



(Ord. 1999-27, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 30.16  ETHICS OFFICER.



   To the extent authorized by law the City Attorney is appointed to serve
as the ethics officer of the city.  The ethics officer’s duties shall be
as provided in the above-mentioned § 35.



(Ord. 1999-27, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 30.17  COMPLAINTS; STATE LEGISLATIVE ETHICS COMMISSION.



   All complaints for violations of the Act and this subchapter shall be
filed with the State Legislative Ethics Commission (created by § 45(a)(6) of
the Act.



(Ord. 1999-27, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 30.18  FUTURE AMENDMENTS.



   Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act that becomes effective after
the passage of this subchapter shall be incorporated into this subchapter by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of
gifts.  However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.



(Ord. 1999-27, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 30.19  EFFECT IF DECLARED UNCONSTITUTIONAL.



   (A)   If the State Supreme Court declares the State Gift Ban Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this subchapter shall be repealed as
of the date that the Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject
to any further appeals or rehearings.  The subchapter shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city if
the Act is found unconstitutional by the State Supreme Court.



   (B)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the State Gift Ban
Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of
the Act as adopted by this subchapter, it shall remain in full force and
effect; however, that part of this subchapter relating to the part of the Act
found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city.



(Ord. 1999-27, passed 6-28-1999)



WAGES OF LABORERS



§ 30.30  GENERAL.



   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of
laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed in any public works by state,
county, city, or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one
under contract for public works,” approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the
general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics,
and other workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the city is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction in the Edgar County area as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June
2008, a copy of that determination being attached hereto in Ordinance
2008-18, Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. The definition of
any terms appearing in this subchapter which are also used in the aforesaid
Act shall be the same as in said Act.



(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-9-2008)



§ 30.31  PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES.



   Nothing herein shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate
of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public works
of the city to the extent required by the aforesaid Act.



(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-9-2008)



§ 30.32  PUBLIC ACCESS.



   (1)   The city shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of the city this determination of
such prevailing rate of wage.



   (2)   The city shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the area that the determination of prevailing
wages has been made. Said notice shall conform substantially to the notice
attached hereto. Such publication shall constitute notice that this is the
determination of the city and is effective.



(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-9-2008)



§ 30.33  EMPLOYERS.



   The city shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and
to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees
who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of
workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.



(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-9-2008)



§ 30.34  CERTIFIED COPIES.



   The city shall promptly file a certified copy of the ordinance
establishing this subchapter with both the Secretary of State Index Division
and the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois.



(Ord. 2008-18, passed 6-9-2008)



EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY



§ 30.45  DEFINITION OF MINORITY.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the term MINORITY will refer to
American Indians, Asians, Blacks, or Hispanics, or to such protected classes
as youth, elderly, women, or persons with disabilities.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 8-8-2011)



§ 30.46  ENFORCEMENT OF FEDERAL AND STATE ACTS.



   The city hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce, and advocate for
all laws related to equal employment opportunity including, but not limited
to, the following:



   (A)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or
national origin.



   (B)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in
all employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation,
and other terms, privileges and conditions of employment.



   (C)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.



   (D)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963 which covers all employees who are
covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Act forbids pay differentials on
the basis of sex.



   (E)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967 which prohibits
discrimination because of age against anyone between the ages of 40 and 65.



   (F)   Federal Executive Order 11246 which requires every contract
with federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination
because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.



   (G)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and POL
Implementing Regulations at 29 CFR 32 which prohibits any discrimination
based on disability.



   (H)   Section 188 of WIA and the U.S. DOL Regulations at 29 CFR
Parts 31 and 32 which provides that no person in the United States shall be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subject to
discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin, under any
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the
Department of Labor.



   (I)   Chapter 68, Article I, Section 17-19 of the Illinois
Constitution which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed,
national ancestry, disability, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices
of any employer.



   (J)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which prohibits
discrimination against an individual with disabilities on the basis of their
disability.



   (K)   Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5) which prohibits
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental
disability, military status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge
from military service in connection with employment, real estate
transactions, access to financial credit, and the availability of public
accommodations.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 8-8-2011)



§ 30.47  NON-DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES; EQUAL OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE.



   (A)   The city will assure non-discriminatory employment practices
in recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or
termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of
compensation and use of facilities.



   (B)   The city will not contract with other agencies, banks,
businesses, vendors, etc., who practice or establish a pattern of
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental
disability, military status, sexual orientation, or unfavorable discharge
from military.



   (C)   The city will incorporate into any contract for construction
work, or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations,
and orders of the Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remains
in effect, which is paid in whole or in part with the aid of such financial
assistance, the following “Equal Opportunity Clause”:



“In the event of the contractor's non-compliance with the provisions of
this Equal Employment Opportunity Clause, the Act or the Rules and
Regulations of the Department, the contractor may be declared ineligible for
future contracts or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its
political subdivisions or municipal corporations, and the contract may be
cancelled or voided in whole or in part, and other sanctions or penalties may
be imposed or remedies invoked as provided by statute or regulation. During
the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:



   (1)   That he or she will not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, marital status, national origin or ancestry,



citizenship status, age, physical or mental disability unrelated to ability,
sexual orientation, military status or an unfavorable discharge from military
service; and, further, that he or she will examine all job classifications to
determine if minority persons or women are underutilized and will take
appropriate affirmative action to rectify any underutilization.



   (2)   That, if he or she hires additional employees in order to
perform this contract or any portion of this contract, he or she will
determine the availability (in accordance with the Department's Rules and
Regulations) of minorities and women in the areas from which he or she may
reasonably recruit and he or she will hire for each job classification for
which employees are hired in a way that minorities and women are not
underutilized.



   (3)   That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by him or her or on his or her behalf, he or she will state that all
applicants will be afforded equal opportunity without discrimination because
of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national
origin or ancestry, citizenship status, age, physical or mental disability
unrelated to ability, sexual orientation, military status or an unfavorable
discharge from military service.



   (4)   That he or she will send to each labor organization or
representative of workers with which he or she has or is bound by a
collective bargaining or other agreement or understanding, a notice advising
the labor organization or representative of the contractor's obligations
under the Act and the Department's Rules and Regulations. If any labor
organization or representative fails or refuses to cooperate with the
contractor in his or her efforts to comply with the Act and Rules and
Regulations, the contractor will promptly notify the Department and the
contracting agency and will recruit employees from other sources when
necessary to fulfill its obligations under the contract.



   (5)   That he or she will submit reports as required by the
Department's Rules and Regulations, furnish all relevant information as may
from time to time be requested by the Department or the contracting agency,
and in all respects comply with the Act and the Department's Rules and
Regulations.



   (6)   That he or she will permit access to all relevant books,
records, accounts and work sites by personnel of the contracting agency and
the Department for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the
Act and the Department's Rules and Regulations.



   (7)   That he or she will include verbatim or by reference the
provisions of this clause in every subcontract awarded under which any
portion of the contract obligations are undertaken or assumed, so that the
provisions will be binding upon the subcontractor. In the same manner as with
other provisions of this contract, the contractor will be liable for
compliance with applicable provisions of this clause by subcontractors; and
further it will promptly notify the contracting agency and the Department in
the event any subcontractor fails or refuses to comply with the provisions.
In addition, the contractor will not utilize any subcontractor declared by
the Illinois Human Rights Commission to be ineligible for contracts or
subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions
or municipal corporations.”



   (D)   The city assures that it will actively provide
nondiscriminatory outreach, selection, and service to all individuals.



   (E)   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job
categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work force
will represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the city as
well as surrounding areas.



   (F)   The city will provide accommodations to the best of its
ability for employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural
limitations.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 8-8-2011)



§ 30.48  OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES TO CARRY OUT AND ADHERE TO PLAN.



   (A)   All city employees are expected to adhere to the policy set
forth in this chapter and to work actively for its implementation both
internally and in carrying out village/city program activities.



   (B)   The City of Paris, Illinois designates the Mayor and
Commissioners of the City Council to carry out the EEO/AA plan.



(Ord. 2011-12, passed 8-8-2011)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY COUNCIL; MAYOR



Section



City Council



   31.001   Council established



   31.002   Vacancies



   31.003   Governmental departments



   31.004   Bond



   31.005   Contracts; authority



   31.006   Rules and regulations



   31.007   Enforcement authority



   31.008   Estimate of expenses



   31.009   Board of Local Improvements



   31.010   Compensation



   31.011   Health insurance



Council Meetings



   31.025   Regular meetings



   31.026   Special meetings



   31.027   Presiding officer



   31.028   Addressing meeting



   31.029   Disturbing meeting



   31.030   Robert’s Rules of Order



   31.031   Order of business



   31.032   Procedures for public discussion



Mayor; Department of Public Affairs



   31.045   Mayor; Superintendent of Public Affairs



   31.046   Duties



   31.047   Department of Public Affairs; officers



   31.048   Responsibilities



   31.049   Publication of ordinances



   31.050   Appointments



   31.051   Contracts; execution



   31.052   Extraordinary powers in emergency



   31.053   Emergency interim succession



Commissioner of Accounts and Finances



   31.065   Superintendent of Department



   31.066   Accounts and records



   31.067   Audits



   31.068   Inspection of accounts



   31.069   Report on bills



   31.070   Collection of monies due



   31.071   Report on failure to pay



   31.072   Department officers



   31.073   Officers’ bond



   31.074   Absence of Mayor



Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements



   31.085   Superintendent of Department; duties



   31.086   Department officers



   31.087   Motor fuel tax



Commissioner of Public Health and Safety



   31.100   Superintendent of Department



   31.101   Enforcement authority



   31.102   Department officers



Commissioner of Public Property



   31.115   Superintendent of Department



   31.116   Department officers



   31.117   Custody of city-owned property



   31.118   Inventory; maps



   31.999   Penalty



CITY COUNCIL



§ 31.001  COUNCIL ESTABLISHED.



   The Council shall consist of 5 Commissioners, 1 of which is the Mayor
elected for a 4-year term, as is provided by law.  The Council shall be the
governing body of the city and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by
statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-23)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.002  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies occurring in the Council shall be filled by the remaining
members, as provided by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.003  GOVERNMENTAL DEPARTMENTS.



   The city government shall be divided into 5 departments, as is provided
by statute, and each Commissioner shall be the superintendent of a
department.  The Mayor shall be Superintendent of the Department of Public
Affairs, and the other Commissioners shall be allotted to the 4 other
departments by the Council as is provided by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-25)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.004  BOND.



   Each Commissioner and the Mayor shall give a bond in that sum as may be
determined by the Council, this bond to be not less than $3,000 and to be
approved by the Judge of the Circuit Court, as is provided by statute, and
filed with the County Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 2-26)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.005  CONTRACTS; AUTHORITY.



   The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts to
which the city may be a party, and no contract shall be entered into on
behalf of or be binding on the city unless it is entered into by ordinance or
resolution or is reduced to writing and approved by the Council, or expressly
authorized by ordinance or resolution.  No such ordinance or resolution
shall be passed until it has remained on file at least 1 week as required by
statute.



(1969 Code, §§ 2-8, 2-32)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



Statutory reference:



   Ordinances authorizing contracts to be filed for public inspection, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-13



§ 31.006  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Each Commissioner shall have authority to make the rules and
regulations to govern the conduct of the officers and employees assigned to
the department of which he or she is the superintendent.  These rules shall
be binding on and obeyed by all such officers and employees until and unless
the same are revoked or altered by the Council or by that Commissioner.



(1969 Code, § 2-33)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.007  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   Each Commissioner shall have the power and authority to enforce all
ordinance provisions relating to anything under his or her control as
superintendent of a department of the city.



(1969 Code, § 2-34)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.008  ESTIMATE OF EXPENSES.



   It shall be the duty of each Commissioner to present to the City Clerk
each year a detailed statement of the expenses which it is anticipated will
be necessary for the operation of his or her department for the coming fiscal
year.  This statement shall be presented to the Commissioner of Accounts and
Finances on or before the first day of March of each year.



(1969 Code, § 2-35)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.009  BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Council shall be and act as the Board of Local Improvements
for the city.  The Board of Local Improvements shall meet upon the call of
the Mayor or any 2 members.  Twenty-four hours’ notice of the call shall
be given each member; provided that a meeting may be held when all members
are present, without notice.



(1969 Code, § 2-36)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.010  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation for the Mayor is hereby set at the annual rate of
$9,000, and the compensation for the Commissioners is hereby set at the
annual rate of $7,800.



(1969 Code, § 2-39)  (Ord. 1998-9, passed 5-11-1998; Am. Ord. 2002-4,
passed 2-11-2002)



§ 31.011  HEALTH INSURANCE.



   No part-time employees shall be eligible for health insurance benefits
provided by the city.  This exclusion shall include the Mayor and City
Council members regardless of their formal classification.



(1969 Code, § 2-40)  (Ord. 1999-23, passed 6-28-1999)



COUNCIL MEETINGS



§ 31.025  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the
second and fourth Mondays of each month at 6:30 p.m. in the Council room of
City Hall; provided, that if a meeting date should occur on any date declared
by the state to be a holiday, the meeting may be moved by the City Council to
the next secular day following.



   (B)   At the last meeting of the fiscal year, the City Council shall
prepare a schedule showing all of its proposed regular meetings for the next
fiscal year.  The schedule shall state the regular dates, times, and places
of the proposed regular meetings of the City Council.



   (C)   The schedule shall, by the first of the fiscal year which it
represents, be posted on the door of the Council room of City Hall.



   (D)   The City Council shall provide copies of any schedule of
meetings required by this section to any local newspaper of local circulation
or to any local radio or television station that has filed an annual request
for that notice.



(1969 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 1999-16,
passed 5-10-1999; Am. Ord. 2004-36, passed 9-27-2004)



§ 31.026  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or
any 2 Commissioners upon a 48-hour notice to every member of the Council;
provided that the requirement of a notice shall be binding in any special
meeting at which all of the members of the Council are present, as is
provided by statute. Notice of the special meeting and the agenda must be
posted 48 hours prior to a special, rescheduled regular, or reconvened
meeting. Ten day notice is required for changes to regular meeting dates.



   (B)   The notices may be served by any member of the Police
Department or by any other person in the city; and it shall be the duty of
the City Clerk when given copies of the notices to serve the same or cause
the same to be served immediately.



   (C)   Public notice of a special, rescheduled regular, or
reconvened  meeting shall be given at least 48 hours prior to the meeting by
posting the notice and agenda.



   (D)   A notice of special meetings shall be provided to any news
medium that has filed an annual request for that notice.



(1969 Code, § 2-28)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2012-2,
passed 1-23-2012)



§ 31.027  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the
Council; provided, that in the absence of the Mayor, the Commissioner of
Accounts and Finances shall be the presiding officer as is provided by
statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-29)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.028  ADDRESSING MEETING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to address or attempt to address
any regular or special meeting of the Council excepting upon the consent of
the Mayor or with the consent of a majority of the members present.



(1969 Code, § 2-30)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.029  DISTURBING MEETING.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or special
meeting of the Council; any person violating any provision of this section
shall be subject to penalties as provided in § 31.999 of this code and may
be summarily ejected from the Council room and City Hall.



(1969 Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.030  ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.



   Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the proceedings of the City
Council where applicable and when not in conflict with statutes or ordinances.



(1969 Code, § 2-37)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.031  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   The following order of business shall govern proceedings of
the City Council.



   (B)   A quorum being present, the Council shall proceed to transact
the business before it in the following manner, unless the same be
temporarily suspended by unanimous consent:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Roll call of members;



      (3)   Devotional exercises;



      (4)   Reading of minutes of preceding meeting or meetings;



      (5)   Petitions and communications;



      (6)   Preparation of bills;



      (7)   Reports of officers;



      (8)   Reports of department heads and Commissioners;



      (9)   Reports of special committees;



      (10)   Unfinished business; and



      (11)   Miscellaneous or new business.



(1969 Code, § 2-38)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.032  PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC DISCUSSION.



   Citizen participation shall be listed on each regularly scheduled City
Council meeting agenda and persons shall be allowed to address the City
Council as set forth in this section.



   (A)   It shall be the policy of the City Council that any person may
address the City Council at its regular meeting under the citizen
participation agenda item.  Citizen participation shall be limited to 5
minutes per speaker on issues or matters relating to the city.  The 5-minute
time limit shall apply unless the City Council, by a majority vote, sets a
lower or higher time limit for comment on particular subject which shall
apply to all speakers during that citizen participation section.  After a
reasonable period of time has been devoted to citizen participation and all
of those desiring to provide public discussion have not had a chance to do
so, the citizen participation section may be closed upon a motion and second
of the City Council and a majority vote in favor thereof.  Any person who
was not able to address the City Council will be encouraged to attend a
subsequent meeting to address the City Council or to provide written comments.



   (B)   If numerous persons wish to speak on a single topic, the
Council may recognize a specified number of individuals who wish to speak in
favor of, against or wish to make general comments regarding the issue. The
Council shall not be required to allow every person who wishes to address the
issue to do so, but as many views as possible are encouraged to be heard. Any
person who is not able to speak during a citizen participation period shall
be allowed and encouraged to present their views to the city in writing.



   (C)   All comments must be civil in nature.  Any person who engages
in threatening, slanderous or disorderly behavior when addressing the City
Council shall be deemed out-of-order by the Mayor and his or her time to
address the Council at the meeting shall end.



(Ord. 2012-26, passed 12-10-2012)



MAYOR; DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS



§ 31.045  MAYOR; SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS.



   The Mayor shall be Commissioner of Public Affairs and shall be
Superintendent of the Department of Public Affairs and the city’s economic
development program, and shall report to the Council for its action all
matters requiring the attention of any department.



(1969 Code, § 2-42)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2004-36,
passed 9-27-2004)



§ 31.046  DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the
duties that are or may be prescribed by law, or by the city ordinances.  He
or she shall be the chief executive officer, economic development leader, and
representative of the city; he or she shall sign all contracts and warrants
on behalf of the city, and all licenses issued by the city; and he or she
shall cause to be prepared and published all statements and reports required
to be prepared and published by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the
Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-43)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.047  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS; OFFICERS.



   The Police Department, city lakes, the City Attorney, the City
Administrator, the Facilities Manager, and all officers, assistants, and
employees therein, and all other officers and employees of the city who are
not specifically assigned to any other department, are hereby assigned to the
Department of Public Affairs.



(1969 Code, § 2-44)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2000-15,
passed 4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2003-9, passed 5-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2015-12, passed
9-14-2015)



§ 31.048  RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Mayor shall be generally charged with and responsible for the
proper conduct of the city’s affairs, the conduct of elections, and the
enforcement of all ordinances of the city, as chief executive.



(1969 Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.049  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   The Mayor shall cause to be prepared and published all ordinances of
the city.



(1969 Code, § 2-46)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.050  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   Subject to the approval and consent of the Council, the Mayor
shall appoint the following:



      (1)   The City Administrator;



      (2)   The City Clerk;



      (3)   The City Treasurer;



      (4)   The City Attorneys;



      (5)   The Budget Officer;



      (6)   The Plan Commission;



      (7)   The Zoning Board of Appeals;



      (8)   The Park Board;



      (9)   The Police Pension Board;



      (10)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners;



      (11)   The Library Board;



      (12)   The Civil Defense Officer;



      (13)   Water Safety Officer; and



      (14)   The Facilities Manager.



   (B)   Subject to the approval and consent of the Council, the Mayor
may create committees for any special purpose and appoint the members of each
committee.



(1969 Code, § 2-47)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2004-36,
passed 9-27-2004; Am. Ord. 2015-12, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 31.051  CONTRACTS; EXECUTION.



   The Mayor, or any other person designated by the City Council, may
execute on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-9)



Statutory reference:



   Contracts which require approval of City



   Council, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-11



§ 31.052  EXTRAORDINARY POWERS IN EMERGENCY.



   In the event of an emergency, the Mayor shall have the following powers:



   (A)   The power and authority to proclaim a state of emergency
exists in the city;



   (B)   To contract with other units of government for the use of
manpower and equipment;



   (C)   To contract with private industry, leasing services, manpower
and equipment;



   (D)   To order all city employees to immediate active duty;



   (E)   To order city departments to concentrate their manpower and
equipment in a given area or areas;



   (F)   To authorize any city-owned or leased property to be made
available as emergency shelters, food and water service and dispensing areas,
hospitals, morgues, bases of operations, and the like;



   (G)   To order city employees and equipment to be utilized in the
transportation of equipment, supplies, food, water, materials, messages, and
the like from place to place to assist any governmental, Red Cross, or like
charitable agency operating within the city;



   (H)   To terminate ordinary city services;



   (I)   To terminate the operation of any city licensed business;



   (J)   To order a curfew for the general public or any segment of the
general public in all or any portion of the city;



   (K)   To close any street, park, or public facility within the city;



   (L)   To authorize agents of the city access to private property to
perform damage assessments; and



   (M)   Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



(Ord. 2003-14, passed 6-23-2003)



§ 31.053  EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSION.



   In the event that the Mayor, for any reason, is unable or unavailable
to perform the duties of office during a state of emergency, the duties shall
be performed by a Mayor Pro Tem. If circumstances prohibit the City Council
from convening to appoint a Mayor Pro Tem, the Mayor Pro Tem shall be the
most senior member of the City Council available.



(Ord. 2004-37, passed 9-13-2004)



COMMISSIONER OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES



§ 31.065  SUPERINTENDENT OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall be Superintendent of
the Department of Accounts and Finances, and shall have supervision over and
direction of all accounts and finances of the city, and shall have charge of
and supervision and direction over all records of the city and all officers,
boards, and departments insofar as the accounts and records of the city are
concerned.



(1969 Code, § 2-61)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2004-36,
passed 9-27-2004)



§ 31.066  ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.



   He or she shall cause proper accounts and records to be kept and proper
reports to be made by the officers and departments of the city, insofar as
the accounts and finances of the city are concerned.



(1969 Code, § 2-62)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.067  AUDITS.



   He or she shall audit, or cause to be audited, at frequent intervals,
the accounts and records of officers or employees of the city who may receive
or disburse money, and shall see to it that the annual audit required by
statute is made.



(1969 Code, § 2-63)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.068  INSPECTION OF ACCOUNTS.



   He or she shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all records or
accounts required to be kept in any of the offices or departments of the
city, insofar as the accounts and finances of the city are concerned, and
shall, at least once in every month, report the result of this inspection to
the Council, with such recommendations as he or she shall see fit to make.



(1969 Code, § 2-64)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.069  REPORT ON BILLS.



   He or she shall examine, or cause to be examined, and report to the
Council upon all bills, accounts, payrolls, demands, and claims before they
are acted upon, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 2-65)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.070  COLLECTION OF MONIES DUE.



   He or she shall collect, or cause to be collected, all claims, demands,
license fees, inspection fees, franchise taxes, fines, penalties,
forfeitures, rentals, or money, which may be due or become due to the city,
except as otherwise provided for by statute, and all amendments thereto, and
except as otherwise provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-66)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.071  REPORT ON FAILURE TO PAY.



   He or she shall report to the Council any failure to make a report, or
to pay monies due the city, with such recommendations in relation thereto as
he or she may deem proper.



(1969 Code, § 2-67)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.072  DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   The City Treasurer, the City Clerk, and the budget director/office
manager, and their respective offices and departments, all officers,
assistants, and employees therein, all clerical employees in City Hall, and
all bookkeepers and accountants, are hereby distributed and assigned to the
Department of Accounts and Finances and shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Commissioner thereof.



(1969 Code, § 2-68)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2003-9,
passed 5-5-2003)



§ 31.073  OFFICERS’ BOND.



   He or she shall require that every officer or employee having the care
or custody of funds of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of
their respective offices, give bond to the city, according to law, with good
and sufficient security, and in the amount as the Council shall by ordinance
or resolution prescribe.



(1969 Code, § 2-69)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.074  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.



   The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall be vice president of
the Council, and in case of vacancy of the office of Mayor, or the absence or
inability of the Mayor, shall perform the duties of the Mayor.



(1969 Code, § 2-70)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



§ 31.085  SUPERINTENDENT OF DEPARTMENT; DUTIES.



   The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall be
Superintendent of the Department of Streets and Public Improvements and shall
have charge of, and supervision over, and direction of the cleaning of
streets, avenues, alleys, and public places; traffic maintenance operations;
park maintenance operations; the construction and reconstruction of all
street improvements, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains, ditches, gutters,
culverts, crossing bridges, viaducts, subways, and other improvements, and of
the repair thereof, except when the improvement or repairs are paid for by
special assessments.



(1969 Code, § 2-75)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2008-28,
passed 11-10- 2008; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 7-11-2016)



§ 31.086  DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   The Electrical Inspector, Engineer, Park Board, and all persons
employed by the city in the maintenance, construction, or repair of the
streets, sidewalks, or city parks are hereby assigned to the Department of
Streets and Public Improvements and shall be under the supervision of the
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements.



(1969 Code, § 2-76)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.087  MOTOR FUEL TAX.



   All repairs, construction, or reconstruction of any and all streets,
and of all adjuncts and appurtenances thereto which may be made in whole or
part out of money received by the city from the state as its share of the
motor fuel tax, shall be under the control of the Commissioner of Streets and
Public Improvements.



(1969 Code, § 2-77)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



§ 31.100  SUPERINTENDENT OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall be Superintendent of
the Department of Public Health and Safety, and shall have charge,
supervision, and direction over all officers and employees hereinafter
assigned to that Department.



(1969 Code, § 2-78)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.101  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   He or she shall enforce, or cause to be enforced, the laws of the state
and the ordinances of the city, relating to public health and safety, and all
building and zoning ordinances.



(1969 Code, § 2-79)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.102  DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   The Health Officer, Fire Department, Building Inspector, the city
transfer station, the collection of garbage and refuse, and all officers,
assistants, and employees therein, are hereby distributed and assigned to the
Department of Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 2-80)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991; Am. Ord. 2000-15,
passed 4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2008-28, passed 11-10-2008)



COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 31.115  SUPERINTENDENT OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Commissioner of Public Property shall be Superintendent over the
Department of Public Property and shall have charge and supervision over all
officers and employees assigned thereto.



(1969 Code, § 2-81)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.116  DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   This Commissioner shall have custody of and be charged with the
operation of the waterworks, sewer plant, and street lighting, and he or she
shall have supervision over all officers and employees assigned to these
activities.



(1969 Code, § 2-82)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.117  CUSTODY OF CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.



   He or she shall have the custody of, and be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of, the City Hall, all fire and police stations, the
city garages and storage houses, and all other city-owned buildings and
grounds.



(1969 Code, § 2-83)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.118  INVENTORY; MAPS.



   The Commissioner of Public Property shall keep an accurate inventory of
all public property of the city used or controlled by any department thereof,
and shall keep accurate maps, plats, and records of all public works, lands,
or property owned by the city.



(1969 Code, § 2-84)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 31.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which  no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as
provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of § 31.029 of this code
shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10 for each offense and may be
summarily ejected from the Council room and City Hall.



(1969 Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. 1991-3, passed 4-22-1991)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   32.001   Officers and employees; appointment



   32.002   Residency of appointees



   32.003   Term of office



   32.004   Elected officers; inauguration date



   32.005   Assignment of duties



   32.006   Employee records open to inspection by Council



   32.007   Remittance of funds



   32.008   Oath



   32.009   Bond



   32.010   Indemnification of officials



   32.011   Compensation



   32.012   Law enforcement authority



   32.013   Surrender of effects of office



   32.014   Badges



   32.015   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act



City Administrator



   32.025   Establishment



   32.026   Powers and duties



   32.027   Emergency interim succession



City Clerk



   32.040   Appointment, supervision



   32.041   Performance bond



   32.042   Deputy Clerk; compensation



   32.043   Council meeting minutes



   32.044   Seal; custody and use



   32.045   Attestation of documents



   32.046   Ex officio city collector



   32.047   Accounts



   32.048   Remittance of money; statement



   32.049   Records



   32.050   Warrants; execution, records



   32.051   Financial records



   32.052   Custody of documents



   32.053   Index of documents and records



   32.054   Additional duties



City Treasurer



   32.065   Appointment; supervision



   32.066   Bond



   32.067   Duties



   32.068   Deposit of city funds; commingling prohibited



   32.069   Records and accounts



   32.070   Payment of warrants



   32.071   Warrant register



City Attorney



   32.085   Appointment



   32.086   Assistants



   32.087   Duties



City Engineer



   32.100   Appointment



   32.101   Duties



Finance Director



   32.110   Establishment



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.001  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; APPOINTMENT.



   Except as otherwise specified by statute or ordinance, each
Commissioner may appoint or hire any officer or employee assigned to his or
her department.



(1969 Code, § 2-206)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-6



§ 32.002  RESIDENCY OF APPOINTEES.



   Only persons who reside or are employed within the city shall be
appointed as members of official boards and commissions by the Mayor and City
Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-207)  (Ord. 1968-14, passed 4-29-1968; Am. Ord. 1975-18,
passed 8-11-1975; Am. Ord. 1989-1, passed 1-9-1989; Am. Ord. 1999-12, passed
4-26-1999; Am. Ord. 2013-1, passed 1-14-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-6



§ 32.003  TERM OF OFFICE.



   Every appointive officer or employee of the city shall hold office for
a term of 1 year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
unless otherwise provided by ordinance.  Employees selected by a
Commissioner shall serve so long as their services are needed by that
Commissioner.  Unless otherwise provided, the term of each office shall
expire on the last day of April following the appointment.



(1969 Code, § 2-208)



§ 32.004  ELECTED OFFICERS; INAUGURATION DATE.



   Newly elected officers of the city shall have their terms commence at
the first regular or special meeting of the City Council during the month of
May following their election.



(Ord. 1991-5, passed 4-22-1991)



§ 32.005  ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.



   The City Council shall have the power to assign to any appointive
officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific
officer; and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective
powers or duties of officers.



(1969 Code, § 2-209)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-2



§ 32.006  EMPLOYEE RECORDS OPEN TO INSPECTION BY COUNCIL.



   All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection
by the Mayor or any member of the City Council at all reasonable times,
whether or not those records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 2-210)



§ 32.007  REMITTANCE OF FUNDS.



   Every officer or employee other than the Treasurer of the city shall at
least once each day turn over all monies received by him or her in his
official capacity to the City Clerk with a statement showing the source from
which the same were received.



(1969 Code, § 2-211)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of all public officers, other than treasurers, to account for
public monies, see ILCS Chapter 30, Act 20, §§ 1et seq.



§ 32.008  OATH.



   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon his duties, take
the oath prescribed by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-212)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 4-4-1, 3.1-10-25



§ 32.009  BOND.



   Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Council upon
entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in that amount as
may be determined by the Council and with such sureties as it may approve,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office
or position.



(1969 Code, § 2-213)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-30, 4-4-2



§ 32.010  INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The city shall indemnify appointed officials and board members
for losses arising from any civil claim or claims made against those
officials or appointees, and shall so indemnify if the claim is made for a
wrongful act arising from, or as a result of their employment or their
capacity as appointee.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      WRONGFUL ACT.  Any actual or alleged error, misstatement,
misleading statement, act, omission, neglect, breach of duty, misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance.



   (C)   This indemnification shall extend to, and shall bind the city
to indemnify those appointed officials and board members, or their estates,
heirs, legal representatives, or assigns in the event the wrongful act
occurred during the course of, or as a result of their having acted in their
official capacity.



   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to indemnify an
appointed official or board member if the subject of the loss is in the
nature of a fine or penalty imposed by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-213.1)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 3-23-1981)



§ 32.011  COMPENSATION.



   All officers and employees of the city shall receive salaries as may be
provided from time to time by ordinance.  No officer or employee receiving a
salary from the city shall be entitled to retain any portion of any fees
collected by him or her in the performance of his or her duties as municipal
officer or employee in the absence of a specific ordinance provision to that
effect.



(1969 Code, § 2-214)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor and Commissioners, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-6-1



   Other officers and employees, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-6-2



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5 et seq.



§ 32.012  LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Mayor, members of the City Council, and members of the Fire
Department, as well as every member of the Police Department, are hereby
declared to be conservators of the peace by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-215)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25



§ 32.013  SURRENDER OF EFFECTS OF OFFICE.



   Every officer and employee of the city, upon the expiration of his or
her term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his or her successor all
books and records which may be the property of the city; and if no successor
has been appointed within 1 week after his or her termination of office, that
property shall be delivered either to the City Clerk or to the City Treasurer.



(1969 Code, § 2-216)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.014  BADGES.



   The following officers and employees of the city shall be furnished
badges denoting the official capacity of the holder of the badge:



   (A)   The Mayor and the City Commissioners;



   (B)   The City Clerk;



   (C)   The Health Officer;



   (D)   The Building Inspector;



   (E)   The Water Safety Officer and deputies;



   (F)   The Plumbing Inspector;



   (G)   The Electrical Inspector;



   (H)   The Chief of Police and subordinate officers;



   (I)   The Fire Chief and firefighters;



   (J)   The auxiliary police officers; and



   (K)   Such other persons as the City Council may from time to time
designate.



(1969 Code, § 2-12)



§ 32.015  STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.



   (A)   The regulations of §§ 5-15 (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §
5-15) and Article 10 (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40) of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §§
1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this section) are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees
of the city to the extent required by ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5.



   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the
city, is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the city under the Act, is hereby
prohibited.



   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and
“employee” shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §
705(c).



   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in ILCS Chapter 5, Act  430, § 50-5 for
similar violations of the Act.



   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers
and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies
are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this
section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 5,
Act 430, § 705(a).



   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the city.



   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of
the date that the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not
subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the city if
the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.



   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the city.



CITY ADMINISTRATOR



§ 32.025  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The City Administrator shall be the supervising executive and
administrative officer of the city government, shall enforce the laws of the
city and require the faithful performance of all administrative duties, and
shall have the powers and duties listed below in § 32.026.



(1969 Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 1999-22, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 32.026  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Duties.  The City Administrator shall:



      (1)   Daily business.  Manage and discipline the employees in
the office at City Hall; see that records and books are properly kept and day
to day business of the office at City Hall is properly performed;



      (2)   Annual report.  Prepare and present to the Council an
annual report of the city’s affairs, including the summary of reports of
department heads, and such other reports as the Council shall require; and



      (3)   Budget report.  Assemble estimates of the financial
needs and resources of the city for each ensuing year, and shall prepare a
program of activities within the financial power of the city, embodying in it
a budget document with proper supporting schedules and analysis.



   (B)   Powers.  The City Administrator shall:



      (1)   Assignment of employees.  Have the power to assign any
employee of the city to any department or branch thereof requiring services
appropriate to the personnel system classification of the employee so
assigned, subject to Council approval;



      (2)   Prescribe rules.  Have the power to prescribe rules and
regulations as he or she shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of
administrative agencies subject to his or her authority; and he or she shall
have the power to revoke, suspend, or amend any rule or regulation of the
administrative service by whomever prescribed;



      (3)   Investigate.  Have the power, either by himself or
herself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose, subject to
Council approval, to investigate and examine or inquire into the affairs or
operation of any department, division, bureau, or office; and when so
authorized by the Council, he or she shall have power to employ consultants
and professional counsel to aid in these investigations, examinations, or
inquiries;



      (4)   Delegate duties.  Have the power to direct any
department, division, or bureau to perform the work for any other department,
division, or bureau, subject to the department Commissioner’s approval;



      (5)   Coordinate departments.  Be responsible for the
coordination of the administrative heads of each department of city
government and for the review and analysis of the operation and
administration of all departments, boards, and commissions established by
ordinance;



      (6)   Reports.  Have the power to require all appointed
administrative officers and administrative employees of the city to furnish
any information connected with or related to their official or assigned
duties; shall have all heads of departments, boards, and commissions provide
the Administrator with a comprehensive report analyzing the conditions and
operations of a department; shall recommend, measure, and shall project need
for the ensuing fiscal year;



      (7)   Appear before Council.  Appear before and address the
Council at any meeting with the right to take part in the discussion
period.  He or she shall make recommendations to the Council and deliver
messages to the Council and the people.  He or she shall furnish any reports
requested by the Council, in a timely manner; and



      (8)   Other.  Perform any other duties in accordance with the
administrative job description.



(1969 Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 1999-22, passed 6-28-1999)



§ 32.027  EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSION.



   (A)   In the event that the City Administrator acting as the
Director of the Emergency Operations Center, is unable or unavailable to
perform the duties of office during a state of emergency, the duties shall be
performed by one of the following persons in the line of succession set forth
as follows:



      (1)   Public Works Director;



      (2)   Fire Chief;



   (B)   The powers of the emergency interim successor to the City
Administrator shall be the same as the City Administrator and the duration of
succession shall be until such time as the City Administrator or the highest
ranking person in the line of succession is able to perform the duties of
office.



(Ord. 2004-37, passed 9-13-2004)



CITY CLERK



§ 32.040  APPOINTMENT, SUPERVISION.



   The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Council as provided by
statute and shall be under the direct supervision of the Commissioner of
Accounts and Finance and shall be responsible to the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-139)  (Ord. 1968-10, passed 4-22-1968)



Statutory reference:



   General duties and authority of City Clerk, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 3.1-35-90



§ 32.041  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of office, the City Clerk shall execute
a bond in such an amount and with those sureties as may be required by the
City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties.



(1969 Code, § 2-140)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-4-2



§ 32.042  DEPUTY CLERK; COMPENSATION.



   The City Clerk may appoint and supervise a Deputy and any other
assistants necessary to administer the duties of the City Clerk’s office,
who shall receive compensation as may be provided by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-141)



Statutory reference:



   Authority and limitations on appointment of deputy clerks, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10



   Duties and powers of deputy city clerks, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
3.1-35, 95



§ 32.043  COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES.



   The City Clerk shall furnish the Mayor and each member of the City
Council a complete copy of the minutes of each regular and special meeting of
the City Council within 10 days following each meeting.



(1969 Code, § 2-142)  (Ord. 1961-28, passed 10-9-1961)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of City Clerk to keep records of meetings, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 3.1-35-90



§ 32.044  SEAL; CUSTODY AND USE.



   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal and shall affix
its impression on documents whenever this is required.



(1969 Code, § 2-143)



Cross-reference:



   City seal, see § 11.01



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90



§ 32.045  ATTESTATION OF DOCUMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall attest all contracts of the city and all licenses,
permits, and other documents which require this formality.



(1969 Code, § 2-144)



§ 32.046  EX OFFICIO CITY COLLECTOR.



   The City Clerk shall be ex officio city collector; he or she shall
collect and keep proper accounts of all special assessments levied or imposed
upon property



in the city and shall perform other duties of a city collector as may be
designated by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-145)



Cross-reference:



   Business Regulations, see Title XI



   Taxation, see Chapter 38



Statutory reference:



   Authority to provide that City Clerk shall be city collector, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-135



   General duties of city collector, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
3.1-35-120



§ 32.047  ACCOUNTS.



   The City Clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him or
her and the source and disposition thereof, and other accounts as may be
required by statute or ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 2-146)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of public officers, except treasurer, to account for public funds,
see ILCS Chapter 30, Act 20, §§ 1et seq.



§ 32.048  REMITTANCE OF MONEY; STATEMENT.



   The City Clerk shall turn over all money received by him or her on
behalf of the city to the City Treasurer promptly on receipt of the same;
with this remittance he or she shall give a statement as to the source of it.



(1969 Code, § 2-147)



§ 32.049  RECORDS.



   In addition to the record of ordinances and records which the City
Clerk is required by statute to keep, he or she shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued, and a record of the payment thereon; he or she
shall keep a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the
city, and such other records as may be required by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-148)



§ 32.050  WARRANTS; EXECUTION, RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall, upon the allowance of any account or claim by the
City Council, draw a warrant therefor upon the city treasury payable to the
order of the claimant, which warrant, when signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk, shall be paid by the City Treasurer.  The City
Clerk shall keep in a suitable book an accurate list of all warrants drawn on
the treasury, stating the date, number and amount thereof, and name of the
person in whose favor drawn.



(1969 Code, § 2-149)



Statutory reference:



   Limitations on drawing warrants, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 430, §§ 1 -
3



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-1-8



§ 32.051  FINANCIAL RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall keep all accounts pertaining to the finances of
the city.  He or she shall keep an accurate account with all city officers
and others collecting or receiving any monies, property, or claims on account
of the city, charging them with all money, or property received by them, or
claims placed in their hands for collection, and crediting them with all
money paid into the treasury, upon their filing the Treasurer’s receipt, or
with claim of accounts uncollectable, or other proper credits, upon filing
the proper vouchers.  The Treasurer shall be credited with all warrants
canceled and returned.



(1969 Code, § 2-150)



Statutory reference:



   Clerk as collector, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-135



   Duties of collector, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-100 to
3.1-35-130



§ 32.052  CUSTODY OF DOCUMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the
city which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.



(1969 Code, § 2-151)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90



§ 32.053  INDEX OF DOCUMENTS AND RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents
and records kept by him or her so that ready access thereto and use thereof
may be had.



(1969 Code, § 2-152)



§ 32.054  ADDITIONAL DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties provided in this subchapter, the City Clerk
shall perform other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 2-153)



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



   Rates and Charges; Water, see §§ 51.080et seq.



   Sewers; billing and payment, see § 52.102



   Water connection permit, see § 51.015



CITY TREASURER



§ 32.065  APPOINTMENT; SUPERVISION.



   The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Council as provided
by statute and shall be under the supervision of the Commissioner of Accounts
and Finances.



(1969 Code, § 2-164)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint City Treasurer, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
4-5-4



   Authority to assign officers, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-2



§ 32.066  BOND.



   The City Treasurer shall give bond in that sum as may be required by
the City Council, but the bond shall not be less than 1½ times the amount of
the estimated money that may be in his or her custody and not less than an
amount in dollars equal to 3 times the latest federal census of the
population of the city, whichever amount is greater, or as required by
statute, with sureties to be approved by the City Council.  The bond shall
be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or her
duties of office, and to indemnify the city for any loss due to any neglect
of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Treasurer.



(1969 Code, § 2-165)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-4-2



§ 32.067  DUTIES.



   The City Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for
him or her by statute or ordinance; he or she shall receive all money paid to
the city, either directly from the person paying it or from the hands of such
other officer as may receive it; and he or she shall pay out only on
vouchers, warrants, or orders properly signed by the City Clerk and the Mayor.



(1969 Code, § 2-166)



Statutory reference:



   Additional duties under commission form of municipal government, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-22



   Duties of municipal treasurer, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
3.1-35-40—3.1-35-85



§ 32.068  DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS; COMMINGLING PROHIBITED.



   The City Treasurer shall deposit the city funds in such depositories as
may be selected from time to time as is provided by statute, and shall keep
the city money separate and distinct from his or her own, and shall not
intermingle his or her own money with it or make private or personal use of
the city funds.



(1969 Code, § 2-167)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-50,
3.1-35-55



§ 32.069  RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall keep records showing all money
received by him or her, the source from which it was received, and the
purpose for which it was paid out; and he or she shall keep a record showing
at all times the financial status of the city.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall keep those books and accounts as may
be required by the City Council; and he or she shall keep them in the manner
required by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-168)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-60,
3.1-35-65



§ 32.070  PAYMENT OF WARRANTS.



   The City Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, for
salaries or for any other purpose other than the retirement of principal or
interest on bonds or tax anticipation warrants, only upon warrant signed by
the Mayor and City Clerk as provided by statute.  The warrants shall
designate the items to be paid and the funds from which they are to be paid.



(1969 Code, § 2-169)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-1-8



§ 32.071  WARRANT REGISTER.



   The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds, or
orders filed with him or her or paid by him or her and all vouchers as
required by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-170)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-45



CITY ATTORNEY



§ 32.085  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council may retain an attorney to serve as legal advisor and
attorney for the city.



(1969 Code, § 2-181)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-4



§ 32.086  ASSISTANTS.



   The City Council may engage additional counsel whenever in its opinion
additional counsel is necessary.



(1969 Code, § 2-182)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-4



§ 32.087  DUTIES.



   (A)   The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits
or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the
city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of that person as an officer
of the city.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the full
enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the
city and of all similar interlocutory orders.



   (C)   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and
shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever
requested to do so by any city official.  Upon request by the Mayor or by
the City Council, the City Attorney shall reduce any opinion to writing.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the
completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to draft or
supervise the phraseology of any contract, leases, or other documents or
instruments, to which the city may be a party; and upon request by the City
Council, to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the
city.



(1969 Code, § 2-183)



CITY ENGINEER



§ 32.100  APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of City Engineer who shall be
appointed by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-194)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint a public engineer, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§§ 3-7-6, 4-5-4



§ 32.101  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to prepare or cause
to be prepared plans and specifications for, and supervise the construction
of, all improvements to city-owned property, including city streets,
utilities, and buildings.



   (B)   The City Engineer shall give to city employees or officers
such engineering information and advice as they may need in the performance
of their duties; he or she shall advise the City Council on all engineering
matters, and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him or her by
the Mayor or by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 2-195)



FINANCE DIRECTOR



§ 32.110  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The City Council hereby creates the position of Finance
Director.  The Finance Director will be responsible for oversight of all
aspects of the finances of the city.  The Finance Director shall have such
responsibilities and duties as directed by the Mayor and City Council.



   (B)   The position of Finance Director shall initially be filled by
written contract between the city and the Finance Director.



(Ord. 2006-38, passed 11-27-2006)



CHAPTER 33:  BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AND THE LIKE



Section



Board of Fire and Police Commissioners



   33.01   Establishment



   33.02   Duties



Board of Local Improvements



   33.15   Establishment



   33.16   President



   33.17   Meetings



   33.18   Public notice of meetings



Library Board



   33.30   Establishment



   33.31   Director qualifications



   33.32   Term of office



   33.33   Organization; meetings



   33.34   Duties



   33.35   Authority to make library rules



Laker Stadium Board



   33.50   Establishment



   33.51   Term of office



   33.52   Appointments



   33.53   Duties and powers



   33.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Emergency Operations Committee, see § 34.17



   Historic Preservation Commission, see §§ 155.15et seq.



   Park Board, see §§ 97.001et seq.



   Plan Commission, see §§ 150.01et seq.



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There shall be a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners as
required by law, which shall consist of 3 members whose terms shall be for 3
years.  The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council.



   (B)   Of the 3 members of the Board, 1 shall be a member of the
employee class, 1 from the employing class, and 1 shall be a representative
citizen not identified with either the employee or employing class, as
provided by statute.



(1969 Code, § 2-227)



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see Chapter 36



   Police Department; City Jail, see Chapter 35



Statutory reference:



   Board of fire and police commissioners; members; appointment of fire
and police officials, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 - 10-2.1-4



§ 33.02  DUTIES.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have charge of all
appointments to the fire and Police Department and shall conduct and hold all
entrance and promotional examinations in the manner required by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-228)



Statutory reference:



   Authority and duties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-5 -
10-2.1-29



BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



§ 33.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The City Council shall be and act as the Board of Local Improvements
for the city.



(1969 Code, § 2-239)



Cross-reference:



   Plan Commission, see §§ 150.01et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Local improvements in general, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 9-1-1et
seq.



§ 33.16  PRESIDENT.



   The Mayor shall be president of the Board of Local Improvements.



(1969 Code, § 2-240)



§ 33.17  MEETINGS.



   The Board of Local Improvements shall meet upon the call of the Mayor
or of any 2 members; 24- hours’ notice shall be given each member of the
Board of called meetings.



(1969 Code, § 2-241)



§ 33.18  PUBLIC NOTICE OF MEETINGS.



   Public notice of a meeting of the Board of Local Improvements shall be
given in the same manner as prescribed in §§ 31.026(C) and 31.026(D).



(1969 Code, § 2-242)



LIBRARY BOARD



§ 33.30  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There shall be a Board of Library Directors (Library Board) for the
city; the Board shall consist of 9 Directors to be appointed by the Mayor by
and with the consent of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 14-1)



Statutory reference:



   Scope of Free Public Library Act of 1965, see ILCS Chapter 75, Act 5,
§ 1-4



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 75, Act 5, § 4-1



§ 33.31  DIRECTOR QUALIFICATIONS.



   No person shall be appointed to the Library Board who is not a resident
of the city and is not fit for the office; not more than 1 member of the City
Council shall be on the Library Board at 1 time.



(1969 Code, § 14-2)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 75, Act 5, § 4-1



§ 33.32  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the Library Directors shall be 3 years, staggered so that 3
Directors’ terms expire each year.



(1969 Code, § 14-3)



§ 33.33  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.



   The Library Directors shall select a president and secretary as
provided by statute, and shall meet at such time as the Library Board may
determine.



(1969 Code, § 14-4)



Statutory reference:



   Requirement that public agency give specified notice of regular and
special meetings, see ILCS Chapter 5, Act 120, §§ 1et seq.



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 75, Act 5, § 4-6



§ 33.34  DUTIES.



   The Library Board shall have charge of the operation of the city
library and of the expenditure of all library funds.  Each year it shall
file a report with the City Council containing, among other things, an
itemized statement of the expenses anticipated for the coming year as
required by law.



(1969 Code, § 14-5)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties of library boards, see ILCS



   Chapter 75, Act 5, §§ 4-7, 4-9, and 4-10



§ 33.35  AUTHORITY TO MAKE LIBRARY RULES.



   The Library Board shall have the power to make all reasonable rules and
regulations governing the use of the library facilities which the City
Council may adopt from time to time by ordinance and shall cause the rules
and regulations to be posted in the library.



(1969 Code, § 14-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 75, Act 5, § 4-7(1)



LAKER STADIUM BOARD



§ 33.50  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There shall be established the Laker Stadium Board comprising of 7
members.



(Ord. 2008-8, passed 3-10-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 3-24-2008)



§ 33.51  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Board Members’ terms shall be 3 years and shall be staggered with
the initial appointment comprising of two 3-year terms, three 2-year terms,
and two 1-year terms.



(Ord. 2008-8, passed 3-10-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-10, passed 3-24-2008)



§ 33.52  APPOINTMENTS.



   Appointments shall be made by the Park Commissioner subject to consent
of the City Council.



(Ord. 2008-8, passed 3-10-2008)



§ 33.53  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   Duties and powers:



   (A)   To develop and recommend policy for operation, maintenance and
improvements for Laker Stadium to the City Council;



   (B)   To solicit funds and collect revenues to defray the costs of
operation, maintenance and improvements of Laker Stadium;



   (C)   To prepare an annual budget and spend funds according to the
budget and the limit of the fund balance as set up by the City Council;



   (D)   To submit all records and recommendations in a timely manner
as determined by the city.



   (E)   To implement and exercise all other duties, responsibilities
and policies pursuant to the policies set forth by the City Council from time
to time.



(Ord. 2008-8, passed 3-10-2008)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person violating any ordinance as authorized in § 33.35
of this code shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $25 for each
offense.



(1969 Code, § 14-6)



CHAPTER 34:  CIVIL DEFENSE



Section



   34.01   Local municipal defense organization established; purpose



   34.02   Functions



   34.03   Composition; Director



   34.04   Director; appointment; duties; absence



   34.05   Mobile support teams



   34.06   Mutual aid agreements



   34.07   State of emergency; cooperation with state



   34.08   Training; compensation of members



   34.09   Receipt of state reimbursement



   34.10   Purchasing procedures



   34.11   Members; oath required



   34.12   Office facilities



   34.13   Appropriations; tax levy authorized



   34.14   Continuity of government; emergency vacancies



   34.15   Emergency relocation of government



   34.16   Authority at emergency location; procedures



   34.17   Emergency Operations Committee



Cross-reference:



   Mayor; extraordinary powers in emergency, see § 31.052



§ 34.01  LOCAL MUNICIPAL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.



   There is hereby created the local municipal defense organization, to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or
natural causes in accordance with the State Civil Defense Act.



(1969 Code, § 7-1)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, ILCS Chapter 5, Act 275,
§§ 1 et seq.



   Emergency Seat of Government Act, ILCS Chapter 5, Act 195, §§ 1 et
seq.



   Purposes of state legislation, ILCS Chapter 275, § 2



   State Civil defense Act, ILCS Chapter 275, §§ 1 et seq.



§ 34.02  FUNCTIONS.



   The municipal civil defense organization shall perform such civil
defense functions within the municipality as shall be prescribed in and by
the state civil defense plan and programs prepared by the Governor, and such
orders, rules, and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor, and in
addition, the organization shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the State
Civil Defense Act.



(1969 Code, § 7-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Governor in civil defense matters, see Ill. Rev. Stat.,
Chapter 275, §§ 1 et seq.



   Authority to act in concert with another political subdivision, see
Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 275, §§ 1 et seq.



§ 34.03  COMPOSITION; DIRECTOR.



   The civil defense organization shall consist of the Director and
additional members to be selected by the Director.



(1969 Code, § 7-3)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency Government Relocation Act, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 5, §§
.01 et seq.



§ 34.04  DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT; DUTIES; ABSENCE.



   (A)   The Director of the municipal civil defense organization shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and shall
serve until removed by the Mayor.



   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operation of the civil defense
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor as provided
by statute.



   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability
of the Director to serve, the Mayor, or any person designated by him or her,
shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided in
this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 7-4)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency Government Relocation Act, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 5, §§
.01 et seq.



§ 34.05  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS.



   (A)   All or any member of the municipal civil defense organization
may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the State
Director of Civil Defense as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader of a mobile support team created under this chapter
shall be designated by the Director of the municipal defense organization.



   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal
employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities
incident to that employment or office.  Any such member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the municipality, while so serving, shall receive from
the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 7-5)



§ 34.06  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Director of the civil defense organization may negotiate mutual-aid
agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the
state; but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by
the City Council and by the State Director of Civil Defense.



(1969 Code, § 7-6)



§ 34.07  STATE OF EMERGENCY; COOPERATION WITH STATE.



   If the Governor declares that a civil defense emergency exists in the
event of actual enemy attack upon this country or the occurrence within the
state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or natural causes, it shall be the duty of the municipal civil
defense organization to cooperate fully with the state civil defense agency
and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 7-7)



§ 34.08  TRAINING; COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the civil defense organization who are paid employees or
officers of the municipality, if called for training by the State Director of
Civil Defense, shall receive for the time spent in that training the same
rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not
municipal employees or officers shall receive for that training time such
compensation as may be established by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 7-8)



§ 34.09  RECEIPT OF STATE REIMBURSEMENT.



   The City Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the state to the municipality for expenses incident to
training members of the civil defense organization as prescribed by the State
Director, compensation for services and expenses of a mobile support team
while serving outside the municipality in response to a call by the state
civil defense agency, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident
to civil defense activities as provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 7-9)



§ 34.10  PURCHASING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The City Council may, on recommendation of the municipal
Director of civil defense, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to
place the municipality in a position to combat effectively any disaster and
to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide
emergency assistance to victims in the case of any disaster.



   (B)   In the event of any disaster, the local Director of civil
defense is authorized, on behalf of the municipality, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment, or materials as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts
or obligations as authorized by the State Civil Defense Act.  However, if
the City Council meets at that time, he or she shall act subject to the
directions and restrictions imposed by that body.



(1969 Code, § 7-10)



§ 34.11  MEMBERS; OATH REQUIRED.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the municipal civil
defense organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe
to the following oath, which shall be filed with the Director:



“I, ____________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; and I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.  And I do further swear
(or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the municipal civil defense
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence.”



(1969 Code, § 7-11)



§ 34.12  OFFICE FACILITIES.



   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in the City Hall, or
elsewhere as may be provided for by the City Council, for the municipal civil
defense organization as its office.



(1969 Code, § 7-12)



§ 34.13  APPROPRIATIONS; TAX LEVY AUTHORIZED.



   The City Council may make an appropriation for civil defense purposes,
and may levy therefor a tax not to exceed $.05 per $100 of the assessed value
of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the
State Civil Defense Act.  However, in no event shall a tax levy made under
this section exceed the amount of $.25 per capita.



(1969 Code, § 7-13)



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see Chapter 38



§ 34.14  CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT; EMERGENCY VACANCIES.



   (A)   In the event that at the time of or as a consequence of any
disaster, the incumbent of any municipal office, position, or place of
employment shall be killed or rendered incapable of performing the duties of
that office or position, the office or position shall be filled until the
time when a successor can be selected in the following manner.



   (B)   Any vacancy shall, for the emergency period, be filled by
appointment by the following order of preference:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The remaining members of the City Council;



      (3)   The City Clerk;



      (4)   The civil defense Director;



      (5)   The Chief of Police; and



      (6)   The Fire Chief.



   (C)   The person appointed in the manner prescribed in this section
to fill any vacant office or position shall exercise all the duties and
powers of that position during the emergency and until the time when a
successor can be appointed or selected in the manner provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-5)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to provide for continuity of municipal government, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-59-1



   Authority to provide for emergency interim successors to municipal
offices, see ILCS Chapter 5, Act 275, §§ 6et seq.



§ 34.15  EMERGENCY RELOCATION OF GOVERNMENT.



   Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects of enemy
attack, or the anticipated effects of a threatened enemy attack, it becomes
imprudent, inexpedient, or impossible to conduct the affairs of local
government at the regular or usual place or places thereof, the City Council
may meet at any place within or without the city limits on the call of the
Mayor or any 2 members of the City Council and shall proceed to establish and
designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner, alternate or substitute
sites or places as the emergency temporary location or locations of
government where all or any part of the public business may be transacted and
conducted during the emergency situation.  The sites or places may be within
or without the territorial limits of the city and may be within or without
the state.



(1969 Code, § 7-14)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 5, § 1



§ 34.16  AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY LOCATION; PROCEDURES.



   During the period when the public business is being conducted at the
emergency temporary location or locations, the City Council and other
officers of the city shall have and possess and shall exercise at such
location or locations all of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers
and functions conferred upon the City Council and officers by or under the
laws of the state. These powers and functions may be exercised in the light
of the exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to or compliance
with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law and
pertaining thereto, and all acts of the body and officers shall be valid and
binding as if performed within the territorial limits of their city.



(1969 Code, § 7-15)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 5, § 2



§ 34.17  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The City Council has adopted the city emergency plan.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall serve as Director of the
Emergency Operations Committee.



   (C)   The Emergency Operations Committee is hereby created and shall
consist of the following members:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The City Council;



      (3)   The City Engineer;



      (4)   The City Attorney;



      (5)   The Public Works Director;



      (6)   The City Clerk; and



      (7)   The Assistant to the City Administrator.



(Ord. 2003-15, passed 6-23-2003)



CHAPTER 35:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



Police Department



   35.01   Establishment; organization



   35.02   Appointments



   35.03   Rank



   35.04   Duties of Chief



   35.05   Custody of stolen property



   35.06   Tenure of Chief



   35.07   Equal opportunity policy



   35.08   Duties of Department members



   35.09   Conduct of members



   35.10   Witness fees; disposition



   35.11   Rules and regulations



   35.12   Other divisions



   35.13   Mistreatment of police dogs unlawful



   35.14   Position of Deputy Chief created



Police Pension Board



   35.25   Composition; appointment; terms



   35.26   Duties



   35.27   Funds



Auxiliary Police Force



   35.40   Establishment



   35.41   Appointment; records check; termination



   35.42   Residence requirement



   35.43   Training; psychological testing



   35.44   Term of office; removal; compensation



   35.45   Distinct from Police Department; uniforms; supervision



   35.46   Duties; firearms restrictions



   35.47   Powers and duties



Cross-reference:



   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, see §§ 33.01et seq.



   Law enforcement authority, see § 32.012



Statutory reference:



   Authority to pass and enforce police ordinances, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-1-1



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 35.01  ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of
the city.  The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and of
such number of captains, lieutenants, sergeants, and patrol officers as may
be provided from time to time by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 21-1)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.02  APPOINTMENTS.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed and or dismissed by the City
Council by a minimum vote of a 4/5 majority.  All other appointments to, or
promotions within the Department, shall be made by the Fire and Police
Commissioners as provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 21-2)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.03  RANK.



   The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have
supervision over all officers and members thereof.  Following him or her in
rank shall be the sergeants and police officers, in order of seniority in
each group.



(1969 Code, § 21-3)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.04  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the city jail, if one
exists, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.  He or
she shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities
of the Department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor.  The Chief
shall be responsible for the performance of the Police Department and of all
its functions; and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.



(1969 Code, § 21-4)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prescribe duties of police officers, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-1-2



§ 35.05  CUSTODY OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned, or
stolen property recovered in the city.



(1969 Code, § 21-9)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.06  TENURE OF CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall serve for such a term as may be provided by
law, and may be removed in the manner provided for the removal of officers. 
Provided, that if any member of the Police Department, having a rank therein,
shall be appointed Chief, upon the expiration of his or her term or the
termination of his or her services for any reason, he or she shall resume the
status and rank held before his or her appointment as Chief.



(1969 Code, § 21-13)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.07  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.



   In making appointments to the Police Department, no person shall be
deprived of an opportunity to serve on the Police Department because of race,
religion, skin color, national origin, or sex.  No arbitrary rules on
height, weight, or achievement of strength or unrelated job needs shall be
imposed.  No handicapped person shall be denied, merely by virtue of being
handicapped, appointment to a position on the Police Department which the
handicapped person is competent to fill.



(1969 Code, § 21-12)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.08  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.



   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes
applicable therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law,
and arrest violators thereof.



(1969 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.09  CONDUCT OF MEMBERS.



   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself, or herself, in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times,
and to avoid the use of unnecessary force.  Each member of the Department
shall obey the orders and directions of his or her superior.



(1969 Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.10  WITNESS FEES; DISPOSITION.



   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance,
or of any state or federal law.  No such member shall retain any witness fee
for service as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party;
any fees paid for these services shall be turned over to the Chief, who shall
deposit the same with the City Treasurer.



(1969 Code, § 21-7)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.11  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as he or she shall deem advisable; these rules, when approved by
the Council, shall be binding on the members.  These rules and regulations
may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be
worn or carried, hours of service, vacations, and all other similar matters
necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department.



(1969 Code, § 21-8)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.12  OTHER DIVISIONS.



   With the approval of the Mayor, the Chief of Police may establish a
detective division or other special division within the Police Department,
assigning such policemen or policewomen to that division, and designating
such duties therefor, as may be deemed necessary.



(1969 Code, § 21-11)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 35.13  MISTREATMENT OF POLICE DOGS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously
torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any
dog used by the City Police Department in the performance of the functions or
duties of that Department or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog
while being used by the Department or any officer or member thereof in the
performance of any of the duties or functions of the Department or of the
officer or member.  Any person violating any provision of this section shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty set out in this
code.



(1969 Code, § 21-14)  (Ord. 1995-12, passed 5-8-1995)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 35.14  POSITION OF DEPUTY CHIEF CREATED.



   The position of Deputy Chief is hereby created, to be appointed by the
Chief of Police, pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
10-2.1-4.



(Ord. 2004-62, passed 10-22-2004)



POLICE PENSION BOARD



§ 35.25  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS.



   There shall be a Police Pension Board consisting of 5 members.  Of
these members, 2 shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Council, to serve a term of 2 years each; 2 shall be elected from the regular
police force of the city; and 1 shall be elected from the beneficiaries of
the pension.  Each member shall serve for 2 years, and elected members shall
be selected in the manner provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 21-23)



Statutory reference:



   Composition, qualifications, terms, appointment of members of police
pension board, see ILCS Chapter 40, Act 5, § 3-128



   Police pension fund; municipalities 500,000 and under, see ILCS Chapter
40, Act 5, §§ 3-101et seq.



§ 35.26  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Pension Board to
manage, invest, and control the police pension fund and all monies pertaining
thereto in the manner provided by statute and to pay beneficiaries as
provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 21-24)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 40, Act 5, §§ 3-131et seq.



§ 35.27  FUNDS.



   There shall be deposited in the police pension fund the amounts
provided for by statute.



(1969 Code, § 21-25)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 40, Act 5, § 3-125



AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE



§ 35.40  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby constituted an auxiliary police force which shall
consist of not more than 15 auxiliary police officers or such number as may
be from time to time prescribed by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 21-36)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



Statutory reference:



   Auxiliary police, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-20



§ 35.41  APPOINTMENT; RECORDS CHECK; TERMINATION.



   Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police officers shall be
fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record.  No
person shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officer if he or she has
been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.  The
appointment of any or all auxiliary police officers may be terminated by the
Mayor subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 21-37)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.42  RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT.



   Auxiliary police officers shall be residents of the city.



(1969 Code, § 21-37.1)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.43  TRAINING; PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING.



   (A)   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of their
duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other
police procedures by the Chief of Police of the city.  This course of
training shall be not less than 10 hours in duration.  Upon completion of
the course of training, the Chief of Police shall file a certificate
attesting to the auxiliary police officer’s completion of the course with
the City Clerk.



   (B)   Prospective auxiliary police officers shall be given
psychological tests preceding their appointment prior to entering upon their
duties.



(1969 Code, § 21-38)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.44  TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION.



   The auxiliary police shall serve at the discretion of the Mayor and the
City Council and may be removed from office at the will of the Mayor and City
Council.  The auxiliary police officers shall receive compensation for their
services as determined by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 21-39)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.45  DISTINCT FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT; UNIFORMS; SUPERVISION.



   The auxiliary police officers shall not be considered to be members of
the regular Police Department of the city and shall not function on a full-
time basis.  Uniforms and identifications symbols of the auxiliary police
shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular
Police Department of the city.  The auxiliary police officers shall at all
times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and
control of the Chief of Police.



(1969 Code, § 21-40)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.46  DUTIES; FIREARMS RESTRICTIONS.



   Auxiliary police officers shall perform duties as directed by the Chief
of Police or by the corporate authorities.  Auxiliary police officers shall
not carry firearms except with the special permission of, and when issued by,
the Chief of Police and when in uniform and while in the performance of their
duties.



(1969 Code, § 21-41)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



§ 35.47  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties
when properly assigned and on duty:



   (A)   To aid and direct traffic in the city;



   (B)   To aid in the control of natural or human- made disasters;



   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorder;



   (D)   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by
the Chief of Police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the
regular Police Department to perform normal or regular police duties;



   (E)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process,
all persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal
ordinance or criminal law of the state;



   (F)   To commit arrested persons for examination;



   (G)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight
or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper
magistrate;



   (H)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that
the corporate authorities may prescribe; and



   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of
municipal ordinances or code provisions, or the state criminal law, within
the corporate limits of the city, and for this purpose shall have all the
common statutory powers of sheriffs.



(1969 Code, § 21-42)  (Ord. 1969-2, passed 1-27-1969)



CHAPTER 36:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



General Provisions



   36.01   Establishment



   36.02   Duties



   36.03   Service outside corporate limits



Fire Chief; Firefighters



   36.15   Fire Chief; appointment



   36.16   Supervision of Department and equipment



   36.17   Command at fires



   36.18   Records



   36.19   Fire investigation; report



   36.20   Tenure of Fire Chief



   36.21   Firefighters; appointment, promotion, and discharge



   36.22   Equal opportunity policy



   36.23   Rules and regulations



   36.24   Firefighters to obey orders



   36.25   Public to obey firefighters



   36.26   Custody of property at fire scene



   36.27   Arrest authority



Pension Fund



   36.40   Board of Trustees



   36.41   Duties of Trustees



Department Board



   36.55   Department officers



   36.56   Budget and expenditures



Cross-reference:



   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, see §§ 33.01et seq.



   Directing traffic at fire, see § 70.01



   Fire Prevention, see Chapter 92



   Law enforcement authority, see § 32.012



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created the Fire Department, which shall be an
executive department of the city.  The Fire Department shall be assigned to
the Department of Public Health and Safety and shall consist of the Fire
Chief and such other members as may be determined from time to time by the
City Council.



(1969 Code, § 9-27)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



Cross-reference:



   Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, see §§ 31.100et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create Fire Department, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-6-2



§ 36.02  DUTIES.



   It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department, and the duty
of the members thereof, to prevent and extinguish accidental or destructive
fires occurring in the city, and to enforce all ordinances relating to fire
hazards.



(1969 Code, § 9-28)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.03  SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



   Members of the Fire Department are authorized to go outside the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of rendering aid to other fire
departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering aid in the case of
accidents.  That the Fire Department shall not render this type of service
outside the corporate limits excepting upon orders of the Chief of the Fire
Department (Fire Chief), the Captain, or the Mayor; excepting that where the
city has undertaken by contract to render service to property outside the
corporate limits in the fulfillment of such contract.



(1969 Code, § 9-32)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 2004-51,
passed 10-25-2004)



FIRE CHIEF; FIREFIGHTERS



§ 36.15  FIRE CHIEF; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief, an executive office
of the city.  The Fire Chief shall be appointed and dismissed by the City
Council by a minimum vote of a 4/5 majority.



(1969 Code, § 9-29)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment authority of board of fire and police commissioners, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 4-5-7, 10-2.1-4



§ 36.16  SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT AND EQUIPMENT.



   It is the Fire Chief who shall have control, subject to the order and
direction of City Council, of the Fire Department and all fire apparatus
belonging to the city.  Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the
Fire Chief shall cause the same to be done without delay.



(1969 Code, § 9-30)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.17  COMMAND AT FIRES.



   In case of fire, the Fire Chief and his or her assistants shall rank in
the order named, and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take
command of the Fire Department, and direct the management thereof for the
suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible; and when it may be
necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of
the conflagration, the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed,
torn down, or destroyed in the best manner possible.



(1969 Code, § 9-31)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.18  RECORDS.



   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings
of the company and the attendance of the members, a record of all fires, and,
during the last week in April of each year, file with the City Clerk a full
report of these records of attendance and fires, which report shall be under
oath.



(1969 Code, § 9-33)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.19  FIRE INVESTIGATION; REPORT.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to investigate into the cause of
any accidental or destructive fire occurring in the city.  In case there is
reason to suspect that there was any criminal act or violation of a city
ordinance in connection therewith, he or she shall report the same to the
City Attorney.



(1969 Code, § 9-34)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.20  TENURE OF FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall serve for such a term as may be provided
by law, and may be removed in the manner provided for the removal of officers.



   (B)   Provided, that if any member of the Fire Department, having a
rank therein, shall be appointed Fire Chief, upon the expiration of his or
her term or the termination of his or her services for any reason, he or she
shall resume the status and rank held before his or her appointment as Chief.



(1969 Code, § 9-37)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.21  FIREFIGHTERS; APPOINTMENT, PROMOTION, AND DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Prospective members of the Fire Department, after examination,
shall be appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, and
promotions shall be made in the same manner as provided by law.



   (B)   No firefighter shall be discharged except after a hearing
before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners as provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 9-35)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.22  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.



   In making appointments to the Fire Department, no person shall be
deprived of an opportunity to serve on the Fire Department because of race,
religion, skin color, national origin, or sex.  No arbitrary rules on
height, weight, or achievement of strength or unrelated job needs shall be
imposed.  No handicapped person shall be denied, merely by virtue of being
handicapped, appointment to a position on the Fire Department which the
handicapped person is competent to fill.



(1969 Code, § 9-36)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.23  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Fire Chief may, with the consent of the Commissioner of Public
Health and Safety, make rules and regulations for the hours of duty,
uniforms, vacations, and conduct of the members and volunteers which shall be
binding on all firefighters while on duty.



(1969 Code, § 9-38)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.24  FIREFIGHTERS TO OBEY ORDERS.



   Firefighters shall obey the orders of the superior officers of the Fire
Department while on duty.



(1969 Code, § 9-39)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of fire marshal to suspend firefighter; appeal therefrom, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-17



§ 36.25  PUBLIC TO OBEY FIREFIGHTERS.



   It shall be the duty of all spectators at fires to obey the orders of
the members of the Fire Department on duty.



(1969 Code, § 9-40)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 36.26  CUSTODY OF PROPERTY AT FIRE SCENE.



   The members of the Fire Department shall have charge of property
removed from the scene of a fire by them to avoid loss or damage thereto
until the property is turned over to the owner or agent of the owner thereof.



(1969 Code, § 9-41)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.27  ARREST AUTHORITY.



   The Fire Chief, fire captains, and all firefighters shall have the
power and authority to arrest any person at or near the scene of an
accidental or destructive fire for any interference with the Fire Department
in the performance of its duties, or for the commission of any crime or
ordinance violation in connection with the fire.



(1969 Code, § 9-42)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PENSION FUND



§ 36.40  BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There shall be a Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund
which shall consist of 5 members.  Two members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor  of the city, 2 members of the Board shall be active
participants of the Pension Fund who are elected from the active participants
of the Fund, 1 member of the Board shall be a person who is retired under the
Fireman's Pension Fund Act of 1919 or this subchapter who is elected from
persons retired under the Fireman's Pension Fund Act of 1919 or this
subchapter. The members of the Boardselected from the active and retired
firefighters shall be elected at the time and in the manner provided by law.



(1969 Code, § 9-43)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 2006-11,
passed 2-13-2006)



Cross-reference:



   Fire protection tax, see § 92.001



   Out-of-State Fire Insurance Companies, see §§ 116.01et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Establishment, regulation, and procedures of firefighters’ pension
fund, see ILCS Chapter 40, Act 5, §§ 4-101 - 4-141



   Selection, composition of board of trustees of firefighters’ pension
fund, see ILCS Chapter 40, Act 5, § 4-121



§ 36.41  DUTIES OF TRUSTEES.



   The Board of Trustees of the firefighters’ pension fund shall have
control of the management of all funds belonging to or designated by law as
part of the firefighters’ pension fund and of the administration of such
funds as provided by statute.



(1969 Code, § 9-44)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



DEPARTMENT BOARD



§ 36.55  DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   (A)   The members of the Fire Department shall annually elect
officers of that Department.  These officers shall include a president,
secretary, and treasurer, and they shall act as a board and shall be
responsible for the expenditure of all funds received by the Fire Department
treasurer, including, but not limited to the foreign fire fund.  The Fire
Chief shall be an ex officio member of the board and shall attend all
meetings but shall have no vote on the proceedings.



   (B)   The treasurer of the Fire Department shall give a sufficient
bond to the city.  The bond shall be approved by the Mayor and the City
Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or
her duties under this section and the rules and regulations provided by state
statutes.  The treasurer’s books shall be audited annually by the city
auditors.



(1969 Code, § 9-45)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



§ 36.56  BUDGET AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The Fire Department Board described in § 36.55 shall be
responsible to submit to the City Council an itemized budget covering the
next year’s proposed expenditure of funds on or before March 1 of each
year.  The itemized budget shall define with specificity how the Board
proposes to expend its funds during the next fiscal year.  This budget shall
then be approved by the City Council or returned to the Fire Department board
for alterations.



   (B)   The Fire Department Board shall expend its money in accordance
with the budget approved by the City Council only for the purposes of
purchasing uniforms, firefighting equipment, or other fire station furniture
and furnishings.



(1969 Code, § 9-46)  (Ord. 1995-10, passed 5-8-1995)



CHAPTER 37:  FINANCE



Section



General Finance Provisions



   37.01   Annual budget



   37.02   Appropriation prerequisite to indebtedness



   37.03   Bill approval before payment; exception



   37.04   Annual audit



Purchasing



   37.15   Competitive bidding required



   37.16   Exceptions to bidding requirement



   37.17   Bidding procedure



   37.18   Determining lowest responsible bidder



   37.19   Award to other than low bidder; statement required



   37.20   Resolution of tie bids



   37.21   Rejection of bids



   37.22   Defaulting bidder



   37.23   Return of bid deposit



   37.24   Purchases by quotations



   37.25   Quotation procedure



   37.26   Determining lowest quotation



   37.27   Expenditures in excess of $1,000; Council approval



Cross-reference:



   Finance Director, see § 32.110



GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS



§ 37.01  ANNUAL BUDGET.



   (A)   Adoption of an annual budget.  The city hereby adopts ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.1— 8-2-9.10 providing for an annual municipal
budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriations ordinance.



   (B)   Budget officer.  The Commissioner of Accounts and Finance
with the approval of the City Council shall appoint a budget officer who
shall have the powers, duties, and responsibilities enumerated in the above
sections of the ILCS as they are now or may hereafter be amended.  The
budget officer shall give a bond in such sum as may be required by statute.



   (C)   Computation of annual budget.  The budget officer shall
compile a budget pursuant to the above sections of the ILCS as they are now,
or may hereafter be amended, containing estimates of the revenues available
before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies together with
recommended expenditures for the city.  The budget shall be adopted prior to
May 1 of each fiscal year.



   (D)   Public inspection, notice, and hearings on budget.  Copies of
the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection in
printed or typewritten form in the office of the City Clerk for at least 10
days prior to the passage of the annual budget.  Not less than 1 week after
the budget is available for inspection, and prior to final action on the
budget, at least 1 public hearing shall be held on the budget by the City
Council.  Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least 1 week prior to
the time of hearing.



   (E)   Revision of annual budget.  The City Council may delegate
authority to heads of municipal departments, boards, or commissions to
delete, add to, or change items previously budgeted to the department, board,
or commission, subject to any limitation or requirement for final approval by
the budget officer or Commissioner of Accounts and Finance as the City
Council upon a 4/5 vote of the members may establish.  The annual budget may
be revised by a vote of 4/5 of the City Council by deleting adding to or
changing budgeted items.  No revision of the budget shall be made increasing
the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of
the revision.



(Ord. 2000-9, passed 3-27-2000)



§ 37.02  APPROPRIATION PREREQUISITE TO INDEBTEDNESS.



   No indebtedness shall be incurred, except such indebtedness as may be
payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of
which the indebtedness could be paid; during the first quarter of any fiscal
year, before the enactment of the current appropriation ordinance, the city
may operate under the appropriation ordinance of the preceding year.



(1969 Code, § 2-7)



Statutory reference:



   Limitations on indebtedness of municipal corporations with population
less than 500,000, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-5-1



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-1-7, 8-2-9



§ 37.03  BILL APPROVAL BEFORE PAYMENT; EXCEPTION.



   All bills payable by the city, other than for the payment of salaries
previously established by the City Council, shall be submitted to the City
Council for approval before payment.



(1969 Code, § 2-10)



§ 37.04  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later
than 3 months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the city
made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws or
the state, to be designated by the City Council.  Copies of the audit report
shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall file the report with the auditor
of public accounts and in such other places as may be required by law.



(1969 Code, § 2-11)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-8-3



PURCHASING



§ 37.15  COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED.



   No purchase of, or contract for, supplies, equipment, or services shall
be made by the city without competitive bidding, except as provided in §
37.16 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 2-300)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975; Am. Ord. 1988-36,
passed 12-12-1988)



§ 37.16  EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENT.



   Bidding may be dispensed with in the following instances:



   (A)   When the amount of the contract in a contract for services or
any work or public improvements, which is not paid for in whole or in part by
special assessment or special taxation, is less than $20,000.



   (B)   Upon a vote of 4/5 of the City Council to dispense with
bidding.



   (C)   When approved by at least 4 of the Council members, the city
shall superintend and cause to be carried out construction of work or other
public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the performance of all
manual labor thereon by laborers and artisans whom the city shall pay by the
day or the hour but, any material used in the construction of work or other
public improvement with a value in excess of $20,000, the city shall purchase
from lowest responsible bidder.



(1969 Code, § 2-301)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975; Am. Ord. 1978-16A,
passed 5-24-1978; Am. Ord. 1983-14, passed 5-23-1983; Am. Ord. 1986-3, passed
1-27-1986; Am. Ord. 1989-36, passed 12-12-1988; Am. Ord. 1996-16, passed
5-28-1996; Am. Ord. 2015-8, passed 8-10-2015)



§ 37.17  BIDDING PROCEDURE.



   All bids shall be solicited, opened, and awards made thereon as follows.



   (A)   Solicitation of bids.  Bids shall be solicited by a notice
inviting bids, published in a newspaper having general circulation within the
corporate limits of the city at least once in each week for 3 successive
weeks, with the first publication being at least 30 days prior to the time
for bid opening.



   (B)   Contents of notice.  The notice inviting bids shall include a
general description of the supplies or services to be purchased or contracted
for, shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured, and shall
specify the time and place for the receipt and opening of bids.



   (C)   Minimum number of bids.  Whenever possible at least 2 bids
shall be obtained.



   (D)   Form of bids.  All bids shall be in writing, and shall be in
strict compliance with the bidding procedure which is hereinafter
enumerated.  All bidders shall be allowed listings of the bidding procedure
in the form of instructions, which instructions shall be as follows.



      (1)   All items contained in the instructions to bidders are
applicable to this call for bids.



      (2)   No bid may be withdrawn after the scheduled closing time
for receipt of bids for at least 30 days.



      (3)   The envelope containing bid shall be marked plainly
“sealed bid,” with material or service description, bid call number, date
and time of closing written thereon.  All bid proposals must be signed with
the firm name and by an authorized officer or employee of the company.



      (4)   Unless otherwise stated in this call for bids, each
bidder must submit with his or her bid either a certified check on any bank,
a cashier’s check on a bank doing business in the city, or a combination
bid and supply bond acceptable to the city in the amount of 10% of the total
base bid, payable to the city, as a guarantee that the successful bidder will
supply material and services as specified.



      (5)   The city reserves the right to require the successful
bidder to furnish a performance bond.  When required, the bond shall be
furnished within 72 hours after notification of award in an amount not to
exceed 100% of the total bid price.



      (6)   All bids must include all taxes that are applicable to
the city.  The city and state sales tax and federal excise taxes are not
applicable to sales made to the city and must be excluded.  The City Clerk,
upon request, will execute the exemption certificates in connection with all
orders when federal excise tax would otherwise be due.



      (7)   Bid price to be F.O.B. Paris, Illinois, with delivery to
city using point within the area unless otherwise stated in this call for
bids.  Prices shall be stated in units and quotation made on each item
separately.  In case of conflict, unit price shall govern.



      (8)   All prices and notations must be in ink or
typewritten.  Mistakes may be crossed out and corrections typed adjacent and
must be initialed in ink by person signing proposal.  The proposal must be
signed by an authorized officer or individual.



      (9)   The brand name or manufacturer of each item proposed
must be clearly stated.  Guarantee and warranty information must be included
with this bid.



      (10)   The parts and materials must be of current date (latest
model) and meet specifications.  This provision excludes surplus,
remanufactured, and used products except as alternate bid.



      (11)   Bids will be considered on equipment or material
complying substantially with specifications provided each deviation is stated
and the substitution is described, including technical data when applicable,
in a letter attached to bid.



         (a)   The city reserves the right to determine as to
whether substitutions or deviations are within the intent of the
specifications and will reasonably meet the service requirements of the using
department.



         (b)   In addition to price and applicability,
consideration for award may be given to engineering design which adds safety,
convenience, or adaptability for the use intended.  A brand name which may
be mentioned in specifications does not indicate a preference and is used
only as a reference to the type and quality of materials or equipment desired.



      (12)   Time of delivery is a part of the consideration and
must be stated in definite terms as this may be a factor in making the
award.  If time varies on different items, the bidder shall so state.



      (13)   Items of foreign origin must be so indicated. 
Signature to the bid proposal will be taken as certification that all
manufactured articles, materials and supplies not otherwise indicated, have
been made or produced in this country or its insular possessions.



      (14)   Unless otherwise specified, materials and equipment
purchased will be inspected by the receiving activity as to meeting the
quality requirements of the call for bids.  When deemed necessary, samples
of supplies or materials will be taken at random from stock received for
submission to a commercial laboratory, or other appropriate inspection
agency, for analysis and test as to whether the material conforms in all
respects to the specifications.  In cases where the commercial laboratory
report indicates that the material does not meet the specifications, the
expense of analysis is to be borne by the successful vendor and the order or
balance thereof may be cancelled by the city.



      (15)   Bidders must be sure to specify any terms which they
wish to offer in the space provided.  Cash discounts will be deducted from
the base bid in determining the low bidder, except that cash discounts based
on payment in less than 10 days will not be considered.  A percentage cash
discount will be deducted from all invoices (excluding labor) by the city
when paid within 21 days following receipt of proper bill and delivery of
material, unless otherwise specified by the bidder in his or her bid proposal.



      (16)   In case of default by the vendor, the city may procure
the articles or services from other sources and may deduct from unpaid
balance due the vendor, or may collect against the bond or surety for excess
costs so paid, and the prices paid by the city shall be considered the
prevailing market price at the time that purchase is made.



      (17)   The vendor shall hold the city, its officers, agents,
and employees, harmless from liability of any nature or kind on account of
use of any copyrighted or uncopyrighted composition, secret process, patented
or unpatented invention, article, or appliance furnished or used under this
bid call.



      (18)   The successful bidder is specifically denied the right
of using in any form or medium the name of the city for public advertising
unless express permission is granted by the city.



      (19)   The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids,
or any part thereof, or to accept any bid or any part thereof, to waive any
informalities in any bid, deemed to be for the best interest of the city.



   (E)   Bid opening.  Bids shall be opened by the City Clerk or his
or her representative at the time and in the place designated in the notice
inviting bids.



   (F)   Awards; rejection.  Awards shall be made by the City Council
to the lowest responsible bidder.  However, the City Council may reject any
and all bids received.  If all bids are rejected, the City Council may
resolicit new bids, or may determine that the work or service may be
performed more economically or more satisfactorily by the city with its own
employees, or that the supplies may be purchased at a lower price or more
advantageously in the open market, and may proceed without further observance
of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (G)   No bids.  If no bids are received, the City Council may
proceed without further competitive bidding.



(1969 Code, § 2-302)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975; Am. Ord. 1979-30,
passed 9-24-1979)



§ 37.18  DETERMINING LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the following shall be
considered, in addition to price:



   (A)   The quality of supplies offered;



   (B)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the supplies or service required;



   (C)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
supplies promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;



   (D)   The sufficiency of the bidder’s financial resources and the
effect thereof on his or her ability to perform the contract or provide the
supplies or services;



   (E)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience,
and efficiency of the bidder;



   (F)   The quality of bidder’s performance on previous orders or
contracts for the city;



   (G)   Litigation by the bidder on previous orders or contracts with
the city;



   (H)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with law
and ordinances relating to the subject of the contract;



   (I)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service where maintenance and service is essential; and



   (J)   Payment of local sales or use taxes that will accrue to the
city.



(1969 Code, § 2-303)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.19  AWARD TO OTHER THAN LOW BIDDER; STATEMENT REQUIRED.



   When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete
statement of the reasons therefor shall be prepared by the City Council,
approved by the City Attorney, and filed with the other papers related to the
transaction.



(1969 Code, § 2-304)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.20  RESOLUTION OF TIE BIDS.



   If 2 or more bids are for the same total amount of unit price, quality
and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay
or re- advertising for bids, the City Council may award the contract to 1 of
the tie bidders by drawing lots in public or it may negotiate with the tie
bidders and accept the lowest bid; provided, however, that when a county firm
is involved in a tie bid with 1 or more firms from outside the county, all
other things being equal, the award shall be made to the county firm.



(1969 Code, § 2-305)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.21  REJECTION OF BIDS.



   The City Council may reject any and all bids and may cause the purchase
or contract to be re- advertised.



(1969 Code, § 2-306)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.22  DEFAULTING BIDDER.



   If the successful bidder refuses or fails to accept a purchase order or
enter into a contract, as the case may be, within 10 days after he or she has
been notified of the award, his or her bid security shall be forfeited to the
city and the City Council may make the award to the next lowest responsible
bidder.  If the award is thus made to the next lowest responsible bidder,
the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to
the difference between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the
surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.  If there is not
enough bid security to compensate the city for its loss, the defaulting
bidder shall be liable for the deficit.



(1969 Code, § 2-307)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.23  RETURN OF BID DEPOSIT.



   After the successful bidder has accepted a purchase order or entered
into a contract, as the case may be, bid deposits shall be returned to the
unsuccessful bidders.



(1969 Code, § 2-308)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.24  PURCHASES  BY QUOTATIONS.



   Any purchase of, or contract for, supplies or services when the amount
thereof is reasonably expected to be less than $5,000 may be made by the City
Council by quotations.



(1969 Code, § 2-309)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975; Am. Ord. 1980-56,
passed 12-22-1980; Am. Ord. 1983-13, passed 5-23-1983; Am. Ord. 1986-3,
passed 1-27-1986)



§ 37.25  QUOTATION PROCEDURE.



   All quotations shall be solicited as follows.



   (A)   Quotations shall be solicited by the appropriate Commissioner
or the appropriate superintendent in writing, orally, or by telephone.



   (B)   Whenever possible at least 2 quotations shall be obtained.



   (C)   Upon report of the quotations by the appropriate Commissioner
or superintendent to the City Council, awards shall be made by the City
Council to the lowest quotation.  However, the City Council may reject any
and all quotations received.



(1969 Code, § 2-310)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.26  DETERMINING LOWEST QUOTATION.



   In determining the lowest responsible quoter, the following shall be
considered, in addition to price:



   (A)   The quality of supplies offered;



   (B)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the quoter to perform the
contract or provide the supplies of services required;



   (C)   Whether the quoter can perform the contract or provide the
supplies promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;



   (D)   The sufficiency of the quoter’s financial resources and the
effect thereof on his or her ability to perform the contract or provide the
supplies or services;



   (E)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience,
and efficiency of the quoter;



   (F)   The quality of quoter’s performance on previous orders or
contracts with the city;



   (G)   Litigation by the quoter on previous orders or contracts with
the city;



   (H)   The previous and existing compliance by the quoter with law
and ordinances relating to the subject of the purchase or contract;



   (I)   The ability of the quoter to provide future maintenance and
service where maintenance and service is essential; and



   (J)   Payment of local sales or use taxes that will accrue to the
city.



(1969 Code, § 2-311)  (Ord. 1975-2, passed 4-14-1975)



§ 37.27  EXPENDITURES IN EXCESS OF $1,000; COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, any contemplated
expenditures for or on behalf of any department or subdivision of the city
corporate entity which are in excess of $1,000 must be submitted to the
entire City Council for approval prior to purchase.



(1969 Code, § 2-312)  (Ord. 1980-55, passed 12-22-1980; Am. Ord. 2001-5,
passed 2-12-2001)



CHAPTER 38:  TAXATION



Section



General Provisions



   38.001   Tax levy ordinance



Locally Administered Tax Rights and Responsibilities



   38.015   Title



   38.016   Scope



   38.017   Definitions



   38.018   Notice



   38.019   Late payment; determination



   38.020   Payment distribution



   38.021   Credits and refunds; procedures



   38.022   Audit procedure



   38.023   Appeal



   38.024   Hearing



   38.025   Interest and penalties



   38.026   Abatement authority



   38.027   Installment contracts



   38.028   Statute of limitations



   38.029   Voluntary disclosure



   38.030   Publication of tax ordinances



   38.031   Internal review of liens



   38.032   Application



Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Service Occupation Tax



   38.045   Taxes imposed



   38.046   Collection and enforcement



   38.047   Effective date



Automobile Renting Occupation Tax



   38.060   Tax imposed



   38.061   Reports



   38.062   Payment to state



Hotel Operator’s Occupation Tax



   38.075   Authorization



   38.076   Purpose



   38.077   Tax imposed



   38.078   Effective date



Municipal Use Tax; Tangible Personal Property



   38.090   Tax imposed



   38.091   Collection by state



Automobile Renting Use Tax



   38.105   Tax imposed



   38.106   Collection



   38.107   Payment to state



Municipal Utility Tax



   38.120   Tax imposed



   38.121   Exemptions



   38.122   Tax in addition to certain other taxes



   38.123   Definitions



   38.124   Filing return



   38.125   Erroneous payment



   38.126   Time limit for recovery



   38.127   Violations



   38.128   Disposition of revenue



Municipal Utility Tax; Electricity



   38.140   Tax imposed



   38.141   Exceptions



   38.142   Additional taxes



   38.143   Collection



   38.144   Report and payment by taxpayer



   38.145   Credit for overpayment



   38.146   Violations



   38.147   Restoration clause



   38.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Electricity Use Tax Schedule



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.001  TAX LEVY ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Not sooner than 10 days after the publication of the annual
budget required by this code, a tax levy ordinance may be enacted as required
by law, levying those taxes as may be needed to meet the anticipated expenses
of the coming year, together with taxes as may be required to meet
outstanding bond issues, or for purposes payable from special taxes properly
authorized.



   (B)   A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with
the County Clerk not later than the second Tuesday in September.  The tax
levy ordinance shall show the amount appropriated for each item and the
amount of tax levied therefor.



(1969 Code, § 24-2)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-3-1



LOCALLY ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES



§ 38.015  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.016  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s
procedures in connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.017  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The city’s Mayor and City Council.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.  Each tax imposed by the
city that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or
department of the state.  It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code, being ILCS Chapter 35, Act 220, §§ 1
et seq., or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure maintenance
fees.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator, who is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees, or agents to the extent they are
authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator’s stead.  The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the
authority to implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to
this subchapter.  The exercise of this authority by the LOCAL TAX
ADMINISTRATOR shall not be inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.



   NOTICE.  Each audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.  Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax, and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of that tax is placed, and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.018  NOTICE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than 7 calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit, or other scheduled
act of the local tax administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.019  LATE PAYMENT; DETERMINATION.



   Any notice, payment, remittance, or other filing required to be made to
the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:



   (A)   Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or



   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.020  PAYMENT DISTRIBUTION.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.021  CREDITS AND REFUNDS; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.  However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be 4 years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made.  The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid
the amounts directly to the city.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows.



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest, and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.



      (2)   Within 10 days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 3% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.022  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (C)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and
if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (D)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted.  The audit shall be conducted not less than 7 days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agree to some other convenient time.  In the event
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.



   (E)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption, or deduction.  All books shall
be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



   (F)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the city.  If the taxpayer
or tax collector falls to provide the documents necessary for audit within
the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (G)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (H)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing that tax.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.023  APPEAL.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax.  The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal,
refund, and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing.  The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer.  The hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing.  In no event
shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be
reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day
period.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.024  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 38.023, above, the local
tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. 
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.  Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit, or assessment.  The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing.  The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.025  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Tax due.  In the event a determination has been made that a
tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment, or other bill sent, the tax
must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.



   (B)   Interest.  The city hereby provides for the amount of
interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax, to be 10% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (C)   Late filing and payment penalties.  If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment
penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed.  If no return is filed within
the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the
city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a
failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due
for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed.  A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to
file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.026  ABATEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty, or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.027  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.  The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer falls to pay any amount due and owing.  Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency.  If the taxpayer fails
to cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.028  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing.  The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving
notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide
any tax still due and owing.



   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
4 years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any 4-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be 6 years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (D)   The statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.029  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a
taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or
assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due. 



   (B)   A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must
agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for
all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than 4 years
before the date of filing the application. 



   (C)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may
not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed.  However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. 



   (D)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator.  However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.030  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements.  The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.  Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.031  INTERNAL REVIEW OF LIENS.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. 



   (B)   Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect.  If the lien
is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



§ 38.032  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances.  To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall be controlling.



(Ord. 2001-1, passed 1-22-2001)



NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 38.045  TAXES IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property titled and registered with an agency of this
state’s government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of ½% of
the gross receipts from the sales made in the course of the business while
this subchapter is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at
the rate of ½% of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by the serviceperson as an incident to a sale of service.  The
non-home rule municipal retailers’ occupation tax and the non-home rule
municipal service occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of food
for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is
sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes, and needles used by diabetics.



   (B)   The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in accordance
with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1.3, 8-11-1.4.



(Ord. 2003-1, passed 1-13-2003)



§ 38.046  COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the state.  The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2003-1, passed 1-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 38.999



§ 38.047  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall take effect on the first day of January, 2004,
next following the adoption and filing of this subchapter with the Department
of Revenue.



(Ord. 2003-1, passed 1-13-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-16, passed 7-14-2003)



AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX



§ 38.060  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this city, at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts
from the rentals made in the course of that business while this subchapter is
in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
8-11-7.



(1969 Code, § 24-26)  (Ord. 1981-21, passed 1-11-1982)



§ 38.061  REPORTS.



   Every person engaged in this business in the city shall file, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by §§ 2 and 3 of An Act in Relation to a Tax
Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to
Purchasers for Use or Consumption, approved June 29, 1933, as amended.



(1969 Code, § 24-27)  (Ord. 1981-21, passed 1-11-1982)  Penalty, see §
38.999



§ 38.062  PAYMENT TO STATE.



   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of the tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(1969 Code, § 24-28)  (Ord. 1981-21, passed 1-11-1982)  Penalty, see §
38.999



HOTEL OPERATOR’S OCCUPATION TAX



§ 38.075  AUTHORIZATION.



   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the
city by and through ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-3-14.



(Ord. 1999-19, passed 6-14-1999)



§ 38.076  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is for the purpose of creating a tax to be collected
and expended solely to promote tourism and conventions within the city and
otherwise to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the municipality.



(Ord. 1999-19, passed 6-14-1999)



§ 38.077  TAX IMPOSED.



   There is hereby imposed as a tax upon all persons engaged in the city
in the business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel, as defined
in the Hotel Operator’s Occupation Tax Act, being ILCS Chapter 35, Act 145,
§§ 1 et seq., at a rate of 5% of the gross rental receipts from that
renting, leasing, or letting; excluding, however, from gross rental receipts,
the proceeds of the renting, leasing, or letting to permanent residents of
that hotel.



(Ord. 1999-19, passed 6-14-1999)



§ 38.078  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall become effective July 1, 1999.



(Ord. 1999-19, passed 6-14-1999)



MUNICIPAL USE TAX; TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 38.090  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item
of tangible personal property which is purchased outside this state at retail
from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of state
government.  The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of that
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the
Use Tax Act, being ILCS Chapter 35, Act 105, §§ 1 et seq., approved July
14, 1955.



(1969 Code, § 24-31)  (Ord. 1974-13, passed 11-12-1974)



§ 38.091  COLLECTION BY STATE.



   This tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.



(1969 Code, § 24-32)  (Ord. 1974-13, passed 11-12-1974)



AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX



§ 38.105  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this city an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside this state and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this state’s government in this city
at the rate of 1% of the rental price of the automobile while this subchapter
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
8-11-8.



(1969 Code, § 24-36)  (Ord. 1981-22, passed 1-11-1982)



§ 38.106  COLLECTION.



   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall be collected from the
persons whose address in this state for titling or registration purposes is
given as being in this city.



(1969 Code, § 24-37)  (Ord. 1981-22, passed 1-11-1982)  Penalty, see §
38.999



§ 38.107  PAYMENT TO STATE.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue.



(1969 Code, § 24-38)  (Ord. 1981-22, passed 1-11-1982)



MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



§ 38.120  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax be herewith imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:



   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by
means of electricity, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts from that
business originating within the corporate limits of the city;



   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas for the use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross
receipts therefrom; and



   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom.



(1969 Code, § 24-53)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979; Am. Ord. 1979-33,
passed 10-22-1979; Am. Ord. 1997-16, passed 4-28-1997)



§ 38.121  EXEMPTIONS.



   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the Constitution and statutes of the U.S., be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or
selling gas, electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for
such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.



(1969 Code, § 24-54)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



§ 38.122  TAX IN ADDITION TO CERTAIN OTHER TAXES.



   This tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.



(1969 Code, § 24-55)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



§ 38.123  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The consideration received for the transmission of
messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas,
electricity, or water for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case
may be, except for that consideration received from the city; and for all
services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services, and property of
every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting the
messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product, or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service
cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation, or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES.  In addition to the usual and popular meaning
of person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both,
to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where those
persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith,
but shall not include the furnishing of services or facilities to persons for
the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such
persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages.



(1969 Code, § 24-56)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979; Am. Ord. 1985-25,
passed 8-12-1985)



§ 38.124  FILING RETURN.



   (A)   On or before the last day of December, 1979, each taxpayer
shall make a return to the City Treasurer stating:



      (1)   His or her name;



      (2)   His or her principal place of business;



      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the
basis of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   The amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer.



   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at
the time of making the return, pay to the City Treasurer the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer
may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her
total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between those
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(1969 Code, § 24-57)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)  Penalty, see §
38.999



§ 38.125  ERRONEOUS PAYMENT.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then that amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than 3 years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.



(1969 Code, § 24-58)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



§ 38.126  TIME LIMIT FOR RECOVERY.



   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of that
amount.



(1969 Code, § 24-59)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



§ 38.127  VIOLATIONS.



   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this division is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor; and in addition to penalties as provided in
this code shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(1969 Code, § 24-60)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)  Penalty, see §
38.999



§ 38.128  DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.



   Any revenues received by the City Treasurer by virtue of the provisions
of this subchapter shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the
city.



(1969 Code, § 24-61)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX; ELECTRICITY



§ 38.140  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges.



      (1)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired
in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the municipality, at the rates set forth in Appendix A of this chapter,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser.



      (2)   Pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the rates
set forth in Appendix A of this chapter shall be effective:



         (a)   On August 1, 1999 for residential customers; and



         (b)   On the earlier of:



            1.   The last bill issued prior to December 31,
2000; or



            2.   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to
ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-104, for nonresidential customers.



      (3)   Pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, Ord.
1979-31 of the city, or §§ 38.120et seq. of this code (commonly known as
the utility tax ordinance on gross receipts), shall specifically remain in
effect:



         (a)   For receipts attributable to residential
customers, until July 31, 1999; and



         (b)   For receipts attributable to nonresidential
customers, the earlier of:



            1.   Through the last bill issued prior to
December 31, 2000; or



            2.   The date of the first bill issued to that
nonresidential customer pursuant to ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et
seq.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not be effective until August 1, 1999.



(1969 Code, § 24-74)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.141  EXCEPTIONS.



   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with
respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent
to which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the U.S., be made the subject of taxation by this state or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business
of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for those transactions that
are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act as authorized by ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this subchapter be imposed upon any
person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in
like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of
the same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or
operated, or exercising the privilege within the municipality.



(1969 Code, § 24-75)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.142  ADDITIONAL TAXES.



   This tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer
or its business.



(1969 Code, § 24-76)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.143  COLLECTION.



   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from
the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser.  This tax shall constitute a debt
of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser,
and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity.  Any tax required to be collected pursuant to
this subchapter and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity
shall constitute a debt owed to the municipality by the person delivering the
electricity. 



   (B)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding the tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity.  Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to the gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying
data to the municipality upon request. 



   (C)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. 



   (D)   Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to
this section shall, at the time of filing the return, pay the municipality
the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 24-77)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.144  REPORT AND PAYMENT BY TAXPAYER.



   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer who has
not paid the tax imposed by this subchapter to a person delivering
electricity as set forth in this subchapter, and who is not otherwise
exempted from paving this tax, shall make a return to the City Clerk for the
preceding month stating:



      (1)   Name;



      (2)   Principal place of business;



      (3)   Gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for, shall, at
the time of making the return, pay to the city the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he
or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between these
billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(1969 Code, § 24-78)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.145  CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT.



   (A)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which
was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of
a mistake of fact or an error of law, then that amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this subchapter, from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than 3 years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.



   (B)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be commenced more than 3 years after the
due date of that amount.



(1969 Code, § 24-79)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.146  VIOLATIONS.



   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this subchapter, is
guilty of a misdemeanor; and in addition to penalties as provided in this
code shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(1969 Code, § 24-80)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal utility taxes, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2



§ 38.147  RESTORATION CLAUSE.



   In the event that Public Act 90-561 is declared unconstitutional, or if
§ 38.140 of this code is voided by court action, the provisions of Ord.
1979-31, or §§ 38.120et seq. of this code, (commonly known as the utility
tax ordinance), shall remain in effect in all respects as if it had never
been amended by this subchapter, and any amounts paid to the city by any
person delivering electricity pursuant to this subchapter shall be deemed to
have been paid pursuant to the utility tax ordinance, §§ 38.120et seq., as
it existed prior to the passage of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 24-80)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



§ 38.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which  no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as
provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any taxpayer who violates any provision of §§ 38.120et seq.
of this code is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500; and in addition shall
be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(1969 Code, § 24-60)  (Ord. 1979-31, passed 10-9-1979)



   (C)   Any taxpayer who violates any provision of §§ 38.140et seq.
of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200; and in addition shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(1969 Code, § 24-80)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



APPENDIX A:  ELECTRICITY USE TAX SCHEDULE



   A tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate
limits of the municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser.



 

Electricity Usage in a Month
 
Tax Rate per Kilowatt-Hour




First 2,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.004840 (.4840 cents)


Next 48,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.003170


Next 50,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002860


Next 400,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002780


Next 500,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002700


Next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002540


Next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002500


Next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours
 
$.002460


Next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002420


All electricity in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours
 
$.002380




 



(1969 Code, § 24-74)  (Ord. 1999-10, passed 4-12-1999)



Cross-reference:



   Electricity tax imposed, see § 38.140



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   51.   WATER



   52.   SEWERS



   53.   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



   54.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Water and Sewers; General Provisions



   50.01   Application of provisions



WATER AND SEWERS; GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of Chapter 51, 52, and 53 shall extend to and be made
applicable to the territory contiguous to the city not more than 1½ miles
beyond the corporate limits of this city.



(1969 Code, § 27-1)  (Ord. 1984-1, passed 1-23-1984)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Definitions



Construction and Connections



   51.015   Connection; permit required



   51.016   Available facility; connection required



   51.017   Turn-on; application; fee



   51.018   Service pipe installations



   51.019   Repair responsibility



   51.020   Cross-connections; prevention



   51.021   Service pipe materials



   51.022   Compliance with plumbing regulations



   51.023   Excavations



   51.024   Shut-off boxes



   51.025   Premises; separate connection required



   51.026   Use of water for construction purposes



Water Use



   51.040   Meters required; deposit



   51.041   Resale of water; unauthorized use



   51.042   Meter location



   51.043   Meter reading



   51.044   Meter testing



   51.045   New construction; meters required



   51.046   Unlawful use of city water supply



Administration and Enforcement



   51.060   Liability disclaimer



   51.061   Tampering with system prohibited



   51.062   Right of access



   51.063   Inspections; safety rules; easements



   51.064   Violations; notice to correct



   51.065   Violations; liability



   51.066   Water service outside city limits



Rates and Charges



   51.080   Water service charges established



   51.081   Bills; payment



   51.082   Delinquent bills; service discontinuance



   51.083   Lien; notice of delinquency



   51.084   Lien foreclosure



   51.085   Disposition of revenues



   51.086   Accounts; annual audit



   51.087   Access to records



   51.088   Appeals



   51.089   Effective date



   51.090   Notice of rates



   51.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Administrator of the U. S. Environmental
Protection Agency.



   BASIC USER CHARGE.  The basic assessment levied on all users of the
public water system.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.  A charge levied on users to improve,
extend, or reconstruct the waterworks.



   CHAPTER.  This chapter.



   CURB COCK.  A shut-off valve attached to a water service pipe from a
water main to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a
valve key to start or stop flow in the water-supply lines of a building. 
Also called CURB STOP.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal, and coverage of (loan, bond, and the like)
outstanding.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA).



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   FEDERAL ACT.  The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts Amendments.



   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE.  Charges for costs other than the
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs, such as debt service and
capital improvement costs.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissible.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER.  A unit of the concentration of water
constituent.  It is 0.001 g of constituent in 1,000 ml of water.  It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.



   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.



   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by 1 of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   ppm.  Parts per million by weight.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the works to maintain the capacity and performance for which those works were
designed and constructed.  The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.



   SERVICE BOX.  A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   STATE ACT.  The State Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.



   STATE LOAN.  The state participation in the financing of the
construction of waterworks as provided for by the State Anti-Pollution Bond
Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the
state.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The estimated period during which the waterworks will be
operated.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of
operation, maintenance, and replacement.



   WATER FUND.  The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the water system.



   WATER SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the water facilities.  The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in §§ 51.080et seq. and shall consist of the total of the basic
user charge and the local capital cost if applicable.



(Ord. 200, App. 1, passed 9-16-1998)



CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.015  CONNECTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No connections with the waterworks system shall be made without a
permit issued by the City Clerk.  All these connections shall be made by the
city forces under the supervision of the Water Commissioner.  Whenever any
premises shall hereafter be connected with the waterworks system, a charge
shall be made.



(1969 Code, § 27-124)  (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.016  AVAILABLE FACILITY; CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   The owner, occupant, or party or parties in possession of any house,
structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any other
building or structure of any other character which uses water and is located
on property within the corporate limits shall cause that house, structure,
factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any other building or
structure of any other character to be connected with the waterworks system
within 90 days from the date that water facilities become available to the
property.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.017  TURN-ON; APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   Application.  No water from the waterworks system shall be
turned on for service into any premises by any person but the city.  An
application to have water turned on shall be made to the City Clerk. The
applicant shall, in addition to completing such application, furnish a photo
identification card which the City Clerk shall photocopy and keep with the
application, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and
accept all the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of
city water supply.



(1969 Code, §§ 27-121, 27-122)



   (B)   Turn-on fee.  A fee shall be paid for turning on the water. 
The only exception to this will be when the customer temporarily relocates to
another home out of state, in which case a fee shall be added to the bill at
the time of turn-on.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-34, passed 8-23-2004)  Penalty, see
§ 51.999



§ 51.018  SERVICE PIPE INSTALLATIONS.



   All service pipes and laterals from the waterworks system (water mains)
to the stop box shall be installed by, and at the expense of the city for a
distance not to exceed 200 feet.  If the water service must cross a city or
state road or alley that requires boring and casing, the cost of that boring
and casing shall be borne by the applicant for the service or the owner of
the property being served.  All expense for more than 200 feet shall be at
the cost of and installed by the owner of the property to be served or the
applicant for the service.  All these water services shall have a curb cock
on the terrace with a stop box flush with the ground.



(1969 Code, § 27-126)  (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.019  REPAIR RESPONSIBILITY.



   All repairs for service pipes and laterals from the waterworks system
(water mains) to the stop box shall be made by and at the expense of the
city.  From the stop box to the property being served, all repairs and
excavations shall be by and at the expense of the property owner.



(1969 Code, § 27-129) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.020  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; PREVENTION.



   (A)   If, in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, Chapter 225,
Act 320, §§ 1 et seq., or in the judgment of the city, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the city will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately.  The water customer shall, at his or her own
expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the State Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations
and shall have inspections and tests made of the approved devices as required
by the State Plumbing Code and local regulations.



   (B)   No person shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the city enters the supply or distribution system of the
municipality, unless the private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of that supply shall have been approved by
the city and the State Environmental Protection Agency.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the city to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist.  These surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every 2 years,
or as often as the city shall deem necessary.  Records of these surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least 5 years.



   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the city or
its authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection.  On demand, the
owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
city any information which it may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on that property.  The refusal of this information,
when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the city, be deemed evidence
of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.



   (E)   The City Clerk of this city is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions
of this section is known to exist, and to take other precautionary measures
as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains.  Water service to the property
shall not be restored until those conditions have been eliminated or
corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a
reconnection fee is paid to the city.  Immediate disconnection with verbal
notice can be effected when the city is assured that imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists.  Such an
action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection.



   (F)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained, or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.021  SERVICE PIPE MATERIALS.



   (A)   All water services used or laid on city property shall be of K
copper construction.



   (B)   At no time will plastic or galvanized pipe be used regardless
of who is laying the pipe.



(1969 Code, § 27-128) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.022  COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING REGULATIONS.



   No water shall be turned on for service in any premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the city and state plumbing
code, provided that water may be turned on for construction work in
unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-123) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-60, passed
10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.023  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Excavations for installing service pipes and laterals or
repairing the same shall be made in compliance with state plumbing code and
with the ordinance or code provisions relating to making excavations in
streets; provided that it shall be unlawful to place any service pipe in the
same excavation with, or directly over, any drainpipe or sewer lateral.



   (B)   Any connections made to the city water system from the stop
box to the house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment,
or any other building or structure, shall require the boring of any city
street or city sidewalk, unless the City Water Department gives written
permission for this city street or city sidewalk to be cut.  If the city
street or city sidewalk are cut with the Water Department's written
permission, then repairs to that street or sidewalk shall be made in
accordance with the standards as set by the City Street Department.



(1969 Code, § 27-131) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-60, passed
10-25-2004; Am. Ord. 2005-30, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.024  SHUT-OFF BOXES.



   Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe,
and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this
is practicable.  These boxes shall be so located that they are easily
accessible and shall be protected from frost.



(1969 Code, § 27-130) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.025  PREMISES; SEPARATE CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   No owner or plumber shall be permitted to connect water pipes into any
2 distinct premises or tenements unless separate and distinct stop-cocks
shall be placed on the outside of each such premises along the sidewalk
opposite the same, nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots of buildings
to adjoining premises.  Duplex flats, double houses, and apartment houses
shall be considered as 1 premises.  A premises shall be construed to cover
all buildings and divisions under 1 common roof, owned by 1 party, who will
be charged for all services to the premises.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.026  USE OF WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.



   During construction of any building and before any water is installed,
the contractor constructing the building may be permitted to use the city
water supply by making application therefor and paying the flat fee
prescribed by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 27-115)



WATER USE



§ 51.040  METERS REQUIRED; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   (1)   No water shall be furnished or supplied or made
available to any user or customer for any purpose whatever until such
customer or user shall make application to the city therefor and a permit is
issued thereto by the city. Such application shall state the location of the
premises to be serviced, and the use to which the water will be put. All
connections to the main shall be either by or under the supervision of the
City Water Department.  The fee for water main taps shall be as follows, and
shall accompany the application for a permit:



         (a)   For ¾-inch tap and meter: $700;



         (b)   For 1-inch tap and meter: $800;



         (c)   For taps and meters 2 inches and larger, the
actual invoice cost of the material, labor and equipment furnished, plus 10%
for overhead and handling charges. The meter vault for 2-inch taps and all
over 2-inch shall be provided at the owner’s expense. The minimum shall be
4 x 4 with a steel lid.



      (2)   The above listed charges, subsections (a) through (c),
shall be minimum charges only. If the cost of the water main tap is in excess
of such minimum, the customer or user shall be billed for any additional cost
by the city when the work on the tap is complete.



   (B)   The above fees for water taps include the furnishing of all
labor, material, and equipment required to construct a service line and meter
by the city to the customer’s property line, unless specifically stated
otherwise on the permit so granted. The city’s maintenance responsibility
for the water service line extends from the water main to a point where the
service line leaves the meter pit, or if no pit, the meter itself. In the
event the meter is located inside or on a building, and/or on the premises of
the customer, then the city’s maintenance responsibility is from the water
main to the customer’s property line, together with the meter and
accessories thereto, located on the customer’s property, unless
specifically stated otherwise on the permit, or in a supplement agreement.
Right of ingress and egress to maintain such meters and accessories is
granted with the permit application for a water tap. With the request for a
water tap and the granting thereof by the city, the customer agrees, at the
city’s option, to permit the use of a “reading meter” to be attached to
the customer’s building at a location convenient to the city.



(1969 Code, § 27-125) (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-34, passed
8-23-2004)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.041  RESALE OF WATER; UNAUTHORIZED USE.



   No water supplied by the waterworks system of the city shall be resold
by any user.  No water user may supply water to other families or allow them
to take it, except for use on the premises and for the purpose specified in
the user’s approved application; nor, after water is introduced into any
building or upon any premises, shall any person make or employ any other
person to make any tap or connection with work upon the premises for
alterations, repairs, extensions, or attachments without written permit
therefor.  Resale or unauthorized use of water shall be grounds for
discontinuance of water service to the user, or the premises, or both.



(1969 Code, § 27-114)  (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.042  METER LOCATION.



   Meters shall be installed in a location that will provide easy access
thereto.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.043  METER READING.



   The city shall read or cause to be read every water meter used in the
city at such times as are necessary so that the bills may be sent out at the
proper times.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)



§ 51.044  METER TESTING.



   Upon request or complaint of the consumer, any water meter shall be
tested for accuracy.  If, upon testing, the meter is found to be over 3% off
in accuracy, the meter shall be replaced at no cost to the consumer.  If the
meter is found to be 3% or less off in accuracy, then the consumer shall pay
a testing fee of the cost of testing plus 10%.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-57, passed 10-25-2004)



§ 51.045  NEW CONSTRUCTION; METERS REQUIRED.



   Any house or building constructed within the city or constructed
outside of the city and using city water must have installed a meter and
backflow prevention device that will service each individual use located upon
any new constructed property.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-57, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty,
see § 51.999



§ 51.046  UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY WATER SUPPLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized by the city, to
withdraw water from the city lake system through any means.



(1969 Code, § 27-113)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.060  LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.



   (A)   Service failure.  All waterworks service supplied by the
waterworks system shall be upon the express condition that the city shall not
be liable nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused
by reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus, or
appurtenances connected with the system or any part or portion thereof, or
for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery, or
by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions, or renewals.



(1969 Code, § 27-111)



   (B)   Service interruption.  The city reserves the right to shut
off water at any time in the mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning,
making connections with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of
water in any part of the city in case of fire, and for restricting the use of
water in case of deficiency in supply, including the suspension of the use of
water for sprinkling lawns or gardens.  No claim shall be made against the
city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or damage
arising from shutting off of water for repairing, laying, or relaying mains,
hydrants, or other connections, or repairing any part of the water system, or
from failure of the water supply, or by increasing the water pressure at any
time, or from concentrated or restricted use of water as above.



(1969 Code, § 27-116)  (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)



§ 51.061  TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City Council
to tamper with, alter, or damage any part of the city waterworks or supply
system, or any meter.



(1969 Code, § 27-112)  (Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-60, passed
10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.062  RIGHT OF ACCESS.



   The city and its employees and the State Environmental Protection
Agency shall have ready access at all reasonable times to the premises,
places, or buildings where water service is supplied for the purpose of
inspecting, examining, and testing the consumption, use, and flow of water;
and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent, or
obstruct the city or its duly authorized agent or the State Environmental
Protection Agency in its duties hereunder.  Every user of the system shall
take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this section.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.063  INSPECTIONS; SAFETY RULES; EASEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Water Department employees and other duly authorized
employees of the city and the State Environmental Protection Agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The city or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewer or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to above in division (A) of this section, the City Water Department
or duly authorized employees of the city and the State Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain conditions.



   (C)   The City Water Department and other duly authorized employees
of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the waterworks lying within the easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.064  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT.



   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§ 51.015et seq.,
51.040et seq., or 51.060et seq., except § 51.061, shall be served by the
city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.065  VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city by reason of that violation.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.066  WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   The owner of all residential or commercial properties that are located
outside the city limits and used for human occupancy, employment, recreation
or other purposes that request to be served by the city’s public water
system must annex to the city before water service will be provided. If the
property is ineligible to annex, then the property owner must sign an
agreement that they will annex to the city. The annexation is to be finalized
when the property becomes eligible for annexation. However, the city shall
not be required to extend water to the subject property if water is not
already available.



(1969 Code. § 27-117)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.080  WATER SERVICE CHARGES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Water service charges.  The water service charge for the use
of and for service supplied by the water facilities of the city shall consist
of a basic user charge, a debt service charge, and a capital improvement
charge.



      (1)   Basic user charge. 



         (a)   The basic user charge is levied on all users to
recover the operation, maintenance, and replacement (O, M, & R) costs and
shall be based on water use as recorded by water meters.



         (b)   The basic user charge shall be computed as follows:



            1.   Estimate the annual water volume;



            2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue
required to operate and maintain the water facilities, including a
replacement fund for the year, for all works categories; and



            3.   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons.



      (2)   Debt service charge.  The debt service charge is
computed by apportioning the annual debt service, as a charge per 1,000
gallons.



      (3)   Capital improvement charge.  The capital improvement
charge is levied on users to provide for capital improvements, extensions, or
reconstruction of the waterworks.  The capital improvement charge is
computed by apportioning the annual amount to be accrued, as a charge per
1,000 gallons.



   (B)   Review.  The adequacy of the water service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the city in their annual audit report.  The water service charge shall be
revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or O, M, & R
costs.



   (C)   Measurement of flow.  The volume of flow used for computing
basic user charges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increments of 100 gallons.



      (1)   If the person procures any part, or all, of his or her
water from sources other than the public waterworks system, the person shall
install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type approved
by the City Water Department for the purpose of determining the volume of
water obtained from these other sources.



      (2)   Devices for measuring the volume of water may be
required by the City Water Department if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.



      (3)   Metering devices for determining the volume shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person.  Following approval and
installation, these meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the City Water Department.



   (D)   Schedule of charges.  The rates established in this section
shall automatically increase by 3% on May 1 of each calendar year commencing
May 1, 2014 unless the Council prior to that date determines that another
amount is appropriate.



      (1)   Basic user charge.  There shall be and there is hereby
established a basic user charge of $3.17 per 1,000 gallons of metered water
consumption to be applied to all users to recover O, M, & R costs (for flow
in excess of 2,000 gallons).



      (2)   Debt service charge.  There shall be and there is
hereby established a debt service charge of $3 per (1,000 gallons, month,
quarter) to each user of the water facility.



      (3)   Capital improvement charge.  There shall be and there
is hereby established a capital improvement charge of $1 per month to each
user of the water facility.



      (4)   Minimum charge.  A minimum charge of $10 per month
shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed 2,000
gallons per month.  This minimum charge consists of $6 for O, M, & R costs,
$3 for debt service costs, and $1 for capital improvement costs.



      (5)   High usage rates.  Usage in excess of 20,000 gallons
per month will be charged at a rate of $2.67 per 1,000 gallons.  This rate
consists of $2.67 for O, M, & R costs, $0.00 for debt service costs, and
$0.00 for capital improvement costs.  The flat rate charge will allow a
maximum of 100,000 gallons per month.



      (6)   Flat rate metering.  In the event use of the water
facilities is determined by the city to be in excess of 10,000 gallons per
month, the city may require the flat rate user to install metering devices on
the water supply to measure the amount of service supplied.



      (7)   Computation of water service charge.  The water service
charge shall be computed by the following formula:



   CW + CC + CD + CM + (Vu - X)CU



      Where:



      CW = Amount of water service charge ($) per billing period;



      CC = Capital improvement charge (division (D)(3));



      CD = Debt service charge (division (D)(2));



      CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, and replacement
(division (D)(4));



      Vu = Water volume for the billing period;



      X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
(division (D)(4)); and



      CU = Basic user charge for operation, maintenance, and
replacement (division (D)(1)).



(1969 Code, § 27-141) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-28, passed
7-12-2004; Am. Ord. 2006-25, passed 7-24-2006; Am. Ord. 2013-5, passed
4-22-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed 4-28-2014)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.081  BILLS; PAYMENT.



   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. 
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises,
and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city.



      (1)   If payment of a bill by a user is not made on or before
the tenth day of the month, or the first business day after the tenth if the
City Clerk’s office is closed on the tenth of the month, an additional
charge of 10% of the current billing shall be charged as a penalty.



      (2)   In the event a user’s bill is not paid by 12:00 noon
on the twentieth day of the month, the city will begin water service
termination procedures.



      (3)   The Water Department will, under the direction of the
City Council, establish a time for service termination. Upon the dispatch of
city crews for such termination, a penalty of $25 shall be charged for
continued service, whether or not that user’s service has been terminated
pursuant to this subsection.



      (4)   If, in the event service has been discontinued and the
user thereafter makes payment of his $25 penalty and his water and sewer
bill, water service shall be restored within 24 hours of the user’s payment.



      (5)   A $50 deposit will be required for water/sewer accounts
for property owners, and a $75 deposit will be required for water/sewer
accounts for renters, both for service provided by the city, based on the
following:



         (a)   There will be a $50 deposit required for each
water/sewer account established by an owner residential customer who has not
had an account before or who has not maintained a current account, and a $75
deposit required for each water/sewer account established by a residential
customer who is renting or leasing property.



         (b)   Deposits for other than renters should be
returned, if the owner has maintained the account on a current basis for a
period of at least 14 consecutive months.



         (c)   Deposits for renters will be held as long as the
water/sewer customer remains a renter or for 5 years. The deposit may be
transferred by the customer or it may be returned if the customer leaves the
service area and the final billing is paid.



         (d)   Commercial accounts are not required to maintain a
deposit (unless account has been delinquent for a period of 2 consecutive
months or more).



         (e)   All accounts are to be finalized and paid on or
before ownership changes. The new owner becomes responsible for the unpaid
balance.



(1969 Code, § 27-142) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998; Am. Ord. 2000-14, passed
4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-34, passed 8-23-2004)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.082  DELINQUENT BILLS; SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE.



   If the charges for these services are not paid within 45 days herein
above mentioned after the rendition of the bill for those services, the
services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all claims are settled.



(Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.083  LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   Whenever a bill for service remains unpaid for monthly service
after it has been rendered, the City Clerk shall file with the County
Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim.  This statement shall contain
the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill,
and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all
charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.



   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the City Clerk has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his or her address be known to the City Clerk,
whenever the bill remains unpaid for the period 45 days for a monthly bill
after it has been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the City Clerk to record the lien or to mail
this notice or the failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the
foregoing section.



(1969 Code, § 27-143) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.084  LIEN FORECLOSURE.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens.  The foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of
the city.  The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
these proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid
45 days in the case of a monthly bill, or 105 days in the case of a quarterly
bill, after it has been rendered.



(1969 Code, § 27-144) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.085  DISPOSITION OF REVENUES.



   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the
water system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund.  All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and
apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the City Treasurer not more than 10 days after receipt of the same,
or at more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
City Council.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
water system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of the
system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the “water fund of the city.” The
Treasurer shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner provided
by statute of the Revised Cities and Villages Act, Chapter 65, Act 20, §§
.01 et seq., effective January, 1942.



(1969 Code, § 27-145) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.086  ACCOUNTS; ANNUAL AUDIT.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water
system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the water system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
water facilities, including a replacement cost.  The financial information
to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water
plant for the current fiscal year;



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per
fiscal year;



      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;



      (4)   The number of users connected to the system; and



      (5)   The number of nonmetered users.



(1969 Code, § 27-146) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.087  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers, and records of the city which are applicable to the
city system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of
the loan agreement and rules for any state loan.



(Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.088  APPEALS.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in § 51.080 of this code shall be made available to a user
within 10 days of receipt of a written request therefor.  Any disagreement
over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by city
within 30 days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies.



(1969 Code, § 27-148) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.089  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The rates of service charges established for user charges in § 51.080
of this code shall be effective as of the next fiscal year beginning May and
on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding month being June 1 for
monthly users.



(Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



§ 51.090  NOTICE OF RATES.



   Each user will be notified by the city in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges or ad valorem taxes
which are attributable to water treatment services.



(1969 Code, § 27-147)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation as set forth in §
51.064 of this code beyond the time limit provided for in that section, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the
amount not exceeding $100 for each violation.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. -, passed 7-27-1998)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of
§§ 51.080et seq. of this code shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $500 for each offense, at the discretion of the full Council.



(1969 Code, § 27-149) (Ord. -, passed 9-16-1998)



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   52.001   Definitions



Discharge to Public Sewers



   52.015   Unlawful deposit of objectionable waste



   52.016   Discharge of pollutants to natural outlets



   52.017   Sanitary facilities and sewer connection required



   52.018   Combined sewer; connection to available storm sewer required



   52.019   Service outside city; annexation agreement



   52.020   Discharge of unpolluted waters



   52.021   Prohibited and restricted discharges



Private Sewage Disposal Systems



   52.035   Private sewage disposal restricted



   52.036   Permit; application; fee



   52.037   Inspection and approval



   52.038   Compliance with state law; lot size; discharge to natural
outlet prohibited



   52.039   Available public sanitary sewer; connection required



   52.040   Owner responsibility



   52.041   Additional requirements by health officers



   52.042   Occupancy; permit required



   52.043   Disposal by private waste haulers



Construction and Connections; Building Sewers



   52.055   Discharges; standards apply



   52.056   Construction; permit required



   52.057   Permit classes; application and fees



   52.058   Adequate capacity of system facilities required



   52.059   Costs and damages; owner responsible



   52.060   Separate building sewer required; exception



   52.061   Construction and materials; standards



   52.062   Elevation; artificial lift



   52.063   Unpolluted water; discharge to sanitary sewer prohibited



   52.064   Connection to public sewer; standards



   52.065   Inspection and supervised connection



   52.066   Excavations; barricades; restoration



   52.067   Repairs; responsibility



Administration and Enforcement



   52.080   Tampering with sewage works unlawful



   52.081   Right of entry; safety rules; easements



   52.082   Violations; notice to correct; liability for damages



Rates and Charges



   52.095   Wastewater service charges; basis



   52.096   Flow measurement



   52.097   Debt service charge established



   52.098   Minimum charge and basic user rate



   52.099   Excessive waste surcharges



   52.100   Surcharge basis computation



   52.101   Wastewater service charge computation



   52.102   Billing and payment; late fees and service charges



   52.103   Delinquent bill; lien; notice



   52.104   Lien foreclosure



   52.105   Disposition of revenues



   52.106   Accounts; annual audit reports



   52.107   Notice of rates



   52.108   Access to records



   52.109   Appeals of computation



   52.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment, see Chapter 53



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The City Administrator for this city.



   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or
other approved point of discharge, beginning 5 feet (1½ meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.



   CHAPTER.  This chapter, as it may be amended.



   CHARGES.  Include:



      (1)   BASIC USER CHARGE.  The basic assessment levied on all
users of the public sewer system;



      (2)   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.  A charge levied on users
to improve, extend, or reconstruct the sewage treatment works;



      (3)   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  The basic assessment levied on
all users of the public sewer system;



      (4)   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE.  Charges for costs other
than the operation, maintenance, and replacement costs, such as debt service
and capital improvement costs;



      (5)   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance
for which the works were designed and constructed.  The term “operation
and maintenance” includes REPLACEMENT;



      (6)   SURCHARGE.  The assessment in addition to the basic
user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose
wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established in
§§ 52.020 and 52.021;



      (7)   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of treatment
works for the cost of operation, maintenance, and replacement; and



      (8)   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.  The charge per quarter or
month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities.  The service charge
shall be computed as outlined in §§ 52.095et seq. and shall consist of the
total of the basic user charge, the local capital cost, and a surcharge, if
applicable.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged.  Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior
drop.  The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the city
representative to sample and measure discharges.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA).



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EFFLUENT CRITERIA.  As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.



   FEDERAL ACT.  The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 466 et seq.)
as amended (Pub. L. 95-217).



   FEDERAL GRANT.  The federal government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.  Wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE FAT
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
food.



   GARBAGE, PROPERLY SHREDDED.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing,
commercial, or business establishment or process or from the development,
recovery, or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.  An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day;



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;



      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or



      (4)   Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection
with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or
upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissible.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER.  A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent.  It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of
water.  It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million,
to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water
and wastewater analysis.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NPDES PERMIT.  Any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued
by the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment
of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants
pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act.



   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.



   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by 1 of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT.  A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream.  One POPULATION
EQUIVALENT is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and
0.20 pound of suspended solids.



   ppm.  Parts per million by weight.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.



      (1)   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal.



      (2)   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer which is designed and intended
to receive wastewater, storm, surface, and ground water drainage.



      (3)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer provided by or subject to the
jurisdiction of the city.  It shall also include sewers within or outside
the city boundaries that serve 1 or more persons and ultimately discharge
into the city sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those sewers
may not have been constructed with city funds.



      (4)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer that conveys sewage or
industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface,
and ground waters or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally
admitted.



      (5)   STORM SEWER.  A sewer that carries storm, surface, and
ground water drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SEWERAGE.  The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.



   SEWERAGE FUND.  The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average
24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.



   STATE ACT.  The State Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.



   STATE GRANT.  The state participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the State Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of
this state.



   STORM WATER RUNOFF.  The portion of the precipitation that is drained
into the sewers.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS.  Solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device.  Quantitative determination of
SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation in receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The estimated period during which the collection system
or treatment works will be operated.



   USER CLASS.  The type of user; residential,
institutional/governmental, commercial, or industrial, as defined herein.



      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER.  Includes transient lodging, retail
and wholesale establishments, or places engaged in selling merchandise, or
rendering services.



      (2)   INDUSTRIAL USER.  Includes establishments engaged in
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation
of materials of substance into products.



      (3)   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Includes schools,
churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and
local governments.



      (4)   RESIDENTIAL USER.  Includes all dwelling units such as
houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.



   WASTEWATER.  The spent water of a community.  From this standpoint,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be
present.  The term SEWAGE is used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.  Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.



   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS.  As defined in the Water Pollution
Regulations of the state.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1969 Code, § 27-16)  (Ord. 1989-13, passed 3-13-1989)



DISCHARGE TO PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 52.015  UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



(1969 Code, § 27-17)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.016  DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS TO NATURAL OUTLETS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-18)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.017  SANITARY FACILITIES AND SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the
city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined)
sewer of the city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect those facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line.



(1969 Code, § 27-19)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2001-9,
passed 4-23-2001)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.018  COMBINED SEWER; CONNECTION TO AVAILABLE STORM SEWER REQUIRED.



   At the time when a public storm sewer becomes available to a property
served by a public combined sewage system, the building and property storm
sewer discharge shall be connected to the storm sewer within 24 months of the
storm sewer becoming available.



(1969 Code, § 27-39)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1997-32,
passed 9-8-1997)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.019  SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY; ANNEXATION AGREEMENT.



   (A)   The owner of all residential or commercial properties that are
located outside the city limits and used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes must annex to the city before sewer service
will be provided.  If the property is ineligible to annex, then the property
owner must sign an agreement that he or she will annex to the city.  The
annexation is to be finalized when the property becomes eligible for
annexation.  However, the city shall not be required to extend sewers to the
subject property if sewers are not already available.



   (B)   The City Council may, under certain circumstances that it
deems beneficial to the interest of the community, and by a unanimous vote,
waive the above requirements for annexation.



(1969 Code, § 27-19.1)  (Ord. 1992-11, passed 4-27-1992)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.020  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
un- contaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City Administrator. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the City Administrator, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.



(1969 Code, § 27-66)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.021  PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Prohibited discharges.  No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than  5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; or



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



   (B)   Restricted discharges.  No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City Administrator that
those wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or
equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.  In forming
his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City
Administrator will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies.  The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
materials, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.  The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Administrator;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the City Administrator for those materials;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-
or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City Administrator as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the City Administrator in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005
mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the City Administrator in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;



      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except
as permitted by the City Administrator in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations;



      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in quantities so as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; or



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs as defined herein.



      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(1969 Code, § 27-67)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 52.035  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL RESTRICTED.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (B)   Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available
under the provisions of § 52.017 of this code, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions
of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-31)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.036  PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEE.



   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of
Public Property.  The application for this permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as deemed necessary by the Director of
Public Property.  A permit fee of $50 shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.



(1969 Code, § 27-32)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord.
2004-58,passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.037  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Edgar County Department of Public Health.  He or she shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the City Administrator when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered.  The inspection shall be made within 60 hours of the receipt of
written notice by the Director of Public Property.



(1969 Code, § 27-33)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord.
2004-58,passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.038  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW; LOT SIZE; DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLET
PROHIBITED.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act and Code, Chapter 225, Act 225, §§ 1 et seq., and
with the State Environmental Protection Agency.  No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than a size suitable for an
effective system.  No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.



(1969 Code, § 27-34)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.039  AVAILABLE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER; CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   At the time when a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 52.017
of this code, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.



   (B)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to that sewer within 60 days, and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or dirt.



(1969 Code, § 27-39)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1997-32,
passed 9-8-1997)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.040  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the
city.  An annual certification by an Illinois licensed septic system
contractor shall be required and the certification of proper operation shall
be filed with the city. A minimum fee of $20 is imposed for the annual
certification.



(1969 Code, § 27-35)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2004-58,
passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.041  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS BY HEALTH OFFICERS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the City
Health Officer.



(1969 Code, § 27-36)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.042  OCCUPANCY; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or allow another to
occupy any premises for which a private sewerage permit is required by this
chapter unless the permit has been issued.



(1969 Code, § 27-37)  (Ord. 1984-1, passed 1-23-1984)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.043  DISPOSAL BY PRIVATE WASTE HAULERS.



   (A)   Private haulers of liquid sludge and sewage waste may
discharge that sanitary waste at the sewage treatment plant in the city by
obtaining a permit therefor, prior to the discharge.



   (B)   A minimum fee in the amount of $40 for this type of discharge
is herewith imposed for disposal in amounts up to 1,000 gallons per load. 
Thereafter, disposal shall be allowed at the rate of $1 per 100 gallons up to
a maximum of 2,000 gallons per load.



   (C)   Permits for this type of discharge shall be obtained from the
City Clerk’s office, and fees paid therefor prior to actual unloading and
discharge at the sewage treatment plant.  However, no permit shall be
allowed to out-of-the-area or out-of-state haulers for the dumping of liquid
sludge.



   (D)   The actual dumping shall be at the discretion of the sewage
plant supervisor.  No dumping of liquid sludge or sanitary waste shall be
allowed at the sewage treatment plant without an adequate permit, as issued
by the office of the City Clerk.



   (E)   Any unauthorized discharge of sanitary waste or sludge in the
sewage system of the city, or at the city sewage treatment plant, shall
constitute a misdemeanor offense.



(1969 Code, § 27-38)  (Ord. 1984-1, passed 1-23-1984; Am. Ord. 1989-16,
passed 6-26-1989; Am. Ord. 2004-58, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see §
52.999



CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS; BUILDING SEWERS



§ 52.055  DISCHARGES; STANDARDS APPLY.



   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.



(1969 Code, § 27-46)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.056  CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



(1969 Code, § 27-47)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2000-16,
passed 4-24-2000)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.057  PERMIT CLASSES; APPLICATION AND FEES.



   (A)   (1)   There shall be 2 classes of building sewer permits:



         (a)   For residential wastewater service; and



         (b)   For commercial, industrial, or
institutional/governmental wastewater service.



      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city.



   (B)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city.  A permit and inspection fee of $500 for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed.  In the case of a force main, the fee shall be $650.
And for this fee, the city shall make the sewer tap to the main sewer and
extend a 6-inch sanitary sewer to a  point 1 foot onto the owner’s
property.  In those instances where the building sewer line has previously
been connected to the city’s sewer line and extended onto the owner’s
property, the permit fee to connect the building sewer at this point will be
$100.



(1969 Code, § 27-48)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1997-17,
passed 4-28-1997; Am. Ord. 2000-16, passed 4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-58,
passed 10-25-2004; Am. Ord. 2010-8, passed 5-24-2010)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.058  ADEQUATE CAPACITY OF SYSTEM FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(1969 Code, § 27-49)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.059  COSTS AND DAMAGES; OWNER RESPONSIBLE.



   (A)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner except as
specified in § 52.057(B).  The normal maintenance of the building sewer
from its connection to the city’s sanitary sewer to its connection with the
building served shall be the responsibility of the owner.  The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (B)   The city will maintain the structural integrity of the tap
within 1 foot inside the property boundary.



(1969 Code, § 27-50)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2000-16,
passed 4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-58, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.060  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where 1 building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as 1 building sewer.



(1969 Code, § 27-51)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.061  CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS; STANDARDS.



   The size, slope, alignment, and materials for construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.  In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in this state shall apply.



(1969 Code, § 27-53)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.062  ELEVATION; ARTIFICIAL LIFT.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by means which
are approved in accordance with § 52.055, and discharged to the building
sewer.



(1969 Code, § 27-54)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.063  UNPOLLUTED WATER; DISCHARGE TO SANITARY SEWER PROHIBITED.



   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(1969 Code, § 27-55)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.064  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER; STANDARDS.



   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Manual of Practice No. 9, the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in this
state.  All connections of this type shall be made gastight and
watertight.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the City Administrator before installation.



   (B)   Whenever possible, if new construction results in a building
sewer being hooked into a public combined sewer, the new construction shall
minimize any and all inflow contributions to the combined sewer system, and
these connections shall discharge only interior household plumbing waste.



   (C)   All new construction of buildings which results in a building
sewer being connected to the public combined sewer shall have separate piping
for all sanitary and storm discharges, and they shall not leave the premises
in a combined status.



(1969 Code, § 27-56)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1997-31,
passed 9-8-1997)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.065  INSPECTION AND SUPERVISED CONNECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City
Administrator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.  The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the City Administrator or his or her representative.



(1969 Code, § 27-57)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.066  EXCAVATIONS; BARRICADES; RESTORATION.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



(1969 Code, § 27-58)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.067  REPAIRS; RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The city shall maintain the structural integrity and repair
the sewer mains and taps to within 1 foot of the property boundary.  Users
shall be responsible for all normal building sewer maintenance.



(1969 Code, § 27-21)



   (B)   All normal maintenance on sewer service pipes from the main
city sewer to the building served shall be made by and at the expense of the
owners of the premises served, regardless of on whose property the service
pipe is located.



   (C)   The city may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipe,
and if that is done, the cost of the repair work shall be repaid to the city
by the owner of the premises served.



(1969 Code, § 27-59)  (Ord. 1984-1, passed 1-23-1984; Am. Ord. 1990-7,
passed 5-30-1990; Am. Ord. 2004-58, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see §
52.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 52.080  TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS UNLAWFUL.



   No authorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works.  Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.



(1969 Code, § 27-20)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.081  RIGHT OF ENTRY; SAFETY RULES; EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Right of entry; limitation on inquiry.  Any duly authorized
employees of the city, or the State Environmental Protection Agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The city representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.



   (B)   Observance of safety rules; indemnification of company. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
division (A) above, the duly authorized employees of the city, the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against
the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating, except as
they may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
conditions as required in § 53.110.



   (C)   Easements.  The duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(1969 Code, § 27-76)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2004-58,
passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.082  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   (A)   Notice of violation; compliance time; permit revocation.  Any
person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except § 52.080
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations.  The city may revoke any
permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
§§ 52.015et seq., 52.035et seq., or 52.055et seq. of this code.



   (B)   Failure to comply.  Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in division (A) above, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Liability of violator.  Any person violating any of the
provisions of §§ 52.015et seq., 52.035et seq., or 52.055et seq. of this
code shall become liable to the city by reasons of that violation.



(1969 Code, § 27-77)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 52.095  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES; BASIS.



   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service
supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic
user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement and applicable
surcharges and local capital cost charge composed of a debt service charge.



      (1)   Debt service charge.  The debt charge is computed by
apportioning the annual debt service on a cost per 1,000 gallons basis.



      (2)   Basic user charge.



         (a)   The basic user charge shall be based on water
usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the
following normal domestic concentrations:



            1.   A 5-day, 20°C, biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) of 240 mg/l; and



            2.   A suspended solids (SS) content of 240 mg/l.



         (b)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance
costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:



            1.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS, and
pounds of BOD to be treated;



            2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue
required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a
replacement fund for the year, for all works categories;



            3.   Proportion the estimated operation,
maintenance, and replacement (O, M, & R) costs to each user class by volume,
suspended solids, and BOD;



            4.   Proportion the estimated O, M, & R costs to
wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids, and BOD;



            5.   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal
sewage strength; and



            6.   Compute surcharge costs per pound per 1,000
gallons in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.



      (3)   Surcharge.  A surcharge will be levied to all users
whose waters exceed the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (240 mg/l) and
SS (240 mg/l).  The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 240 mg/l and
240 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS respectively.  The procedure to
compute a surcharge is specified in § 52.100.



   (B)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the city in their annual audit report.  The wastewater service charge shall
be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or a
change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.



   (C)   The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges which is attributable to the wastewater treatment operation,
maintenance, and replacement.



(1969 Code, § 27-81)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.096  FLOW MEASUREMENT.



   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of 100 gallons.



      (1)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the
public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense,
water meters of a type approved by the City Administrator for the purpose of
determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.



      (2)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may
be required by the City Administrator if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.



      (3)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste
shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the person.



   (B)   Following approval and installation, these meters may not be
removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of the City
Administrator.



(1969 Code, § 27-82)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.097  DEBT SERVICE CHARGE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   A debt service charge of $1.99 per 1,000 gallons to each user
of the wastewater facility, for usage up to and including 200,000 gallons per
month, is hereby established.



   (B)   A debt service charge of $.25 per 1,000 gallons to each user
of the wastewater facility, for usage over 200,000 gallons per month, is
hereby established.



   (C)   The rates established in this section shall automatically
increase by 3% on May 1 of each calendar year.



(1969 Code, § 27-83)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1995-21,
passed 8-28-1995; Am. Ord. 1997-18, passed 4-28-1997; Am. Ord. 1998-10,
passed 5-11-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-28, passed 7-12-2004; Am. Ord. 2004-33,
passed 8-23-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.098  MINIMUM CHARGE AND BASIC USER RATE.



   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum
charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the city.  A minimum charge of $6.44 per month
shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed 2,000
gallons per month.  A basic user rate of $3.22 per 1,000 gallons shall be
applied to all users for water consumption in excess of 2,000 gallons per
month.



   (B)   All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per month adequate to cover the costs of
the minimum accrual capital cost charge, the minimum service charge, and the
basic user rate, of $20.84 per 4,000 gallons per month.



   (C)   The rates in this section shall automatically increase by 3%
on May 1 of each calendar year.



(1969 Code, § 27-84)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1995-21,
passed 8-28-1995; Am. Ord. 1998-10, passed 5-11-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-28,
passed 7-12-2004)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.099  EXCESSIVE WASTE SURCHARGES.



   (A)   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:



      (1)   Per pound of BOD:  $.46; and



      (2)   Per pound of SS:  $.46.



   (B)   The rates established in this section shall automatically
increase by 3% on May 1 of each calendar year commencing May 1, 2014 unless
the Council prior to that date determines that another amount is appropriate.



(1969 Code, § 27-85)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 1995-21,
passed 8-28-1995; Am. Ord. 1998-10, passed 5-11-1998; Am. Ord. 2004-28,
passed 7-12-2004; Am. Ord. 2004-33, passed 8-23-2004; Am. Ord. 2006-25,
passed 7-24-2006; Am. Ord. 2013-5, passed 4-22-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-3, passed
4-28-2014)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.100  SURCHARGE BASIS COMPUTATION.



   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling.  Waste sampling shall be performed as often
as may be deemed necessary by the City Administrator and shall be binding as
a basis for surcharges.



(1969 Code, § 27-86)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.101  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE COMPUTATION.



   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:



   CW = CD + CM + (Vu - X) CU + CS



      Where:



      CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period;



      CD = Debt service charge (§ 52.097);



      CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, and replacement
(§ 52.098);



      Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period;



      X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (§
52.098);



      CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance, and replacement
(§ 52.098); and



      CS = Amount of surcharge (§§ 52.099, 52.100).



(1969 Code, § 27-87)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.102  BILLING AND PAYMENT; LATE FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Rates and charges for service shall be payable monthly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. 
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to the premises;
and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city.



      (1)   The bill amount is payable on or before the tenth of
each month.  In the event that the City Clerk’s office is closed on the
tenth, the bill amount payable is due on the first business day after the
tenth.  A 10% service charge is added to the bill amount after the payment
due date.



      (2)   In the event a user’s bill is not paid by 12:00 noon
on the seventeenth day of the month, the city will begin water service
termination procedures.



      (3)   The Water Department will, under the direction of the
City Council, establish a time for service termination.  Upon the dispatch
of city crews for this termination, a penalty of $25 shall be charged for
continued service, whether or not that user’s service has been terminated
pursuant to this division.



      (4)   If, in the event service has been discontinued and the
user thereafter makes payment of the $25 penalty and his or her water and
sewer bill, water service shall be restored within 24 hours of the user’s
payment.



   (B)   In addition to the rates set out herein, there shall be a
service charge of $20 to the user for each check of the user that is returned
unpaid to the City Clerk’s office.



(1969 Code, § 27-88)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989; Am. Ord. 2000-14,
passed 4-24-2000; Am. Ord. 2004-59, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.103  DELINQUENT BILL; LIEN; NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 30 days
after it has been rendered, the City Treasurer shall file with the County
Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim.  This statement shall contain
the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill,
and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all
charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.



   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the City Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to
the owner of the premises if his or her address be known to the Treasurer,
whenever the bill remains unpaid for the period 45 days for a monthly bill or
105 days for a quarterly bill after it has been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the City Treasurer to record the lien or to
mail the notice, or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the
foregoing division.



(1969 Code, § 27-89)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.104  LIEN FORECLOSURE.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens.  This foreclosure shall be by a bill in equity in the name
of the city.  The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute these proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over these matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid 45 days after it has been rendered.



(1969 Code, § 27-90)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.105  DISPOSITION OF REVENUES.



   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the
sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage
fund.  All these revenues and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer
separate and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the city, and all of that sum, without any deductions
whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more than 10 days
after receipt of the same, or at more frequent intervals as may from time to
time be directed by the Mayor and Council.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
the system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the “sewerage fund of the city.” 
The Treasurer shall administer this fund in every respect in the manner
provided by statute of the Revised Cities and Villages Act, Chapter 65, Act
20, §§ .01 et seq., effective January 1942.



(1969 Code, § 27-91)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.106  ACCOUNTS; ANNUAL AUDIT REPORTS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations.  In this regard, the financial information to be
shown in the audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing the total gallons received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year;



      (2)   Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed
per fiscal year;



      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;



      (4)   The number of users connected to the system;



      (5)   The number of nonmetered users; and



      (6)   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial
wastes and the volume of waste discharged.



(1969 Code, § 27-92)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.107  NOTICE OF RATES.



   Each user will be notified by the city in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges or ad valorem taxes
which are attributable to wastewater treatment services, including the
financial information of § 52.106 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-93)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.108  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The IEPA, U.S. EPA, or its authorized representative shall have access
to any books, documents, papers, and records of the city which are applicable
to the city system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the
purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcripts thereof to
ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any
state grant (or federal regulations and conditions of the federal grant).



(1969 Code, § 27-95)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.109  APPEALS OF COMPUTATION.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in §§ 52.095 - 52.101 of this code shall be made available to
a user with 10 days of receipt of a written request therefor.  Any
disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be
remedied by City Administrator within 10 days after notification of a formal
written appeal outlining the discrepancies.



(1969 Code, § 27-96)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any unauthorized discharge of sanitary waste or sludge in the
sewage system of the city, or at the city sewage treatment plant, as
described in § 52.043 of this code, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense,
and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500 per offense.



(1969 Code, § 27-38)  (Ord. 1984-1, passed 1-23-1984; Am. Ord. 1989-16,
passed 6-26-1989)



   (C)   Any person who shall continue any violation as described in §
52.082 of this code beyond the time limit provided for in that section, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the
amount not exceeding $50 for each violation.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 27-77)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of
§§ 52.095et seq. of this code shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $500 for each offense.



(1969 Code, § 27-94)  (Ord. 1989-7, passed 3-13-1989)



CHAPTER 53:  INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



Section



General Provisions



   53.001   Purpose and policy



   53.002   Administration authority



   53.003   Definitions



   53.004   Abbreviations



Industrial Discharges



   53.015   Prohibited discharges



   53.016   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards adopted



   53.017   State pretreatment standards adopted



   53.018   Specific pollutant limits



   53.019   City right of revision



   53.020   Special agreements



   53.021   Dilution



Pretreatment



   53.035   Pretreatment facilities; plans



   53.036   Discharge flow



   53.037   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   53.038   Gas detection or explosion hazard meter



   53.039   Accidental discharge/slug control plan



   53.040   Owner and tenant responsibility



   53.041   Hauled wastewater; discharge permit



   53.042   Tampering with POTW unlawful



Wastewater Discharge Permit



   53.055   Wastewater survey



   53.056   Wastewater discharge permit required



   53.057   Existing industrial users; permit



   53.058   New industrial users; permit



   53.059   Industrial users outside city



   53.060   Application; content



   53.061   Signatories and certification



   53.062   Evaluation and decision



   53.063   Permit term



   53.064   Permit content; conditions



   53.065   Appeal of permit terms and conditions



   53.066   Modification



   53.067   Transfer; notice and approval



   53.068   Revocation



   53.069   Reissuance



   53.070   Municipal wastewater discharge permit



Compliance Monitoring



   53.085   Baseline monitoring reports; content



   53.086   Compliance schedule; progress reports



   53.087   Categorical Pretreatment Standards compliance report



   53.088   Periodic compliance reports



   53.089   Changed conditions; notice required



   53.090   Unusual or accidental discharges; report; liability



   53.091   Nonsignificant industrial users; reports



   53.092   Notice of violation; repeat testing



   53.093   Hazardous waste discharge; notice required



   53.094   Sampling and analysis; standards



   53.095   Sampling techniques



   53.096   Grab sampling; noncompliance determination



   53.097   Submission date



   53.098   Records retention



Administration and Enforcement



   53.110   Inspection and monitoring; right of access



   53.111   Search warrants



   53.112   Confidential information



   53.113   Significant noncompliance; publication of violators



   53.114   Notice of violation; user plan of action



   53.115   Consent orders



   53.116   Show cause hearing



   53.117   Compliance order



   53.118   Cease and desist order



   53.119   Administrative fines



   53.120   Emergency suspension of discharge



   53.121   Termination of discharge



   53.122   Injunctive relief



   53.123   Remedies not exclusive



   53.124   Permit reissuance; performance bond



   53.125   Liability insurance



   53.126   Water supply severance



   53.127   Violations a nuisance; abatement



   53.128   Informant rewards



   53.129   Contractor eligibility



   53.130   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



   53.131   Pretreatment charges and fees



   53.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city
and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. pt. 403).  The objectives of this
chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will interfere with the operation of the POTW;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;



      (3)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment
plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in
compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;



      (4)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and to protect the
general public;



      (5)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewater and sludge from the POTW;



      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and



      (7)   To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit
conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or
state laws to which the POTW is subject.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all industrial users of the
POTW.  The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.



(1969 Code, § 27-171)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.002  ADMINISTRATION AUTHORITY.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated
by the Superintendent to other city personnel.



(1969 Code, § 27-172)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The State Environmental Protection Agency.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1.    The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



            2.   The manager of 1 or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $20,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or
proprietor, respectively;



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state, or
local governmental facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his or her
designee; or



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) - (c)
above may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD.  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, 5 days at 20°C, expressed in terms of mass and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).



      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA
in accordance with §§ 307(b) and 307(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40
C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N, pt. 405 - 471.



      COLOR.  The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water.  100% transmittance is equivalent
to 0.0 optical density.



      COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency; or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the regional water management division director or other duly
authorized official of the agency.



      EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards which will be applicable to the source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
1-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The introduction of
nondomestic pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated
under §§ 307(b), 307(c), or 307(d) of the Act.



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER.  A source of indirect discharge.



      INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM AL- LOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.  The maximum
concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.



      INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources:



         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operation, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and



         (b)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of the
city’s NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): 
§ 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including
Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive or discretionary.



      MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites,
etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to the source if those
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.  In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (a)2. or (a)3. above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE as defined under this
section has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:



               a.   Any placement, as- sembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site prepa- ration work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment.



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this provision.



      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.



      PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.  This definition includes all federal,
state, or local governmental entities.



      pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed in standard units.



      POLLUTANTS.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (such as pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD),
toxicity, odor).



      PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing the pollutants
into the POTW.  This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than
a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS.  Prohibitive discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.



      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. 
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 53.015 of this code.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A “treatment works”
as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the
state or municipality.  This definition includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant.  The term also means the municipal entity having
jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation
and maintenance of the treatment works.



      SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



      SEWAGE.  Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Shall apply to:



         (a)   Industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards; or



         (b)   Any other industrial user that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more
of process wastewater;



            2.   Contributes a process waste stream which
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the treatment plant; or



            3.   Is designated as significant by the city on
the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement.



      SLUG LOAD.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 53.015 of
this code or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but
not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLAS- SIFICATION or SIC.  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget.



      STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snow melt.



      SUPERINTENDENT.  The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      TOXIC POLLUTANT.  One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the
provisions of § 307 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317).



      TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT.  Any discharge of pollutants from the
POTW into waters of the state.



      WASTEWATER.  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of
the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.



   (B)   The use of the singular shall be constructed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of its use.



(1969 Code, § 27-173)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.004  ABBREVIATIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD.  Biochemical oxygen demand.



   C.F.R.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   EPA.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   gpd.  Gallons per day.



   l.  Liter.



   mg.  Milligrams.



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   O&M.  Operation and maintenance.



   POTW.  Publicly owned treatment works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC.  Standard Industrial Classifications.



   SWDA.  Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.).



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   U.S.C.  United States Code.



(1969 Code, § 27-174)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES



§ 53.015  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference.  These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of
the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirement.  Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the following
substances to the POTW:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the municipal wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using
the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.21;



      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than
9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment, or endangering city personnel;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case
solids greater than 2 inches or 5.08 centimeters in any dimension;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen
demanding pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow
rate, or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any
wastewater treatment of sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to
humans or animals;



      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65.5°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes temperature
at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradeable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the city in accordance with § 53.041;



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewer for maintenance and repair;



      (10)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit. 
Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant
effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for established norm
for aquatic life;



      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (13)   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant’s effluent
to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or



      (17)   Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or
vegetable origin is limited to 240 mg/l.



   (B)   Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.  All
floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to
the industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.



(1969 Code, § 27-175)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 C.F.R.
chapter I, subchapter N, pt. 405 - 471, are hereby incorporated.



(1969 Code, § 27-176)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.017  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   (A)   State pretreatment standards located at cite are hereby
incorporated.



   (B)   Note:  in the case of an approved state, the local sewer use
ordinance should incorporate applicable state pretreatment standards.



(1969 Code, § 27-177)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.018  SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITS.



   (A)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference.  No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable
discharge limits:



      (1)   Arsenic:  1.0 mg/l;



      (2)   BOD5:  240 mg/l;



      (3)   Cadmium:  15 mg/l;



      (4)   Cyanide:  0.8 mg/l;



      (5)   Iron:  10 mg/l;



      (6)   Lead:  2 mg/l;



      (7)   Manganese:  18.8 mg/l;



      (8)   Mercury:  0.003 mg/l;



      (9)   Methanol:  100 mg/l;



      (10)   Nickel:  1.5 mg/l;



      (11)   Oil and grease (petroleum or mineral oil products): 
100 mg/l;



      (12)   Selenium:  10 mg/l;



      (13)   Silver:  0.3 mg/l;



      (14)   Total chromium:  50 mg/l;



      (15)   Total suspended solids:  240 mg/l; or



      (16)   Zinc:  3.0 mg/l.



   (B)   Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste
is discharged to the POTW.  All concentrations for metallic substances are
for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.  At his or her discretion,
the Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of
the concentration-based limitations above.



(1969 Code, § 27-178)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.019  CITY RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
53.015 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-179)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.020  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to
the POTW.  In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard prerequirement.  However, the industrial user may
request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with
40 C.F.R. pt. 403.15.  They may also request a variance from the categorical
pretreatment standard from the EPA.  Such a request will be approved only if
the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
establishing that pretreatment standard.  An industrial user requesting a
fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.13.



(1969 Code, § 27-180)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.021  DILUTION.



   No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation,
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement.  The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial
users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.



(1969 Code, § 27-181)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



PRETREATMENT



§ 53.035  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES; PLANS.



   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out
in § 53.105 above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the
state, or the Superintendent, whichever is more stringent.  Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user’s expense. 
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the
city before construction of the facility.  The review of these plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-191)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.036  DISCHARGE FLOW.



   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require industrial
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewage, relocate or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-192)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.037  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except
that these interceptors shall not be required for residential users.  All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.  The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his or her expense.



(1969 Code, § 27-192)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.038  GAS DETECTION OR EXPLOSION HAZARD METER.



   (A)   Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (B)   At no time shall 2 readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more
than 50% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



(1969 Code, § 27-192)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.039  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLAN.



   (A)   The Superintendent may require any industrial user to develop
and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan.  At least once
every 2 years, the Superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs such a plan.



   (B)   Any industrial user required to develop and implement an
accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses,
at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any
accidental or slug discharge.  Notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in § 53.015
of this code; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge.  These types of procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(1969 Code, § 27-193)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.040  OWNER AND TENANT RESPONSIBILITY.



   Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a
tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant
is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance
with the provisions of the chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-194)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.041  HAULED WASTEWATER; DISCHARGE PERMIT.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a
designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such
times as are established by the Superintendent, provided those wastes do not
violate §§ 53.015 - 53.021 of this code or any other requirements
established or adopted by the city.  Wastewater discharge permits for
individual vehicles to use these facilities shall be issued by the
Superintendent.



   (B)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as industrial
septage requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the
city.  The Superintendent shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of
those wastes, if that disposal would interfere with the treatment plans
operation.  Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this chapter.



   (C)   Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the
industrial user fee system as authorized in § 53.131 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-195)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.042  TAMPERING WITH POTW UNLAWFUL.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment, or other part of the POTW.  Any person found in
violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in
§§ 53.114 - 53.131 and 53.999 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-196)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT



§ 53.055  WASTEWATER SURVEY.



   When requested by the Superintendent, all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by
completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge.  The
Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require industrial users to update the survey.  Failure to
complete this survey shall be responsible grounds for terminating service to
the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of the chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-201)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.056  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to
discharge wastewater into the city’s POTW without first obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit from the Superintendent.  Any violation of the
terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subject the wastewater discharge permittee to
the sanctions set out in §§ 53.114 - 53.131 and 53.999 of this code. 
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require other industrial users,
including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-202)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.057  EXISTING INDUSTRIAL USERS; PERMIT.



   Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into
the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after that
date, apply to the city for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
§ 53.060 below, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after 150 days of the effective date of this chapter except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.



(1969 Code, § 27-203)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.058  NEW INDUSTRIAL USERS; PERMIT.



   Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence
discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of that discharge. 
An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 90
days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin.



(1969 Code, § 27-204)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.059  INDUSTRIAL USERS OUTSIDE CITY.



   (A)   Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the
city limits shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in
accordance with § 53.060 below, within 90 days of the effective date of this
chapter.  New significant industrial users located beyond the city limits
shall submit these applications to the Superintendent 90 days prior to any
proposed discharge in to the POTW.



   (B)   Alternately, the Superintendent may enter into an agreement
with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is
located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment
program requirements against the industrial user.



(1969 Code, § 27-205)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.060  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   (A)   In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit,
all industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must
submit the information required by § 53.085(B) of this code.  The
Superintendent shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. 



   (B)   In addition, the following information may be requested:



      (1)   A description of activities, facilities, and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



      (2)   The number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation on the POTW;



      (3)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;



      (4)   The type and amount of raw materials processed (average
and maximum per day);



      (5)   The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (6)   The time and duration of the discharge; and



      (7)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.



   (C)   An incomplete or inaccurate application will not be processed
and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.



(1969 Code, § 27-206)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.061  SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.



   All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user
reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by
an authorized representative of the industrial user.



   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.  I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(1969 Code, § 27-207)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.062  EVALUATION AND DECISION.



   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information.  Within 60 days of receipt of a
complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit.  If no
determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed
denied.  The Superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater
discharge permit.



(1969 Code, § 27-208)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.063  PERMIT TERM.



   Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed 5 years.  A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
for a period less than 5 years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. 
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it
will expire.



(1969 Code, § 27-211)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.064  PERMIT CONTENT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall include those conditions as
are reasonably deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass though
or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect
against damage to the POTW.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following
conditions:



      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed 5 years;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval for the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the
existing wastewater discharge permit;



      (3)   The effluent limits applicable to the user based on
applicable standards in federal, state, and local law;



      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record keeping requirements.  These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and
administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedules.  The schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal,
state, or local law.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily, and monthly average
or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;



      (3)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (4)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or
other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;



      (5)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges
and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (7)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



      (8)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



      (9)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.



(1969 Code, § 27-212)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.065  APPEAL OF PERMIT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the
city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days
of its issuance.



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.



      (4)   If the city fails to act within 60 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.  Decisions not to reconsider
shall be deemed to be denied.  Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to
modify a discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action
for purposes of judicial review.



   (B)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Circuit Court for the county within 30 days.



(1969 Code, § 27-213)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.066  MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit
for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
industrial user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character
since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;



      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.13;



      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
wastewater discharge permit; or



      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new operator.



   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater
discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit
condition.



(1969 Code, § 27-214)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.067  TRANSFER; NOTICE AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permit may be reassigned or transferred
to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60-days’
advance notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer.  The notice to the Superintendent must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.



(1969 Code, § 27-215)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.068  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following
reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of
changed condition pursuant to § 53.089;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility
premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a
permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon non-use,
cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership.  All wastewater
discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge
permit.



(1969 Code, § 27-216)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.069  REISSUANCE.



   A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit
application in accordance with § 53.060(A) of this code a minimum of 60 days
prior to the expiration of the industrial user’s existing wastewater
discharge permit.



(1969 Code, § 27-217)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.070  MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.



   (A)   In the event another municipality contributes all or a portion
of its wastewater to the POTW, the POTW may require that municipality to
apply for and obtain a municipal wastewater discharge permit.



   (B)   A municipal wastewater discharge permit application shall
include:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of the
wastewater at the point(s) where it enters the POTW;



      (2)   An inventory of all industrial users discharging to the
municipality; and



      (3)   Other information as may be required by the
Superintendent.



   (C)   A municipal wastewater discharge permit shall contain the
following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the municipal user adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 53.018 of this code;



      (2)   A requirement for the municipal user to:



         (a)   Conduct pretreatment imple- mentation activities
including industrial user permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement; or



         (b)   Authorize the POTW to take or conduct those
activities on its behalf.



      (3)   A requirement for the municipal user to:



         (a)   Conduct pretreatment imple- mentation activities
including industrial permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement; or



         (b)   Authorize the POTW to take or conduct those
activities on its behalf.



      (4)   A requirement for the municipal user to provide the city
with access to all information that the municipal user obtains as part of its
pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
municipal user’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
and



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the municipal user’s
discharge.



   (D)   Violation of the terms and conditions of the municipal
user’s wastewater discharge permit subjects the municipal user to the
sanctions set out in §§ 53.114 - 53.131 and 53.999 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-218)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 53.085  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS; CONTENT.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. pt. 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
significant industrial users subject to these categorical pretreatment
standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW,
shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below.  At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains
information listed in division (B) below.  A new source shall also be
required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.  A new source shall also give estimates
of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.



   (B)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by
this section, including:



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owners;



      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits.  A list of any
environment control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility;



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user.  This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e);



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   Identify the categorical pre- treatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.



         (b)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration or mass, where required by the
standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported.  The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 53.094 of this code.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 53.095 of this code.



      (6)   Review.  A statement reviewed by the industrial
user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the industrial user will provide the additional pretreatment or O&M. 
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
53.059 of this code; and



      (8)   Certification.  All baseline-monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 53.061 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-221)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.086  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE; PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by §
53.085(B)(7) above.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (these events include
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction,
beginning and conducting routine operation).  No increment referred to above
shall exceed 9 months.  The industrial user shall submit a progress report
to the Superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return
to the established schedule.  In no event shall more than 9 months elapse
between progress reports to the Superintendent.



(1969 Code, § 27-222)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.087  CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS COMPLIANCE REPORT.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to these pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in §§ 53.085(B)(4) -
53.085(B)(6) of this code.  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. pt. 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
industrial user’s long term production rate.  For all other industrial
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the industrial user’s actual
production during the appropriate sampling period.  All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with § 53.061 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 27-223)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.088  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment
standard shall, at a frequency determined by the Superintendent but in no
case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by the pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.  All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 53.061.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
industrial user’s discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times.  The failure of an industrial user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the
industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.



   (C)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in
and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by
the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in § 53.095 of this code, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



(1969 Code, § 27-224)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.089  CHANGED CONDITIONS; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each industrial user is required to notify the Superintendent
of any planned significant changes to the industrial user’s operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 30 days before the change.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit
such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 53.060 of this code.



   (C)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 53.062 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
53.066 of this code.



   (D)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed
condition(s) until and unless the Superintendent has responded to the
industrial user’s notice.



   (E)   For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of 10% or
greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be
deemed significant.



(1969 Code, § 27-225)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.090  UNUSUAL OR ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES; REPORT; LIABILITY.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, which may cause potential
problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 53.015 of this code), it is the responsibility of the
industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the
incident.  This notification shall include the location of discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the industrial user.



   (B)   Within 5 days following such a discharge, the industrial user
shall, unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences.  This notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall this
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter.



   (C)   Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges
shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.



   (D)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial
user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a discharge described in division (A) above.  Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(1969 Code, § 27-226)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.091  NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS; REPORTS.



   All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards
and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the city as the Superintendent may require.



(1969 Code, § 27-227)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.092  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT TESTING.



   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the control authority within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation.  The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling
and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control
authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.  The
industrial user is not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring
at the industrial user’s at least once a month, or if the POTW performs
sampling between the industrial user’s initial sampling and when the
industrial user receives the results of this sampling.



(1969 Code, § 27-228)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.093  HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.  This notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other).  If the industrial user discharges more than 10 kilograms of that
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the
following information to the extent the information is known and readily
available to the industrial user:  an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of those constituents in the waste stream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.  All
notification must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences.  Any notification under this provision need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged.  However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under § 53.089, above.  The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported
under the self- monitoring requirement of §§ 53.085 and 53.088, above.



   (B)   (1)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of
division (A) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge
no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. pt. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a 1-time notification.



      (2)   Subsequent months during which the industrial user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under RCRA § 3001
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of that substance within
90 days of the effective date of those regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.



(1969 Code, § 27-229)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.094  SAMPLING AND ANALYSIS; STANDARDS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard.  If 40 C.F.R. pt. 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.



(1969 Code, § 27-230)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.095  SAMPLING TECHNIQUES.



   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B), below, the industrial
user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques.  In the event flow proportional sampling is
infeasible, the Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional
sampling, or though a minimum of 4 grab samples where the user demonstrates
that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged.  In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using
grab collection techniques.



(1969 Code, § 27-231)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.096  GRAB SAMPLING; NONCOMPLIANCE DETERMINATION.



   The Superintendent may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance
with pretreatment standards.



(1969 Code, § 27-232)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.097  SUBMISSION DATE.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked.  For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date or receipt of the
report shall govern.



(1969 Code, § 27-233)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.098  RECORDS RETENTION.



   Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records and information required to be retained under this
chapter.  These records shall remain available for a period of at least 3
years.  This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial
user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Superintendent.



(1969 Code, § 27-234)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 53.110  INSPECTION AND MONITORING; RIGHT OF ACCESS.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any
industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any
permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial
user is complying with all requirements thereof.  Industrial users shall
allow the Superintendent or his or her representatives ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



   (B)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of identification, personnel from the city,
state, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.



   (C)   The city, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user’s property, or require installation of such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and metering of the user’s operations.



   (D)   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary.  The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the industrial user at its own expense.  All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their
accuracy.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the industrial facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent and shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing the access
shall be born by the industrial user.



   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the
industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 27-241)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.111  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and if the Superintendent has demonstrated
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or
that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program the
city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the
Circuit Judge of the county shall issue a search and seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant.  The
warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched or seized on the
property described.  This warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the
Superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city.  In
the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections
shall be made without the issuance of a warrant.



(1969 Code, § 27-242)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.112  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the
industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city, that the release of this information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law.  When requested and demonstrated
by the industrial user furnishing a report that this information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and
in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, and other effluent data as
defined by 40 C.F.R. pt. 2.302, will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction.



(1969 Code, § 27-183)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.113  SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE; PUBLICATION OF VIOLATORS.



   (A)   The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pre- treatment standards and
requirements.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.  Includes:



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a 6-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for
the same pollutant parameter by any amount;



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a 6-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);



         (c)   Any other discharge violation that the city
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city
personnel or the general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused
imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in
the city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;



         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance schedules;



         (f)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due
date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90 days
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports of
compliance with compliance schedules;



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and



         (h)   Any other violation(s) which the city determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(1969 Code, § 27-184)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.114  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; USER PLAN OF ACTION.



   Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is
violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent or his
or her agent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.  Within
30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Superintendent.  Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(1969 Code, § 27-251)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.115  CONSENT ORDERS.



   The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance.  These orders will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order.  Consent orders shall have
the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
§§ 53.117 and 53.118 below and shall be judicially enforceable.



(1969 Code, § 27-252)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.116  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Superintendent may order any user which causes or contributes to
violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the Superintendent and show cause why this proposed enforcement action
should not be taken.  The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30
days prior to the hearing.  The notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user.  Whether or not the user appears as ordered,
immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date.  A
show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action
against the user.



(1969 Code, § 27-253)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.117  COMPLIANCE ORDER.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he or she may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within 30 days.  If the user does not come into
compliance within 30 days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated.  Compliance orders may also contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharge to the sewer.  A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for
any violation, including any continuing violation.  Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.



(1969 Code, § 27-254)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.118  CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user is violating this
chapter, the user’s wastewater discharge permit, any order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the
user’s past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.



(1969 Code, § 27-255)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.119  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user
that is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater
discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $750. 
These fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis.  In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   (B)   Assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer
service charge, and the Superintendent shall have such other collection
remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.



   (C)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1½% per month.  A lien
against the individual user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties.



   (D)   Users desiring to dispute these fines must file a written
request for the Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.  Where a
request has merit, the Superintendent shall convene a hearing on the matter
within 15 days of receiving the request from the industrial user.  In the
event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment together with any
interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user.  The
city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such
as notices and orders, to the fine.



   (E)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite
for taking any other action against the user.



(1969 Code, § 27-256)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.120  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever that suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably
appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons.  The Superintendent may also immediately
suspend a user’s discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or
may present an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution.  In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.  The
Superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in §
53.121 below are initiated against the user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any further occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§ 53.116 and 53.121 of
this code.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(1969 Code, § 27-257)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.121  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to those provisions in § 53.068 of this code, any
user that violates the following conditions of this chapter, wastewater
discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge
termination:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 53.015 -
53.021 of this code.



   (B)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 53.116 of this
code why the proposed action should not be taken.



(1969 Code, § 27-258)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.122  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the
Superintendent may petition the Circuit Court of the county, through the City
Attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the industrial user.  Such other action as
appropriate for legal or equitable relief may also be sought by the city.  A
petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking
any other action against a user.



(1969 Code, § 27-261)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.123  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions in §§ 53.113, 53.114 - 53.131, and 53.999 are not
exclusive remedies.  The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.  Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan.  However, the city reserves the right to take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.  Further, the
city is empowered to take more than 1 enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.  These actions may be taken concurrently.



(1969 Code, § 27-264)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.124  PERMIT REISSUANCE; PERFORMANCE BOND.



   The Superintendent may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit
to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder,
unless the user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a
sum not to exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance.



(1969 Code, § 27-271)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.125  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Superintendent may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit
to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of a wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that
it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair’s
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.



(1969 Code, § 27-272)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.126  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water
service to the user may be severed.  Service will only recommence, at the
user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply.



(1969 Code, § 27-273)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.127  VIOLATIONS A NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.



   Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders
issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the Superintendent or his or her designee.  Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of
the city ordinances governing nuisances, including reimbursing the city for
any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying the nuisance.



(1969 Code, § 27-274)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.128  INFORMANT REWARDS.



   The Superintendent is authorized to pay up to $1,000 for information
leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user.  In the event that the
information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty
levied against the user, the Superintendent is authorized to disperse up to
50% of the collected fine or penalty to the informant.  However, a single
reward payment may not exceed $1,000.



(1969 Code, § 27-275)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.129  CONTRACTOR ELIGIBILITY.



   Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city.  Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found
to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be
terminated at the discretion of the city.



(1969 Code, § 27-276)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



§ 53.130  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial
user.  An UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.



      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (A)(3), below, are met.



      (3)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contem- poraneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence:



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance; and



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times, or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.



      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.



      (5)   Industrial users will have the opportunity for a
judicial determination of any claim of upset only in an enforcement action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (6)   The industrial user shall control production or all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided.  This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost, or fails.



(1969 Code, § 27-281)



   (B)   General or specific prohibitions.  An industrial user shall
have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in § 53.015 of this
code if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its
discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and
during, the pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(1969 Code, § 27-282)



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.



         SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.  SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      (2)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which
does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. 
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of divisions (C)(3) and
(C)(4) of this section.



      (3)   (a)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the
need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass if possible.



         (b)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
POTW within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.  A
written submission shall also be provided within 5 days of the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass.  The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken
or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.



      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take
enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime.  This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment
should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment
to prevent a bypass which occurred during maintenance; and



            3.   The industrial user submitted notices as
required under division (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the
3 conditions listed in division (C)(4)(a) of this section.



(1969 Code, § 27-283)



(Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.131  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for
reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment
program, which may include:



      (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications,
including the cost of processing the applications;



      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance
procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial
user’s discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial
users;



      (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental
discharge procedures and construction;



      (4)   Fees for filing appeals; and



      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements contained herein.



   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the city.



(1969 Code, § 27-182)  (Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)  Penalty, see §
53.999



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   General penalty.  Any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any user which has violated or continues to violate this
chapter, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the Superintendent
for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per violation per day.



      (2)   Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $1,000 per violation per day and/or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than 1 year.  This penalty shall be in addition to
any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available
under state law.



      (3)   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit, or order, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or
both.



      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.



(1969 Code, § 27-262)



   (C)   Criminal prosecution.



      (1)   Any user that willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation or imprisonment of not more than 1 year.



      (2)   Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $1,000 per violation or imprisonment of not more than 1
year.  This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for
personal injury or property damage available under state law.



      (3)   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order, or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $1,000 per violation or imprisonment of not more than 1 year.



      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation or imprisonment for
not more than 1 year.



(1969 Code, § 27-263)



(Ord. 1999-45, passed 11-29-1999)



Cross-reference:



   Administrative fines, see § 53.119



CHAPTER 54:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



Disposal Restrictions



   54.01   Improper refuse disposal prohibited



   54.02   Deposit of refuse on streets prohibited



   54.03   (Reserved)



   54.04   (Reserved)



   54.05   Windblown refuse prohibited



   54.06   Hauling; vehicle to be covered



   54.07   Use of city refuse containers restricted



Private Refuse Collectors



   54.34   Definitions



   54.35   License required



   54.36   Application



   54.37   Certificate vehicle and hauling standards



   54.38   License fees; payment



   54.39   Violations



   54.40   Unlicensed collection prohibited



Landscape Waste Disposal



   54.50   Disposal site; fees



   54.51   City facilities; rules and hours



 



   54.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  (Reserved)



   Appendix B:  Schedule of Landscape Waste Disposal Fees



DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS



§ 54.01  IMPROPER REFUSE DISPOSAL PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the city any
uncovered piles of refuse; garbage, offal, or carcasses of dead animals. 
This refuse must be buried at least 2 feet below the surface of the ground or
otherwise properly disposed of.  Any uncovered pile of refuse is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



(1969 Code, § 11-1)  Penalty, see § 54.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 740, Act 55, §§ 221, 221a



§ 54.02  DEPOSIT OF REFUSE ON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or cause to be
dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches, or any other things in the
roadway or gutter of any public street in the city.



(1969 Code, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 54.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 96



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent littering on public property, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-80-10



§ 54.03  (RESERVED).



§ 54.04  (RESERVED).



§ 54.05  WINDBLOWN REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such
a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered
or cause clouds of dust or particles.



(1969 Code, § 11-5)  Penalty, see § 54.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent air contamination, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-19.1-11



§ 54.06  HAULING; VEHICLE TO BE COVERED.



   It shall be unlawful to use any vehicle for hauling garbage or similar
refuse in the city unless that portion of the vehicle containing the garbage
or refuse is enclosed or completely covered with a tight tarpaulin.



(1969 Code, § 11-6)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.07  USE OF CITY REFUSE CONTAINERS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse, garbage, or other
material that has been accumulated at a home or business in a city refuse
container.  The use of all city refuse containers shall be limited to refuse
accumulated by users of the city park system in the parks or by persons
picking up trash and refuse that has accumulated on the streets, within the
parks, or from other city property.



(1969 Code, § 11-7)  (Ord. 1988-15, passed 5-23-1988)  Penalty, see §
54.99



PRIVATE REFUSE COLLECTORS



§ 54.34  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted and defined as follows:



   GARBAGE. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food or food products.



   REFUSE. Any discarded matter, including but not limited to garbage,
sweepings, landscape waste, paper, cardboard, tin cans, ashes, bottles, and
similar other accumulations, but excluding special wastes as defined by
Illinois Environmental Agency or other such agency.



   REFUSE COLLECTOR BUSINESS. A business that  includes  collection 
and  disposal of garbage, ashes, manure, trash and miscellaneous waste and
other refuse, as well as the renting, placing and removal of roll-off
dumpsters.



   REFUSE COLLECTOR LICENSE. The license given to a person in the refuse
collector business.



   ROLL-OFF DUMPSTER. A dumpster that is a rented bulk solid waste
receptacle, placed temporarily in a driveway or other location, used to
handle solid waste disposal related to temporary activities such as moving,
remodeling or other construction at a site which is typically delivered and
removed by truck. The rented container is hauled away when it is full and is
emptied by mechanical means.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§ 54.35  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, company, corporation or other enticy shall engage
in the business of collecting, gathering or transporting in the city limits,
any garbage, ashes, manure, miscellaneous waste or other refuse for
compensation or otherwise, or operating a roll-off dumpster business without
first having obtained a license to do so under penalty as provided for
violation of this code.



   (B)   The city shall issue no more than three refuse collector
licenses, which shall include all aspects of the refuse collector business.



   (C)   All licenses shall be issued upon application as set forth in
the city code. Each license shall be good for one calendar year, commencing
January and ending the following December. All licenses shall be issued on an
application set forth in the code and subsequent approval by City Council.



   (D)   The license shall be subject to payment of annual  fees as 
set  forth in this code, and revocation for violations as set forth in this
code.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§ 54.36  APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for the issuance or renewal of a refuse
collector's license shall be made on or before December lst for the following
year. An application shall be made to the City Council on a form or forms
prescribed by the City Manager, which shall provide information necessary to
determine fully the applicant's satisfaction of the conditions for issuance
of a license.



   (B)   Conditions for issuance of license. To be eligible for a
license, each applicant must submit evidence satisfactory to the city of the
following:



      (1)   Service history. Proof of satisfactory service history
in the private refuse collection business or roll-off dumpster business,
either through private services within the city limits, or in other
communities. If in other communities, it must be evidenced by letters of
reference from administrators of municipalities or by customers served by the
applicant in the three years prior to the application; and any other
information applicant believes demonstrates adequate service history. The
City reserves the right to conduct an investigation of service history beyond
the documentation provided by applicant.



      (2)   Financial Responsibility. Financial responsibility of
applicant, as evidenced by financial statements of the named company
servicing the city and any and all parent corporations or subsidiaries
thereof, to a degree of detail sufficient to the City Council, which
statements demonstrate sufficient resources to meet the applicant's service
obligations under the proposed license. Said financial  statements shall
cover the two year period immediately preceding the application, and any
additional period as required by the City Manager. Applicant shall further
supply proof of appropriate insurance coverage as required by the City
Manager.



      (3)   Equipment. The year, make and model of each vehicle
owned or leased by the applicant proposed to be operated within the city,
together with evidence that such vehicle has a valid safety inspection
certificate from the state and a statement that any such vehicle which has an
obstructed view to the rear is equipped with a reverse noise alarm.



   (C)   Issuance. The City Manager shall review, or cause to be
reviewed all applications, and may require any applicant to submit additional
information as may be deemed reasonably necessary to determine the
applicant's qualifications. The Manager shall report promptly to the City
Council concerning pending applications. Any report related to applications
for renewal of license shall include a summary of the licensee's past
performance in the city and elsewhere, complaints received, the licensee's
response to complaints and other information relevant to the quality of
service provided.



   (D)   License transferability. No license hereby issued will be
transferred to any other entity and any license is only valid for the entity
that initially received the license.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§ 54.37  CERTIFICATE VEHICLE AND HAULING STANDARDS.



   The applicant for a refuse collector's license to operate in the city
shall certify that he or she will carry on his or her operations by using a
solid truck body firmly mounted on a vehicle for making collections; and when
the vehicle is moving the body is to be sufficiently covered so that no
refuse can escape or blow out of the body, however, brush can be hauled
without a cover as long as it is securely lashed to the body. Also, no refuse
in liquid form or in part-liquid form can be hauled except in a leakproof
body. The applicant will further certify they will unload all of the refuse
collected at a lawful license refuse disposal site.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§ 54.38  LICENSE FEES; PAYMENT.



   An annual license fee, in the amount of $250, payable to the City Clerk
in advance, shall be charged for each license. Each applicant shall pay an
additional $50 for each additional vehicle used in the collection of refuse,
regardless of vehicle size.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§ 54.39  VIOLATIONS.



   In case of any violation of the requirements set forth for a private
refuse collection business or roll-off dumpster business, the business shall
be warned by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, or any law
enforcement officer. Any violation is subject to penalties as set forth in §
54.99 of this code. Subsequent violations by the license holder wi1l lead to
revocation of the collector's license, after due notice and hearing before
the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



§  54.40  UNLICENSED COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



   Any operator of a roll-off dumpster business or private refuse
collector business who operates for hire within the city, without first
securing an appropriate license from the City Clerk, shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in § 54.99 of this code.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 11-28-2011)



LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL



§ 54.50  DISPOSAL SITE; FEES.



   The city will accept landscape waste at the Potts Lane disposal site at
the established rates and fees provided for in Appendix B of this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-19, passed 8-11-2003)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.51  CITY FACILITIES; RULES AND HOURS.



   The rules and hours of operation for the use of the landscape waste
facilities of the city shall be established by the Superintendent of Streets
on an annual basis and posted at City Hall and the landscape waste yard
currently located on Potts Lane.



(Ord. 2003-19, passed 8-11-2003)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 54.39 of this
code shall be fined not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each offense.



(1969 Code, § 11-36)  (Ord. 1966-9, passed 8-29-1966)



APPENDIX A:  (RESERVED)



APPENDIX B:  SCHEDULE OF LANDSCAPE WASTE DISPOSAL FEES



   The city will accept landscape waste at the Potts Lane disposal site at
the established rates and fees provided for as follows.



 

User
 
Vehicle
 
Waste Amount Hauled
 
Fee




City resident
 
Pick-up truck
 
Less than 2 cubic yards
 
No charge


City resident
 
1-ton truck
 
More than 2 cubic yards
 
$10


Landscape contractor
 
Pick-up truck
 
Less than 2 cubic yards
 
$20


Landscape contractor
 
-
 
More than 2 cubic yards, but less than 8 cubic yards
 
$60


Landscape contractor
 
Tandem/semi-trailer
 
More than 8 cubic yards
 
$120


Nonresident
 
Pick-up truck
 
Less than 2 cubic yards
 
$10


Nonresident
 
1-ton truck
 
More than 2 cubic yards
 
$20




 



(Ord. 2003-19, passed 8-11-2003)



Cross-reference:



   Disposal site; fees, see § 54.50



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   71.   RULES OF OPERATION



   72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



   73.   SNOWMOBILES



   74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



   75.   PARKING SCHEDULES



   76.   GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws



   70.01   Directing traffic at fire



Administration and Enforcement



   70.15   Arrest; bail



   70.16   Traffic citation; failure to appear



OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS



§ 70.01  DIRECTING TRAFFIC AT FIRE.



   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated
by him or her, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has
responded to an emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on
the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police.



(1969 Code, § 16-3)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.15  ARREST; BAIL.



   Any person arrested without a warrant for a violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as
specified by statute and secured in accordance with statute.



(1969 Code, § 16-252)



§ 70.16  TRAFFIC CITATION; FAILURE TO APPEAR.



   For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving,
police officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle and
name of the offender where possible, may issue a traffic violation ticket
notifying the offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing
such cases.  The officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant
if the offender does not appear at the time and place so specified.



(1969 Code, § 16-253)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  RULES OF OPERATION



Section



Operating Restrictions; Licensing



   71.001   Operator’s license required



   71.002   Driving under the influence



   71.003   Accident with injury; duty to report



Speed Restrictions



   71.015   Speed limits established



   71.016   Speed limit on vehicles with solid tires



Turning and Starting; Signals



   71.030   Prohibited left turns



   71.031   Prohibited U-turns



Right-of-Way



   71.045   Stop at through street



   71.046   Posting signs



   71.047   Identification of funeral procession



   71.048   Driving in funeral procession



Prohibitions



   71.060   Vehicles obstructing traffic



   71.061   Truck routes



   71.062   Unattended draft animals



Pedestrians



   71.075   Standing in roadway



   71.076   Standing on sidewalk



   71.077   Blind pedestrians; right-of-way



Bicycles



   71.090   Operating offenses



   71.091   Riding abreast prohibited



OPERATING RESTRICTIONS; LICENSING



§ 71.001  OPERATOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon
any street in the city without first having complied with the state
operator’s licensing law.



(1969 Code, § 16-131)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   State Driver’s License Act, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 6-101et
seq.



§ 71.002  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate
any motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be unlawful for any intoxicated
person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug,
to operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicle on any street.



(1969 Code, § 16-132)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Persons who are habitual users of drugs or habitual drunkards are not
entitled to driver’s license, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-103



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-501



§ 71.003  ACCIDENT WITH INJURY; DUTY TO REPORT.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop that vehicle at the
scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible and shall then
forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of the
accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. Every stop required by this division shall be made without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary.



   (B)   Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with the
requirements of the preceding division shall, within 48 hours after the
accident or, if hospitalized and incapacitated from reporting at any time
during that period, within 48 hours after being discharged from the hospital,
report the place of accident, the date, the approximate time, his or her
name, address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and the names
of the occupants, if any, of that vehicle, at the police station.  No report
made as required under this division shall be used, directly or indirectly,
as a basis for the prosecution of any violation of division (A) of this
section.



(1969 Code, § 16-133)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, §§
11-401 to 11-407



SPEED RESTRICTIONS



§ 71.015  SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street
in the city at a speed in excess of 30 miles an hour, or 20 miles an hour in
a school zone as provided by statute.



   (B)   If the City Council by ordinance sets other limits except
school zones as provided by statute after an engineering or traffic survey,
then those limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in
the ordinance.  The Chief of Police shall post appropriate signs showing
speed limits.



(1969 Code, § 16-95)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.016  SPEED LIMIT ON VEHICLES WITH SOLID TIRES.



   The speed of all vehicles of the second division, as defined by Chapter
625, Act 5, § 5-217, having 2 or more solid tires, shall not exceed 10 miles
per hour.



(1969 Code, § 16-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-6091



TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS



§ 71.030  PROHIBITED LEFT TURNS.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left
at any place where turns of this type are prohibited by ordinance and so
marked by appropriate signs.



(1969 Code, § 16-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.031  PROHIBITED U-TURNS.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a “U”
turn at any place where turns of this type are prohibited by ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 16-48)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 71.045  STOP AT THROUGH STREET.



   The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as
through streets are hereby declared to be through streets.  It shall be
unlawful to drive any vehicle into a through street without first bringing
that vehicle to a full stop within 10 feet of the street line, unless a go
signal is first given by a traffic light or traffic officer.



(1969 Code, § 16-167)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-904



   Traffic signs required to effectuate through street provisions, see
Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-302



§ 71.046  POSTING SIGNS.



   The Chief of Police shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for
all through streets, 1-way streets or alleys, and stop intersections.



(1969 Code, § 16-170)



§ 71.047  IDENTIFICATION OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   A funeral procession composed of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia and by having the lights of each vehicle lighted.



(1969 Code, § 16-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate processions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 11-208



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1402



§ 71.048  DRIVING IN FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practicable and safe.



(1969 Code, § 16-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate processions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625,
Act 5, § 11-1420



PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.060  VEHICLES OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in
such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon
or in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic.



(1969 Code, § 16-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3



§ 71.061  TRUCK ROUTES.



   The streets as set forth in Chapter 74, Sch. I of this code shall be
designated as truck routes, and trucks shall be allowed on those streets and
alleys.  All other streets in the city shall have a 5-ton weight limit, and
trucks over 5 tons shall be prohibited from using the streets except in
accordance with the terms of this section, and provided that all service
trucks, including trash, utility, and others, shall be exempt.



(1969 Code, § 16-7)  (Am. Ord. 2002-32, passed 11-12-2002; Am. Ord.
2002-35, passed 11-25-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to limit street use because of vehicle size, weight, or load,
Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-316



§ 71.062  UNATTENDED DRAFT ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal
unattended in any street without having the animal securely fastened.



(1969 Code, § 17-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see Chapter 98



PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.075  STANDING IN ROADWAY.



   No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety
zone if that act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.



(1969 Code, § 16-151)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.076  STANDING ON SIDEWALK.



   If, by standing on a sidewalk, a pedestrian should interfere with the
movement of other pedestrians, it shall be unlawful to stand upon any
sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line.



(1969 Code, § 16-154)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.077  BLIND PEDESTRIANS; RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a
cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or
who is being guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any
street or highway, whether or not traffic on that street or highway is
controlled by traffic signals, anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding.  The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a
blind person, so carrying such a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is
crossing a street or highway shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop
and before proceeding shall take precautions as may be necessary to avoid
injury to the blind person.  The failure of a blind person to carry a cane
or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets,
highways, or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory
negligence.



(1969 Code, § 16-155)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1004



BICYCLES



§ 71.090  OPERATING OFFENSES.



   It is unlawful for operators of bicycles to ride in the wrong direction
of traffic, to fail to observe all traffic signs and signals, to ride in the
business area, or to leave bicycles on sidewalks; it is not intended that
this enumeration be exclusive.



(1969 Code, § 16-222)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.091  RIDING ABREAST PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for more than 1 person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power, or to ride 2 or more abreast, other than when
passing.



(1969 Code, § 16-223)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   72.001   Parking signs to be posted



   72.002   Parking regulations; compliance required



   72.003   Annual parking pass



Restrictions



   72.015   Extended parking prohibited



   72.016   Parking; prohibited purposes



   72.017   Loading zones



   72.018   Night parking in business area



   72.019   Parking in alleys; obstruction prohibited



   72.020   Bus stops, cab stands



   72.021   Limited time parking



   72.022   Two-hour parking



   72.023   Other posted no-parking areas



Snow Removal



   72.035   Emergency snow routes; signs to be posted



   72.036   Removal of parked vehicles



Parking Meters



   72.050   Definitions



   72.051   Marked parking spaces



   72.052   Parking meter installation



   72.053   Meter operation



   72.054   Parking times; hours of operation



   72.055   Violations



   72.056   Enforcement



   72.057   Collections



   72.058   Disposition of funds



   72.059   Reservation of powers



   72.060   Cumulative effect



   72.061   Construction; exercise of police power



Violations; Enforcement



   72.075   Parking violation; registration prima facie evidence



   72.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.001  PARKING SIGNS TO BE POSTED.



   The Chief of Police shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where
parking is limited or prohibited, indicating those limitations or
prohibitions.



(1969 Code, § 16-191)



§ 72.002  PARKING REGULATIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   The parking of any vehicle parallel to the curb shall be permitted as
may be provided by ordinance, and it shall be unlawful to park other than
parallel to the curb or to park in any designated no-parking areas, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or a traffic signal.



(1969 Code, § 16-184)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.003  ANNUAL PARKING PASS.



   A parking pass may be obtained for Paris municipal parking lots in
which there are meters, for an annual fee of $75.



(Ord. 2004-22, passed 5-24-2004)



RESTRICTIONS



§ 72.015  EXTENDED PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle, farm
implement or trailer to remain parked on any public thoroughfare within the
city continuously in the same location for a period of time exceeding 36
hours.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle exceeding 12,000
pounds in gross vehicle weight rating on the public right-of-way for a period
in excess of 30 minutes unless the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded.



   (C)   Prohibited vehicles.  The following vehicles are prohibited
from being parked on any city right-of-way in excess of 30 minutes:



      (1)   Any trailer;



      (2)   Motor home;



      (3)   Campers;



      (4)   Boat/boat trailer;



      (5)   Unlicensed vehicle.



   (D)   There shall be an exception which allows for service trailers
owned by contractors to park a trailer adjacent to a property where the
contractor is making improvements.  This exception shall only apply during
the period the contractor is working on the site and can extend through
evenings but in no case longer than seven days.



(1969 Code, § 16-182)  (Ord. 1963-9, passed 6-10-1963; Am. Ord. 2005-11,
passed 2-28-2005; Am. Ord. 2010-3, passed 3-22-2010)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.016  PARKING; PROHIBITED PURPOSES.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any business
street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.



(1969 Code, § 16-185)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.017  LOADING ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed 3 minutes, and for the driver to stand
any freight-carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary
to load, unload, and deliver materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any
place designated by the City Council as a loading zone and marked as such, or
in any of the following designated places:



   (A)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the
entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time;



   (B)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the
entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on
Sunday; or



   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time
the theater is open for business.



(1969 Code, § 16-186)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.018  NIGHT PARKING IN BUSINESS AREA.



   No person shall park a vehicle on any street in the business area for a
period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls.



(1969 Code, § 16-187)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.019  PARKING IN ALLEYS; OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(1969 Code, § 16-188)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.020  BUS STOPS, CAB STANDS.



   No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall
be parked in a place so designated as a bus-loading zone.



(1969 Code, § 16-189)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.021  LIMITED TIME PARKING.



   Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in any area designated as a limited parking
area, and so marked.



(1969 Code, § 16-190)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.022  TWO-HOUR PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle to remain
parked for a period of more than 2 hours consecutively during regular
business hours on the following named and described areas, streets, or
portions of streets lying within the corporate limits of the city:



      (1)   East side and west side of Main Street between Union
Street and Washington Street;



      (2)   East side and west side of Central Avenue between Union
Street and Washington Street;



      (3)   North side and south side of Court Street between Water
Street and Sheriff Street;



      (4)   North side and south side of Wood Street between Water
Street and Sheriff Street;



      (5)   North side of Washington Street between a point 394 feet
east of Main Street to Sheriff Street;



      (6)   South side of Washington Street between a point 394 feet
east of main Street to Ten Broeck Street;



      (7)   East side of central Avenue between Washington Street
and the east-west alley between Washington Street and Madison Street.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      HOLIDAY.  Includes the following days only:  New Year’s Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas
Day.



      REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS.  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
and Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; Friday between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except on holidays.



(1969 Code, § 16-193)  (Ord. 1976-32, passed 11-22-1976;Am. Ord. 2003-37,
passed 11-24-2003)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.023  OTHER POSTED NO-PARKING AREAS.



   There shall be a no-parking area in addition to all other no-parking
areas previously designated by the City Council on the south of Elizabeth
Street between Jefferson and the railroad tracks and that the Chief of Police
be directed to post signs at this area indicating that parking is prohibited.



(1969 Code, § 16-194)  (Am. Ord. 2008-34, passed 12-15-2008)  Penalty, see
§ 72.999



SNOW REMOVAL



§ 72.035  EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES; SIGNS TO BE POSTED.



   The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to be installed along
each of the streets designated emergency snow routes.



(1969 Code, § 16-314)  (Ord. 2000-2, passed 1-10-2000)



Cross-reference:



   Emergency snow routes, see Chapter 75, Sch. II



§ 72.036  REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES.



   All vehicles parked on snow routes must be removed at any time 3 or
more inches of snow is forecasted.  Any vehicle parked on a snow route after
this period of time may be removed or caused to be removed by a police
officer to the nearest garage or other place of safety, and the vehicle may
not be recovered until the towing and any storage charges are paid.



(1969 Code, § 16-313)  (Ord. 2000-2, passed 1-10-2000; Am. Ord. 2014-1,
passed 2-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 72.999



PARKING METERS



§ 72.050  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATOR.  Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as
the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner, or
is in actual physical control of a vehicle.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs, or
signals, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.



   PARKING METER.  Includes any mechanical device or meter not
inconsistent with this subchapter placed or erected for the regulation of
parking by authority of this subchapter.  Each PARKING METER installed shall
indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and
when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time,
and at the expiration of that period shall indicate illegal or overtime
parking.



   PARKING METER SPACE.  Any space within a parking meter zone, adjacent
to a parking meter, and which is duly designated for the parking of a single
vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on a curb or on the
surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.



   PARKING METER ZONE.  Includes any restricted street upon which parking
meters are installed and in operation.



   PERSON.  Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association, or
corporation.



   STREET.  Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path,
or other public place located in the city and established for the use of
vehicles.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.



(1969 Code, § 16-204)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



Cross-reference:



   Parking meter zones, see Chapter 75, Sch. III



§ 72.051  MARKED PARKING SPACES.



   The Chief of Police is hereby directed and authorized to mark off
individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated and described in
Chapter 75, Sch. III of this code and in such other zones as may hereafter be
established, these parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or
durably marked on the curbing or surface of the street.  At each space so
marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that the
vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.



(1969 Code, § 16-206)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.052  PARKING METER INSTALLATION.



   In the parking meter zones, the Chief of Police shall cause parking
meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the
parking spaces provided in § 72.051 of this code, the installation to be
placed not more than 2 feet from the curb nor more than 4 feet from the front
line of the parking space as indicated, and the Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance, and use of
these parking meters.  Each device shall be so set as to display a signal
showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins,
lawful money of this country, for the period of time prescribed by this
subchapter.  Each device shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of
the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the
lawful parking period has expired, and in these cases the right of the
vehicle to occupy the space shall cease and the operator, owner, or manager
thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.



(1969 Code, § 16-207)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.053  METER OPERATION.



   Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or traffic-control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the
operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter space,
immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter such proper coin of
this country as is required for that parking meter and as is designated by
proper directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the
meter, the operator of the vehicle, after the deposit of the proper coin or
coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on the meter in
accordance with directions properly appearing thereon; and failure to deposit
the proper coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so
required, shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.  Upon the deposit
of the coin (and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation when so
required), the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during
the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in
which that parking space is located, provided that any person placing a
vehicle in a parking space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused
time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall
not be required to deposit a coin so long as his or her occupancy of that
space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time.  If the vehicle
shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit
set for that parking space, and if the meter shall indicate illegal parking,
then, and in that event, the vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime
and beyond the period of legal parking time, and this parking shall be deemed
a violation of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 16-208)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)  Penalty, see §
72.999



§ 72.054  PARKING TIMES; HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Parking or standing a vehicle in a designated space in a
parking meter zone shall be lawful for the time desired upon deposit of coins
of this country as follows:



      (1)   One $.05 coin for each 1 hour of time desired.



      (2)   Two $.05 or one $.10 coin for each 2 hours of times
desired;



      (3)   One $.25 coin for 10 hours of time.



   (B)   The parking meters shall be operated in the parking meter
zones Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; and Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.; the parking meters shall not be operated in the parking meter zones on
Sunday and holidays.



   (C)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      HOLIDAY.  Includes the following days only:  New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas Day.



(1969 Code, § 16-209)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973; Am. Ord. 2005-3,
passed 1-24-2005)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.055  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this
subchapter for any person:



   (A)   To cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in
the name of or operated by that person to be parked overtime, or beyond the
period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein
described, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of
parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking
meter zone;



   (B)   To permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking
space adjacent to any parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying the parking space has already been
parked beyond the period prescribed for that parking space;



   (C)   To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking
meter space or in such a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely
within the area designated by the lines or markings;



   (D)   To deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break,
destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this subchapter;



   (E)   To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any
slugs, device, or metal substance, or other substitute for lawful coins; or



   (F)   To back into a metered parking space.



(1969 Code, § 16-210)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973; Am. Ord. 1984-11,
passed 6-11-1984)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.056  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 16-211)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



§ 72.057  COLLECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to designate some member or
members of the Police Department to make regular collections of the money
deposited in the meters, and it shall be the duty of those persons so
designated to remove from the parking meters the coins contained therein into
a sealed container and to deliver this sealed container, with the seal
unbroken, to the City Treasurer to receive and count the funds contained
therein and deposit those funds to the city motor vehicle parking revenue
fund.



(1969 Code, § 16-212)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



§ 72.058  DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.



   The coins in parking meters are required and shall be used to provide
for the cost of supervision, regulation, and control of the parking of
vehicles in parking meter zones and to cover the cost of purchase,
supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance,
control, and use of parking meters.



(1969 Code, § 16-213)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



§ 72.059  RESERVATION OF POWERS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city
from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands, and other matters of
similar nature, including the loading or unloading of trucks, vans, or other
commercial vehicles.



(1969 Code, § 16-215)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



§ 72.060  CUMULATIVE EFFECT.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the terms of
this subchapter are hereby repealed; provided, however, that this repeal
shall be only to the extent of the inconsistency and in all other respects
this subchapter shall be cumulative of other ordinances regulating and
governing the subject matter covered by this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 16-216)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



§ 72.061  CONSTRUCTION; EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.



   This entire subchapter shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise
of the police power of the city and in the state, for the preservation and
protection of public safety, and all of its provisions shall be liberally
construed with a view to the effectuation of this purpose.



(1969 Code, § 16-218)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973)



VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.075  PARKING VIOLATION; REGISTRATION PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in
the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that the person
was in control of the automobile at the time of parking.



(1969 Code, § 16-254)  Penalty, see § 72.999



§ 72.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person who shall violate any provision of this
chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Parking violations.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the
provisions of §§ 72.015et seq. may pay the city within 48 hours of the time
an offense was committed the sum of $10 or by paying the city after 48 hours
of the time the offense was committed the minimum sum of $15.  The minimum
sum to be paid after 10 days of the time of the offense was committed shall
be $25.  This money shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and placed in
the city’s general fund.



      (2)   However, if any person either neglects or willfully
refuses to pay those sums as hereinabove provided within 32 days of any such
violation of § 72.054 of this code, he or she shall be guilty of a petty
offense and shall be liable for a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $750
for each separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 16-195)  (Am. Ord. 1992-31, passed 9-14-1992; Am. Ord.
1998-34, passed 12-15-1998)



   (C)   Emergency snow routes.  Any operator of a vehicle who shall
violate the provisions of §§ 72.035et seq. shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined in an amount of not less than $75 nor more than $750.



(1969 Code, § 16-315)  (Ord. 2000-2, passed 1-10-2000)



   (D)   Parking meters.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any
of the provisions of §§ 72.050et seq. with the exception of § 72.054, or
who shall counsel, aid, or abet any such violation or failure to comply,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not
to exceed $50 or by imprisonment for not to exceed 30 days, either or both
penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the court.



      (2)   (a)   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply
with the provisions of § 72.054 may pay to the city within 48 hours of the
time the offense was committed the sum of $5 or by paying the city after 48
hours of the time the offense was committed the minimum sum of $15.  The
minimum sum to be paid after 10 days of the time of the offense was committed
shall be $25.  These payments shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and
placed in the city’s general fund.



         (b)   However, if any person either neglects or
willfully refuses to pay those sums as hereinabove provided within 32 days of
any such violation of § 72.054, he or she shall be guilty of a petty offense
and shall be liable for a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $750 for
each separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 16-214)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973; Am. Ord. 1973-28,
passed 1-14-1974; Am. Ord. 1980-5, passed 2-11-1980; Am. Ord. 1989-4, passed
2-27-1989; Am. Ord. 1998-35, passed 12-15-1998)



   (E)   Parking penalties; procedures.



      (1)   Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance
prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length
of time a vehicle may be parked there, may settle and compromise the claim
against him or her for that illegal parking by paying to the city the sum of
$5 within 48 hours of the time the alleged offense was committed or by paying
to the city after 48 hours of the time the offense was committed the minimum
sum of $10.  These payments may be made at the designated deposit boxes or
the City Clerk’s office and the money shall be promptly turned over to the
Treasurer to be used in the manner provided for the disposition of fines for
traffic violations.



      (2)   The members of the Police Department are hereby
authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense
involved.



      (3)   This division (E) shall not apply to persons parking a
vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where Police or
Fire Department apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or
so as to block an emergency entrance into a hospital.  This division (E)
shall not apply to any person charged with parking a vehicle so as to
entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or parking in such a way as
to reduce traffic on an arterial street to 1-way traffic only; nor to any
person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the request of any
member of the Police Department.



(1969 Code, § 16-255)  (Am. Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-24-1991)



CHAPTER 73:  SNOWMOBILES



Section



General Provisions



   73.001   Definitions



   73.002   State law applies



   73.003   Enforcement



   73.004   Inspection



   73.005   Resistance or obstruction of officers



   73.006   Operating regulations



   73.007   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   73.008   Accidents



Registration; Licensing



   73.020   Operator’s license required



   73.021   State registration required



   73.022   Municipal registration



   73.023   Decal issuance



   73.024   Replacement certificate



   73.025   Application for number



Equipment



   73.040   Headlamp



   73.041   Taillights



   73.042   Brakes



   73.043   Mufflers



   73.044   Flag



Speed Restrictions



   73.055   Speed restrictions



   73.056   Minimum speed; traffic obstruction



Turning and Starting; Signals



   73.070   Starting parked snowmobile



   73.071   Turning; signals required



   73.072   Signal by hand or signal device



   73.073   Method of giving hand and arm signals



Overtaking and Passing



   73.085   Driving upon right side of roadway



   73.086   Limitations on overtaking on left



Right-of-Way



   73.100   Right-of-way at intersections



   73.101   Right-of-way; left turns



   73.102   Stop intersections



   73.103   Yield intersections



   73.104   Pedestrian right-of-way



Prohibitions



   73.115   Reckless driving



   73.116   Racing



   73.117   Following too closely



   73.118   Operating under the influence



   73.119   Liquor consumption or transportation



   73.120   Obstruction of operator’s view



   73.121   Obstruction of traffic



   73.122   Possession of weapons



   73.123   Operation on state highway restricted



   73.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 73.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS DRUG.  Any drug defined as a depressant or stimulant
substance in the State Controlled Substance Act, being ILCS Chapter 750, Act
570, §§ 1 et seq., and cannabis as defined in the Cannabis Control Act,
being ILCS Chapter 750, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq., of the state.



   DEALER.  A person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business
of manufacturing, selling, or leasing snowmobiles at wholesale or retail.



   HIGHWAY.  The entire width between boundary lines of any highway,
road, street, avenue, alley, or public driveway.



   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE.  Any beverage enumerated in the Liquor Control
Act, being ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq., of the state.



   LOCAL AUTHORITY.  The municipal board or body having authority to
adopt local police regulations under the Constitution and laws of this state.



   NARCOTIC DRUG.  Any substance defined as a narcotic drug in the State
Controlled Substance Act, being ILCS Chapter 750, Act 570, §§ 1 et seq.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, to use or
control the operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the
snowmobile is underway.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person other than a lien holder having title to a snowmobile.



   PEACE OFFICER.  Any person authorized under the statutes of this state
to make arrest for a violation of any statute or ordinance, whether it be a
total arrest power of all statutes or a portion of any statute.



   REGISTER.  The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile
by state statute and by local ordinance.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a highway, improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.  In the event
a highway includes 2 or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used in
this chapter refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all those
roads collectively.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or
ice or natural terrain, steered by skis or runners and supported in part by
skis, belts, or cleats.



(1969 Code, § 16-261)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 1, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 73.002  STATE LAW APPLIES.



   No portion of this chapter shall preclude the state or its officers or
agents from enforcing the State Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act under
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 40, §§ 1-1 - 11-1 inclusive.



(1969 Code, § 16-261)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 1, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 73.003  ENFORCEMENT.



   It is the duty of all sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and other police
officers to arrest any person detected in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 16-262)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 2.1, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 73.004  INSPECTION.



   Duly authorized police officers may stop and inspect any snowmobile at
any time for the purpose of determining if the provisions of this chapter are
being complied with.  If the inspecting officer discovers any violation of
the provisions of this chapter, he or she may issue a summons to the operator
of the snowmobile requiring that the operator appear before the Circuit Court
for the county in which the offense was committed.  Every snowmobile subject
to this chapter if underway and upon being hailed by a designated law
enforcement officer must stop immediately.



(1969 Code, § 16-263)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 2.2, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.005  RESISTANCE OR OBSTRUCTION OF OFFICERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any peace officer
in a discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 16-264)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 2.3, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.006  OPERATING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the city
limits of the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter, with the
following exceptions.



      (1)   Snowmobiles may be operated on city streets only for the
purpose of leaving and entering the city or for visitation within. 
Recreational snowmobiling within the city limits is not permitted.



      (2)   Snowmobiles shall not be operated under any
circumstances within the Central Business District of the city or on any
street that adjoins the Central Business District.  The Central Business
District is that area zoned C-3 Central Business District, by the city’s
zoning ordinance, Title XV, App. A of this code.



      (3)   Snowmobiles shall not be operated on any state highway
or thoroughfare.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, snowmobiles may be operated in the
alleys of the Central Business District with individual permission of the
Chief of Police.  This permission shall be given only if the snowmobiles are
needed for business reasons.



(1969 Code, § 16-275)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.1, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.007  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The operator of any snowmobile shall obey the instructions of
any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any
snowmobile operator to leave the roadway and travel across private property
to avoid an official traffic-control device.



   (B)   Snowmobile traffic facing a steady red signal at an automatic
traffic-control device must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until
an indication to proceed is indicated by a green traffic-control signal.



(1969 Code, § 16-291)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.17, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.008  ACCIDENTS.



   Operators of snowmobiles involved in any accident with another
snowmobile or any other motor vehicle or pedestrian shall make accident
reports in accordance with the provisions of the State Snowmobile
Registration and Safety Act, ILCS Chapter 625, Act 40, § 6-1.  Snowmobiles
are operated at the driver’s risk, and if involved in an accident the
operator shall be considered guilty of contributory negligence.



(1969 Code, § 16-292)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.18, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



REGISTRATION; LICENSING



§ 73.020  OPERATOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the municipality on any
roadway unless he or she is in possession of a valid operator’s license
issued by this state or is a resident of another state and possesses a valid
operator’s license from that state.



(1969 Code, § 16-298)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.24, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.021  STATE REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided in the ILCS Chapter 625, no person shall
after the effective date of this chapter operate any snowmobile within the
corporate limits unless that snowmobile has been registered and numbered in
accordance with the provisions of the State Snowmobile Registration and
Safety Act, and the numbers shall be properly displayed on each side of the
cowling.



(1969 Code, § 16-265)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 3.1, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.022  MUNICIPAL REGISTRATION.



   All persons owning or operating a snowmobile within the corporation
limits shall purchase from the City Clerk and display prominently upon the
snowmobile a municipal registration decal.  The fee for this registration
shall be the sum of $5.  In addition to payment of the fee, the registrant
must show proof of liability insurance on the snowmobile in an amount equal
to $100,000.



(1969 Code, § 16-266)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 3.2, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.023  DECAL ISSUANCE.



   The City Clerk upon receipt of payment of the authorized fee and proof
of insurance shall supply a decal to the owner or operator of a snowmobile
upon proof that the owner or operator of that snowmobile has properly
registered same with the State Department of Conservation and has received a
certificate of number indicating the registration.



(1969 Code, § 16-267)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 3.3, passed 1-26-1978)



§ 73.024  REPLACEMENT CERTIFICATE.



   Should a certificate of municipal registration become lost, destroyed,
or mutilated beyond legibility, the owner of the snowmobile shall make
application to the City Clerk for the replacement of the certificate or
decal, giving his or her name, address, and the number of his or her
snowmobile, and shall at the same time pay to the City Clerk a fee of $1.



(1969 Code, § 16-268)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 3.4, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.025  APPLICATION FOR NUMBER.



   The owner of each snowmobile requiring numbering by this municipality
shall file an application for number with the City Clerk on forms approved by
the City Council.  The application shall be signed by the owner of the
snowmobile and shall be accompanied by a fee paid annually to the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 16-269)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 3.5, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



EQUIPMENT



§ 73.040  HEADLAMP.



   All snowmobiles in operation shall display at least 1 lighted headlamp,
white in color, having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to
exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet
ahead.



(1969 Code, § 16-270)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 4.1, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.041  TAILLIGHTS.



   All snowmobiles while in operation shall display at least 1 red
taillight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a
red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.



(1969 Code, § 16-271)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 4.2, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.042  BRAKES.



   All snowmobiles shall have an operating brake system in good mechanical
condition.



(1969 Code, § 16-272)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 4.3, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.043  MUFFLERS.



   No snowmobile shall be sold or offered for sale or operated unless it
is equipped with a sound muffling device installed by the manufacturer, and
under no circumstances shall this muffler device be modified or removed by
the owner or operator.



(1969 Code, § 16-273)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 4.4, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.044  FLAG.



   All snowmobiles in operation shall display an orange or red flag which
extends a minimum of 6 feet above the top of the snowmobile.



(1969 Code, § 16-274)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 4.5, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



SPEED RESTRICTIONS



§ 73.055  SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   Unless some other speed restriction is established by the posting of
speed limit signs under the authority of the City Council, the maximum speed
limits for snowmobiles within the corporate limits are as follows:



   (A)   30 m.p.h. in any residential or business district;



   (B)   15 m.p.h. in any alley; and



   (C)   20 m.p.h. while passing through any school zone, properly
posted.



(1969 Code, § 16-276)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.2, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.056  MINIMUM SPEED; TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION.



   No person shall drive a snowmobile at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his or her snowmobile or in
compliance with the direction of a peace officer.



(1969 Code, § 16-279)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.5, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS



§ 73.070  STARTING PARKED SNOWMOBILE.



   No operator shall start a snowmobile which is stopped, standing, or
parked unless and until that movement can be made with reasonable safety.



(1969 Code, § 16-283)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.9, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.071  TURNING; SIGNALS REQUIRED.



   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
snowmobile before turning within a business or residence district.



(1969 Code, § 16-284)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.10, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.072  SIGNAL BY HAND OR SIGNAL DEVICE.



   Any stop or turn signal when required shall be given either by means of
a hand and arm or by electric turn signal device conforming to the
requirements of ILCS Chapter 625.



(1969 Code, § 16-285)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.11, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.073  METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   All signals required by this chapter shall be given from the left side
of the vehicle in the following manner:



   (A)   Left turn:  hand and arm extended horizontally;



   (B)   Right turn:  hand and arm extended upward; or



   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed:  hand and arm extended downward.



(1969 Code, § 16-286)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.12, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



OVERTAKING AND PASSING



§ 73.085  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   Snowmobiles shall be operated on all roadways as close to the right
hand side of the roadway as possible.  Snowmobiles proceeding in opposite
directions shall pass each other to the right; and upon roadways having width
for not more than 1 line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give
to the other at least 1/2 of the main traveled portion of the roadway as
nearly as possible.



(1969 Code, § 16-280)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.6, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.086  LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT.



   No snowmobiles shall be driven to left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction.



(1969 Code, § 16-281)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.7, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 73.100  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   Any snowmobile approaching or entering an intersection from a different
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle on the opposite roadway
which is entering at approximately the same time.  The driver of the
snowmobile must always yield the right-of-way to other motorized vehicles.



(1969 Code, § 16-287)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.13, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.101  RIGHT-OF-WAY; LEFT TURNS.



   The operator of a snowmobile intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but the snowmobile operator
having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



(1969 Code, § 16-288)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.14, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.102  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic-control
signal, every operator of a snowmobile approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
operator has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering the intersection.  After having stopped, the operator of the
snowmobile shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on the
roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the
operator is moving across or within the intersection, but the operator having
so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.



(1969 Code, § 16-289)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.15, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.103  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The operator of a snowmobile approaching a yield sign shall in
obedience to the sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the operator has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway.  After slowing or stopping, the operator shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the operator
is moving across or within the intersection.  If a snowmobile is involved in
a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other
vehicles after driving past the yield right-of-way sign, the collision or
interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure
to yield right-of- way.



(1969 Code, § 16-290)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.16, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.104  PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The operator of all snowmobiles shall yield the right-of-way, slowing
down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing a roadway
within a crosswalk; but in any case every driver of a snowmobile shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person.



(1969 Code, § 16-293)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.19, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



PROHIBITIONS



§ 73.115  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   Any person who drives any snowmobile with a willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.



(1969 Code, § 16-277)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.3, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.116  RACING.



   (A)   No person shall engage in any race on any roadway within the
corporate limits.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      RACE.  The act of 2 or more individuals competing or racing on
any street or highway in a situation in which 1 of the snowmobiles is beside
or to the rear of a snowmobile operated by a competing driver and the 1
driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking
him or her, either by acceleration or maneuver, or 1 or more individuals
competing in a race against time on any street or roadway in this
municipality.



(1969 Code, § 16-278)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.4, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.117  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.



   The operator of a snowmobile shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of the
vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the highway.



(1969 Code, § 16-282)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.8, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.118  OPERATING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor may drive
or be in actual physical control of any snowmobile within this municipality,
and further no person who is an habitual user of or under the influence of
any narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree
which renders him or her incapable of safely driving a snowmobile with this
corporate limits.



(1969 Code, § 16-294)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.20, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.119  LIQUOR CONSUMPTION OR TRANSPORTATION.



   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while operating a
snowmobile within this municipality, and any alcoholic liquor transported in
a snowmobile shall be in its original package and with the seal unbroken.



(1969 Code, § 16-295)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.21, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.120  OBSTRUCTION OF OPERATOR’S VIEW.



   No person shall operate a snowmobile when it is so loaded with
passengers as to obstruct the operator’s view or his or her operation of
the driving mechanism.



(1969 Code, § 16-296)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.22, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.121  OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC.



   No operator shall willfully, unlawfully, or unnecessarily hinder,
obstruct, or delay, or attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any other person
driving or traveling along or upon any roadway within the corporate limits.



(1969 Code, § 16-297)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.23, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.122  POSSESSION OF WEAPONS.



   No person, except persons permitted by law, shall operate or ride any
snowmobile with any firearm in his or her possession unless it is unloaded
and enclosed in a carrying case, or any bow unless it is in a carrying case.



(1969 Code, § 16-299)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.25, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.123  OPERATION ON STATE HIGHWAY RESTRICTED.



   No person may operate a snowmobile on any state highway within the
limits of the municipality, except to cross that state highway at a 90-degree
angle, yielding to all traffic and crossing only when it is safe to do so.



(1969 Code, § 16-300)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.26, passed 1-26-1978)  Penalty,
see § 73.999



§ 73.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each
offense.



(1969 Code, § 16-264.1)  (Ord. 1978-38, § 5.27, passed 1-26-1978)



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Truck routes



   II.   Stop signs



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   Truck routes are as follows.



 

Truck Routes




Cherry Point Road to West Steidl Road to Illinois Route 1, then south to
Jasper Street


McMillian to Springfield Road, to Grandview Street to Jasper Street to
Boydston Street (Inbound Cereal Mill trucks may use Benton Street to Boydston
Street to avoid Jasper Street; outbound trucks may use Jefferson Street to
Elizabeth Street to Grandview to avoid Jasper Street)


Route 1/150 to Elliott Street to Central Avenue to Vandalia Way to Main Street


East Steidl Road from Main Street to High Street to Jasper Street


Clinton Road to Manier Street to East Wood Street to High Street


Route 16, 133, and 150 (Jasper Street)


South Jefferson Street from Jasper Street to the Cereal Mill Parking lot at
Elizabeth Street


Main Street to Union Street to Buena Vista Street


PEDCO Drive, Stratton Drive, and Gibson Drive




 



(1969 Code, § 16-7)  (Am. Ord. 2002-32, passed 11-12-2002; Am. Ord.
2002-35, passed 11-25-2002)



Cross-reference:



   Truck routes, see § 71.061



SCHEDULE II.  STOP SIGNS.



   Stop signs to be added as follows:



 


Stop Signs



Cleveland and Marshall, intersection of


Garfield and Marshall, intersection of


Grant and Marshall, intersection of


Hayes and Marshall, intersection of


Jefferson Street and Washington Street, intersection of


Lincoln and Marshall, intersection of



 



(Ord. 2008-17, passed 6-9-2008; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed 8-22-2016)



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Two-hour parking zones



   II.   Emergency snow routes



   III.   Parking meter zones



   IV.   Parking prohibited



   V.   Handicapped parking



SCHEDULE I.  TWO-HOUR PARKING ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle to remain parked for a
period of more than 2 hours consecutively during regular business hours on
the following named and described areas, streets, or portions of streets
lying within the corporate limits of the city.



 

Street
 
Side(s)
 
Two-Hour Parking Location




Central Avenue
 
East
 
Between Washington Street and the east-west alley between Washington Street
and Madison Street


Central Avenue
 
East and west
 
Between Union Street and Washington Street


Court Street
 
North and south
 
Between Water Street and Sheriff Street


Main Street
 
East and west
 
Between Union Street and Washington Street


Washington Street
 
North
 
From a point 394 feet east of Main Street to Sheriff Street


Washington Street
 
South
 
From a point 394 feet east of Main Street to Ten Broeck Street


Wood Street
 
North and south
 
Between Water Street and Sheriff Street




 



(1969 Code, § 16-193)  (Ord. 1976-32, passed 11-22-1976; Am. Ord. 2003-37,
passed 11-24-2003)  Penalty, see § 72.999



Cross-reference:



   Two-hour parking, see § 72.022



SCHEDULE II.  EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES.



   The following streets are hereby established as emergency snow routes
within the city.



 

Street
 
Emergency Snow Route Location




Alexander Street
 
From Court Street to Jasper Street


Court Street
 
From Jefferson Street to U.S. 150


Crawford Street
 
From Jefferson Street to High Street


Douglas Street
 
From Madison Street to Jasper Street


High Street
 
From U.S. 150 to Blackburn


Jefferson Street
 
From Jasper Street to Maple Avenue


Madison Street
 
From Jefferson Street to High Street


Marshall Street
 
From Crawford Street to Van Buren


Ten Broeck Street
 
From Jasper Street to Washington Street


Washington Street
 
From Jefferson Street to Bayard


Wood Street
 
From Sheriff Street to Eads Avenue




 



(1969 Code, § 16-314)  (Ord. 2000-2, passed 1-10-2000)



Cross-reference:



   Emergency snow routes; signs to be posted, see § 72.035



SCHEDULE III.  PARKING METER ZONES.



   (A)   The following named and described areas, streets, or portions
of streets, and such other areas, streets, or portions of streets as may
hereafter be included in this schedule by amendment hereto, lying within the
corporate limits of the city, shall constitute parking meter zones.



 


Parking Meter Zones



Motor Vehicle Parking Facility
 
Location




-
 
On the north side of the 200 West Washington Street block


Adams Lot
 
On the south side of the 200 West Wood Street block


Armstrong Lot
 
On the east side of the 100 South Main Street block


Citizens National Bank Lot
 
On the west side of the 100 South Main Street block


Coady Lot
 
On the north side of the 100 East Court Street block


Lippman Lot
 
On the west side of the 200 North Main Street block


Silverman Lot
 
On the southeast corner of Main and Union Streets




 



   (B)   All frontages in the squares, streets, or avenues defining the
above zones are to be included therein.



(1969 Code, § 16-205)  (Ord. 1973-21, passed 11-13-1973; Am. Ord. 1973-25,
passed 12-10-1973; Am. Ord. 1977-17, passed 5-23-1977)



Cross-reference:



   Parking Meters, see §§ 72.050et seq.



SCHEDULE IV.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Description
 
Ord. No.
 
Date


Eads Avenue
 
Both sides
 
Located off of US Route 150
 
2005-20
 
5-23-05



 



   (B)   The city shall post no parking signs on the above locations.



(Ord. 2005-20, passed 5-23-2005)



SCHEDULE V.  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The following named and described areas, streets, or portions of
streets, and such other areas, streets, or portions of streets as may
hereafter be included in this schedule by amendment hereto, lying within the
corporate limits of the city, shall have handicapped parking space:



 

Street
 
Location


Douglas Street
 
before 309 Douglas Street



 



(Ord. 2005-40, passed 9-26-2005)



CHAPTER 76:  GOLF CARTS



Section



   76.01   Purpose



   76.02   Golf carts on city streets



   76.03   Definitions



   76.04   Requirements



   76.05   Permits



   76.06   Denial, suspension or revocation of permit



   76.07   Traffic rules



 



   76.99   Penalty



§ 76.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and
enhance health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. After
consideration of the volume, speed and character of traffic on city streets,
the City Council has determined golf carts may safely travel on or cross city
streets. The city is not advocating or endorsing the use of golf carts on
city streets in that other means of travel may be safer.



   (B)   In passing this chapter, the city is regulating the use of
golf carts within the corporate limits of the city  as authorized by the
Illinois Legislature in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.02  GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS.



   Golf carts specifically defined and qualified herein shall be allowed
on city streets under the conditions as stated herein.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the city,
excluding any street which is under the jurisdiction of a unit of government
other than the city, including, but not limited to,  Edgar County or the
State of Illinois.



   COUNTY ROADS. Any county roads within the boundaries of the city.



   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the
purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the
play of golf or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course.



(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-123.9)



   STATE ROADS. Includes Illinois Route 1 and Illinois Route 150 and any
other road under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.04  REQUIREMENTS.



   All persons wishing to operate a golf cart on the city streets must
ensure compliance with following requirements:



   (A)   Proof of current liability insurance, a copy of which shall be
kept in the golf cart whenever used on city streets.



   (B)   The golf cart must be certified and have the vehicles
certified by inspection by the Chief of Police or a designated representative
and receive a valid permit.



   (C)   Must display valid city decal on front and rear of the vehicle.



   (D)   Must have a current, valid Illinois driver's license on their
person.



   (E)   Golf carts must be equipped as follows:



      (1)   Horn;



      (2)   Brakes and brake light;



      (3)   Front and rear turn signals;



      (4)   A steering wheel apparatus;



      (5)   Four tires;



      (6)   Rearview mirror;



      (7)   Seat belts for each passenger;



      (8)   Red reflector warning device on the front and rear;



      (9)   Yellow flashing light visible for at least 100 feet from
the rear of the golf cart. Said lights must be turned on when operated one
hour before sunrise or one hour before sunset;



      (10)   Approved "Slow Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of
the vehicle; (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5,12-709);



      (11)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation;



      (12)   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least
100 feet from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation;



      (13)   Any additional requirements which may be amended to
ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1426.1 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.



      (14)   Windshield.



   (F)   Must obey all traffic laws of the State of Illinois and the
City of Paris.



   (G)   Must be 21  years of age.



   (H)   Must be operated only on the city streets, except Court Street
between Jefferson Street and Highway 150, High Street, Washington Street
between Monterey Street and Jefferson Street, Central Avenue, Wood Street
between Sheriff Street and Eads, Crawford Street between Central Street and
High Street, Jefferson Street, Madison Street between Ten Broeck street and
Court Street, Jasper Street, Main Street, Edgar Street between High Street
and Central Street, and Steidl Road and Clinton Road.



   (I)   May only be operated on permitted city streets where the
posted speed limit is 30 miles per hour or less.



   (J)   May cross Main Street and Central Avenue only at the
intersections with Grant Street, Monroe Street and Blackburn. Cannot cross
Jasper Street.



   (K)   Must not be operated in excess of 20 miles per hour.



   (L)   A person operating or who is in actual physical control of a
golf cart as described herein on a roadway while under the influence is
subject ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-500 through 11-502.



   (M)   Each golf cart may transport only as many individuals as is
the lesser of the number of seats or as its manufacturer designates. No
individuals may ride on any other portion of the golf cart.



   (N)   Children must be restrained in a golf cart in the same manner
required as if they were in an automobile. Car seats are not permitted.



   (O)   Whenever being operated on city streets, headlights and
taillights shall be illuminated.



   (P)   Golf carts may only be operated on city streets from the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 10 p.m. on Daylight Savings Time and 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
at all other times. They shall not be operated in inclement weather nor when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any
time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on
the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.



   (Q)   No person shall be in possession of or consume alcoholic
beverages on or in a golf cart on city streets.



   (R)   May only be operated on city streets.



   (S)   May not be operated on sidewalks or other public property not
accessible to or authorized to vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.05  PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a golf cart unless that golf cart has
been approved and granted a permit from the Chief of Police or his designee.
A copy of said permit shall be kept in the golf cart whenever used on city
streets. Only a golf cart with a valid permit and featuring a city decal as
detailed above shall be allowed to be operated on the streets of the city.



   (B)   Permits shall be granted for a period of only year for the
date designated on the permit. Renewal date is annually March 1 regardless of
when the permit was granted.



   (C)   The cost of the permit is $100.



   (D)   Insurance coverage is to be verified to be in effect by the
Police Department when obtaining and renewing a permit.



   (E)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the city and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Name of liability insurance carrier;



      (3)   The serial number, make, model and description of golf
cart;



      (4)   Signed Waiver of Liability by applicant releasing the
city and agreeing to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any
and all future claims resulting from the operation of their golf carts on
city streets relating to the golf cart owned or operated by the applicant;



      (5)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage
card specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit;



      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.



   (F)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are
met:



      (1)   The vehicle must be inspected by the designated
representative to insure that the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets
and is in compliance with this chapter and with the State of Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code;



      (2)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in
compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Statutes regarding minimum
liability insurance.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.06  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or a designee, may deny the permit if it
finds the applicant cannot safely operate the golf cart on city streets, or
if the applicant has had earlier golf cart permits denied, suspended or
revoked. The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder
upon a finding that the holder of the permit has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, or if there evidence that the holder of the
permit cannot safely operate the golf cart on city streets.



   (B)   Decisions of the Chief of Police, or the designee, shall only
be reversed or modified by a majority vote of the City Council.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.07  TRAFFIC RULES.



   Every person operating a golf cart, pursuant to an approved permit, on
city streets has all of the rights and duties applicable to a driver of any
other vehicle pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code except those provisions
which cannot reasonably be applied to golf carts.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



§ 76.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon a
finding of guilt and/or conviction for a first offense during a permit year
will be subject to a fine of $150 plus costs of prosecution. A second
violation within the permit year will result in fines as allowed by the city
ordinances plus costs of prosecution and revocation of the permit for the
remainder of that permit year.



(Ord. 2016-25, passed 11-14-2016)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   FAIR HOUSING



   91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



   92.   FIRE PREVENTION



   93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



   94.   STREET TREES



   95.   ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES



   96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



   98.   ANIMALS



CHAPTER 90:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   90.01   Policy



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Prohibited acts



   90.04   Enforcement; remedies not exclusive



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  POLICY.



   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its
Constitution and other laws, in order that the safety and general welfare,
peace, and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is
hereby declared the policy of the city to assure equal opportunity to all
residents, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or physical disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful,
standard living quarters.



   (B)   It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee,
sub-lessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm, or corporation
having the right to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise control any housing
accommodation or real property within the city, or any agent of these, shall
refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person
or group of persons such housing accommodations or real property because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
of the person or persons or discriminate against any person or persons
because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental, or lease
of any housing accommodation or real property or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith.



   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote
maximum choice within the community’s total housing supply, lessen racial,
ethnic, and economic concentrations, and facilitate desegregation and
racially inclusive patterns of occupancy and use of public and private
facilities.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-1998)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL, STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS.  Housing which
is in sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with
applicable local, state, and national codes.



   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION.  Any difference expressed in any way
toward a person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental,
or financing for housing accommodation or real property in regard to that
sale, exchange, rental, lease, or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the person.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  Any person, institution, or business entity of
any kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for these
loans a secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.



   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION.  Includes any building, structure, or portion
thereof which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied as a home, residence, or sleeping place of 1 or more human
beings, or any real estate so used, or designed or intended for that use.



   OWNER.  Any person or persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or
own any beneficial interest in any real property, or who hold legal or
equitable title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real
estate cooperative which owns any real property or housing accommodations.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER.  Any person, partnership, association,
corporation, or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration
offers, sells, purchases, exchanges, or rents, or negotiates for the sale,
purchase, exchange, or rental of a housing accommodation or real property of
another, or collects rental for the use of housing accommodation or real
property of another.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure, or
housing accommodations within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-1998)



§ 90.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee,
sub-lessee, real estate broker or salesperson, financial institution or
employee of the financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of
the foregoing, to discriminate against any person or persons because of their
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability, with regard to the sale, exchange, or rental, or any dealing
concerning any housing accommodation or real property.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for
any real estate broker or employee thereof, owner, or other person or
financial institution dealing with housing or real property in the city:



      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability
of or the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind relating to the
sale, rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real
property in the city or in furnishing of any facilities or services in
connection therewith;



      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or
circulated, any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to announce a policy,
or to use any form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental, or
financing of real property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection
with the prospective purchase, rental, or lease of such real estate, which
expresses directly or indirectly any discrimination as to race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of any
person;



      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money,
guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise obtaining or making
available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation,
repair, or maintenance of any housing accommodation or real property;



      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or
lease, of any housing accommodation or real property on the grounds of loss
of value because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of
any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability;



      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written
material or statements designed to induce any owner of any housing
accommodation or real property to sell or lease his or her property because
of any present or prospective change in the race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood;



      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing
for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing
accommodation or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to
induce the sale or listing for sale of any housing accommodation or real
property by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons
of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex,
creed, or disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of
property values in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located;



      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell,
rent, or otherwise deal with the owner’s housing accommodations or real
property with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability; or



      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal
with any housing accommodation or real property because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the
proposed buyer or tenant.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  ENFORCEMENT; REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The penalties provided in § 90.99 of this code shall in no way
abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically enforce, by any
legal means, any of the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-1998)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$750.  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.



(Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-1998)



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   91.001   Title



   91.002   Definitions



Minimum Standards and Regulations



   91.015   Compliance required



   91.016   Audible alarms; shut-off



   91.017   Record of inspection



   91.018   Alarm business; obligation to instruct operators



   91.019   Automatic dialing restrictions



   91.020   Alarms similar to sirens prohibited



   91.021   Systems constituting a hazard



   91.022   Connection to public communications center



   91.023   Medical alarm; backup battery



   91.024   Confidentiality



Required Licenses and Permits



   91.035   Alarm business; requirements



   91.036   Alarm agent



   91.037   Auto alarms exempted



   91.038   Information change; notice required



   91.039   Issuing authority



   91.040   Approving authority



   91.041   Application; content



   91.042   Application investigation; denial



Alarm System Permits



   91.055   Fees; term; renewal



   91.056   Filing application



   91.057   Application investigation



   91.058   Emergency contacts



Suspension or Revocation



   91.070   Grounds for suspension



   91.071   Authority to suspend



   91.072   Suspension procedure; appeal



   91.073   Duration of suspension



   91.074   Revocation



   91.075   Surrender of permit



Appeals Procedure



   91.090   Appeals



   91.091   Failure to file on time



   91.092   Hearing notice



   91.093   Hearing and decision



System Maintenance; False Alarms



   91.105   Alarm system maintenance



   91.106   Permittee inspections



   91.107   Maintenance responsibility



   91.108   False alarm determination



Fees and Charges



   91.120   False alarm reimbursement



   91.121   Governmental entities; fee exemption



   91.122   Enforcement; remedies not exclusive



   91.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Public Safety Alarm Systems
Ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 15-186)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:  selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing, or
installing on or in any building, structure, or facility, any alarm system.



   ALARM BUSINESS. 



      (1)   The occupation by any individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity of:  selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building,
structure, or facility.



      (2)   Exemption:  the provisions of this section do not
include a business which engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm
system unless that business services, installs, monitors, or responds to
alarm systems.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
or used for the detection of burglar, robbery, fire, or need for medical
assistance within a building, structure, or facility or for alerting others
to the commission of an unlawful act or hazard within a building, structure,
or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or
message when actuated.  ALARM SYSTEMS include but are not limited to, direct
dial telephone devices, audible alarms, and proprietor alarms.  Devices
which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible,
or perceptible outside of the protected buildings, structure, or facility are
not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by
the telephone company to protect telephone systems which might be damaged or
disrupted by the use of an alarm system.  An ALARM SYSTEM includes all of
the necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection of burglary,
robbery, fire, need for medical assistance, or other hazard in a single
building, structure, or facility or for alerting others of the commission of
an unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, or both.



   APPELLANT.  A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.



   APPLICANT.  A person who files an application for a new or renewal
permit as provided by this chapter.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of burglary,
robbery, fire, or medical assistance on premises which generates an audible
sound on the premises when it is actuated.



   COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR.  The communications director of the city or
his or her authorized representative.



   DAY.  Calendar day.



   FALSE ALARMS.  The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system, or his or her employees or agents.  In
addition, the use of an alarm to summon Police or Fire Department personnel
for reasons other than those listed on alarm system permits will also be
considered a FALSE ALARM.  FALSE ALARMS shall not include alarms caused by
electrical interruptions, floods, or other natural disasters.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person who shall be granted a permit as provided in
this chapter and his or her agents and representatives.



   PERSON.  Natural person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM.  An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.



   REPORTING TELEPHONE.  Any intrusion detection device which when
activated, causes, either mechanically, electronically, or by any other
automatic means, intrastate dialing of any telephone number and then
transmits a prerecorded message.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or
otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of an alarm system from an alarm business.



(1969 Code, § 15-187)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS



§ 91.015  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   The City Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe minimum standards for
the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the
city.  All devices shall meet or exceed those standards and regulations
before permits may be issued pursuant to this chapter.  The communications
director shall inspect all alarm systems installed within the city.



(1969 Code, § 15-188)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.016  AUDIBLE ALARMS; SHUT-OFF.



   Upon notification by the city’s communications department that an
audible alarm is activated, the permittee, his or her representative, or his
or her alarm agent, shall immediately proceed to silence the alarm, and the
silencing shall be finished within 30 minutes.  Alternately, the alarm
system may be equipped with an automatic shut-off device which shall silence
the alarm within 30 minutes, thus eliminating the need for a personal
response as otherwise required by this section.



(1969 Code, § 15-189)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.017  RECORD OF INSPECTION.



   Each alarm business, alarm agent, or permittee shall display to the
communications director, when requested, his or her record of inspection or
repair of an installed alarm system.



(1969 Code, § 15-190)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.018  ALARM BUSINESS; OBLIGATION TO INSTRUCT OPERATORS.



   Each alarm business, alarm agent, or permittee which installs or
services an alarm system shall clearly instruct the operators of the alarm
systems in the proper use and operation of the alarm system, as frequently as
necessary, especially in those factors which can cause false alarms.



(1969 Code, § 15-191)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.019  AUTOMATIC DIALING RESTRICTIONS.



   No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to
be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program, or otherwise provide or
install any device or combination of devices that will upon activation,
either mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, initiate
the intrastate calling, dialing, or connection to any telephone number
assigned to any subscriber by a public telephone company, without the prior
written consent of that subscriber.



(1969 Code, § 15-192)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999; Am. Ord. 2004-54,
passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.020  ALARMS SIMILAR TO SIRENS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to install on the exterior or interior of a building an
intrusion detection device or burglar alarm system which upon actuation emits
a sound exceeding 80 decibels (when measured from outside the premises),
which is similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or in vehicles used
for civil defense purposes.



(1969 Code, § 15-193)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.021  SYSTEMS CONSTITUTING A HAZARD.



   No permit shall be issued for an alarm system which, due to the nature
of its construction or installation, constitutes an unreasonable hazard to
life and limb of any person.



(1969 Code, § 15-194)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.022  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.



   (A)   The communications director is authorized to enforce rules and
regulations, adopted by ordinance by the City Council, governing the
connection of private burglar or robbery systems to the public safety
communications center or other city communications center.  The rules and
regulations may prescribe minimum standards for the manner in which these
connections are to be made, the equipment and devices which shall be used to
accomplish the connection, and the manner in which the equipment and devices
shall be maintained and their cost defrayed.



   (B)   No person shall connect or continue to have connected any
burglary, robbery, fire, or medical alarm system to the city public safety
communications center or other city communications center, unless the alarm
system complies with all applicable ordinances.



(1969 Code, § 15-195)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.023  MEDICAL ALARM; BACKUP BATTERY.



   Each medical alarm connected to the public utility electricity shall
have a backup battery, so the alarm will function during electric power
outages.



(1969 Code, § 15-196)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.024  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to
persons charged with the administration of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-196.1)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



REQUIRED LICENSES AND PERMITS



§ 91.035  ALARM BUSINESS; REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business
within the city without complying with all applicable state laws.  Each
alarm business owner and operator is required to provide the communications
director with the name, address, and phone number of each new subscriber
within the city prior to the activation of the new alarm system, or upon
notification that an existing alarm system has been sold or transferred to
another subscriber.



(1969 Code, § 15-201)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.036  ALARM AGENT.



   No person shall operate as an alarm agent within the city without
complying with all applicable state laws.



(1969 Code, § 15-202)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.037  AUTO ALARMS EXEMPTED.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms
affixed to automobiles.



(1969 Code, § 15-204)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.038  INFORMATION CHANGE; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required
by this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof
to the communications department, within 10 days after that change, or at any
hearing conducted under this chapter if the hearing is conducted before the
notice has been given.



(1969 Code, § 15-205)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.039  ISSUING AUTHORITY.



   The issuing authority shall be the communications department.



(1969 Code, § 15-211)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.040  APPROVING AUTHORITY.



   The approving authority shall be the communications director.



(1969 Code, § 15-212)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.041  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Application for all permits required hereunder shall be filed with the
communications department and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. 
The fee is to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the
applications and permits and is not refundable.  The communications
department shall prescribe the form of the application and request such
information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit
application.  The application for alarm systems shall require the name,
address, and telephone number of a person who will render service or repairs
during any hour of the day or night.



(1969 Code, § 15-213)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.042  APPLICATION INVESTIGATION; DENIAL.



   An application for an alarm permit shall be processed in a timely
manner.  The permit shall be denied if the alarm system does not comply with
standards adopted pursuant to this chapter, or if the applicant has knowingly
made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the
application for permit.



(1969 Code, § 15-214)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS



§ 91.055  FEES; TERM; RENEWAL.



   The fee for an alarm system permit shall be set by resolution and shall
not be prorated.  The permit issued shall expire 1 year after its
issuance.  Applications for renewals of permits shall be processed in the
same manner as applications for the initial permit.



(1969 Code, § 15-231)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.056  FILING APPLICATION.



   Applications for an alarm permit shall be filed with the communications
department on forms provided by the communications department, and the
applicant shall at that time pay the appropriate fee established by
resolution of the City Council.  The application shall be signed and
verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as may be deemed
necessary by the communications director.  Permits provided for in this
chapter shall be issued by the communications department and shall be
nontransferable.



(1969 Code, § 15-232)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.057  APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receiving an application from any person for an alarm permit, the
communications director or his or her authorized representative shall cause
an investigation to be made of the system to be installed to determine if the
system complies with the requirements of this chapter and all applicable laws
and ordinances.  If the proposed system complies, a permit shall be
issued.  An alarm permittee may be allowed a direct connection or digital
transmission to the public safety alarm system, provided facilities are
available for either connection.



(1969 Code, § 15-233)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.058  EMERGENCY CONTACTS.



   The alarm permittee shall supply on his or her application for permit
the names, addresses, and phone numbers of at least 2 persons to call in the
event of an emergency.  If the permittee has arranged for a service
contract, emergency telephone numbers of the service company shall be
supplied.



(1969 Code, § 15-234)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION



§ 91.070  GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION.



   The following shall constitute grounds for suspension:



   (A)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   The failure to comply with any applicable law or ordinance;



   (C)   When an alarm system activates more than the following number
of false alarms:



      (1)   Three within any 30-day period;



      (2)   Five within any 90-day period; or



      (3)   Six within any 180-day period.



   (D)   When the applicant or permittee, or his or her employee or
agent, has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record
related to the alarm system; or



   (E)   Immediately following an alarm activation, where the alarm
system permittee or his or her designated representative fails to respond
within 1 hour to a request for access to the protected premises, upon request
to do so by a city police officer or public safety dispatcher when a response
is necessary to ensure the security of the premises or persons where the
system is installed.



(1969 Code, § 15-241)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.071  AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND.



   Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended by the communications
director for the grounds listed in this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-242)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.072  SUSPENSION PROCEDURE; APPEAL.



   (A)   The determination of the communications director with regard
to matters of suspension shall be appealable in the time and manner set forth
in this chapter.



   (B)   The communications director, in the case of a suspension,
shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall
state the reasons for the suspension.  The suspension order shall be
effective immediately if personally served, or 48 hours after the same has
been deposited in the U.S. Postal Service.  Notwithstanding any order of
suspension, a permittee who has filed an appeal may continue the use of any
alarm system requiring a permit under this chapter, until the appeal process
as defined in this chapter has been exhausted, unless the communications
director determines that the continued operation of the alarm system
interferes with the operation of the Police or Fire Department.



(1969 Code, § 15-243)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.073  DURATION OF SUSPENSION.



   Any suspension ordered under this chapter shall remain in effect until
the permittee submits evidence to the communications department to show that
the conditions giving rise to the suspension have been corrected.  Evidence
of correction may include servicing or replacement of components, training of
personnel, or other applicable actions.  Upon proof that the conditions
giving rise to the suspension have been corrected, the permit shall be
reinstated.  A refusal to reinstate shall be appealable in the same manner
and in the same times as a suspension or a refusal to issue a permit.



(1969 Code, § 15-244)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.074  REVOCATION.



   A permit may be revoked by the director of communications for repeated
violations of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws and
ordinances.  A revocation shall be appealable in the same manner and in the
same times as a suspension or refusal to issue a permit.



(1969 Code, § 15-245)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.075  SURRENDER OF PERMIT.



   If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall
surrender the permit to the communications department.



(1969 Code, § 15-246)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



APPEALS PROCEDURE



§ 91.090  APPEALS.



   (A)   Informal appeal.  An appellant may informally seek relief
from an order of suspension of an alarm system permit or a denial of a permit
by presenting evidence to the communications director that the deficiencies
in the alarm system, or its operation, have been rectified.  The evidence
must be presented within 10 days of the effective date of suspension. 
Within 5 days of the date upon which the evidence was presented, the
communications director shall notify the appellant of his or her decision. 
In the event informal relief is not granted, the appellant has an additional
15 days, from the date of notification of decision by the communications
director, to file a formal appeal with the City Council.



   (B)   Formal appeal.  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
communications director, including the decision to approve or deny an
application for a permit, to renew a permit, to suspend a permit, or to
require reimbursement for false alarms, shall have the right of appeal to the
City Council.  An appeal must be perfected within 15 days after notice of
the decision of order of suspension, or within 15 days after notice of a
decision on an informal appeal, whichever is later, by filing with the City
Administrator a notice of appeal or letter of appeal, which will be forwarded
to the City Council, stating therein the basis for the appeal.



(1969 Code, § 15-221)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.091  FAILURE TO FILE ON TIME.



   No hearing shall be held unless the informal appeal and formal appeals
have been filed within the times provided in this chapter, provided that the
City Council may waive this requirement.



(1969 Code, § 15-222)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.092  HEARING NOTICE.



   (A)   The time of the hearing before the City Council shall be no
more than  20 days after his or her receipt of the letter of appeal.  The
City Administrator shall give the appealing party and any other persons
requesting the same at least 5-days’ notice of the time and place of the
hearing. 



   (B)   The notice shall be substantially in the following form, but
may include other information:



“You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held at the City Council
meeting room at the City Hall, on _____ at the hour of _________, at which
time you may show cause why the appeal you have filed should be sustained. 
The appeal is from the decision of the communications director, dated ______,
deciding ______.”



(1969 Code, § 15-223)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.093  HEARING AND DECISION.



   At the time and place set for the hearing the City Council shall give
the appealing party and all other interested parties a reasonable opportunity
to be heard.  The City Council may affirm the action of the communications
director or the communications department, or may reverse the decision and
order the license or permit issued or reinstated.



(1969 Code, § 15-224)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



SYSTEM MAINTENANCE; FALSE ALARMS



§ 91.105  ALARM SYSTEM MAINTENANCE.



   Each permittee shall maintain each alarm system in good working order,
providing the necessary service to prevent false alarms, to prevent
malfunctions endangering persons or property, and to prevent other
malfunctions.



(1969 Code, § 15-251)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.106  PERMITTEE INSPECTIONS.



   Each permittee shall cause each alarm system to be inspected regularly,
by a representative of the company with a service contract or other person
qualified to inspect and service the equipment, at least once every 6
months.  Inspections shall be complete enough to detect any likely
malfunctions and may include testing of the equipment.  Particular attention
shall be paid to the conditions that have the potential of causing false
alarms.  The person making the inspection shall provide a written report to
the permittee, and the report shall be kept on hand for 12 months, subject to
being shown to any representative to the communications department of the
city when requested during business hours.



(1969 Code, § 15-252)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.107  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the alarm system,
and he or she shall look to the report of the inspector for guidance, but
shall not limit his or her maintenance effort to matters on the report of the
inspector.



(1969 Code, § 15-253)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.108  FALSE ALARM DETERMINATION.



   In determining whether an alarm is a false alarm, all circumstances
shall be considered.  Setting off an alarm may cause a person who was
attempting a break-in to flee.  In investigating whether an alarm is false,
a careful check will be made for signs of attempts to break in, such as
scratches around windows.



(1969 Code, § 15-254)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



FEES AND CHARGES



§ 91.120  FALSE ALARM REIMBURSEMENT.



   A property owner or occupant shall reimburse the city for the cost of
the Police or Fire Department manpower and equipment response to each false
alarm.  The amount of the reimbursement shall be $25 for each of the first 3
false alarms in any 12-month period and $250 for each additional false alarm
from any 1 building or facility.  Notification thereof to the permittee
shall be made within 10 days from the false alarm.



(1969 Code, § 15-262)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999; Am. Ord. 2004-54,
passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.121  GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES; FEE EXEMPTION.



   The federal government, the state, counties, municipal corporations,
departments thereof, and other governmental entities are exempt from fees
required by this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-264)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 91.122  ENFORCEMENT; REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall not release that person from paying the
permit fee or reimbursement for false alarms due and unpaid at the time of
the conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee or reimbursement for
false alarms prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.  All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of
1 or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy. 
The amount of any permit fee or reimbursement for false alarms shall be
deemed a debt to the city.  An action may be commenced in the name of the
city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent
permit fee or reimbursement for false alarms.  All unpaid permit fees or
reimbursement for false alarms shall be deemed delinquent 30 days after they
are due and payable.



(1969 Code, § 15-263)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
91.999



§ 91.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 not more than $750 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 15-197)  (Ord. 1999-29, passed 8-23-1999)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   92.001   Fire protection tax



   92.002   Tampering with fire apparatus prohibited



Fire Prevention Code



   92.015   Fire prevention code adopted



   92.016   Enforcement



   92.017   Fire limits



   92.018   Modification of code



   92.019   Appeals



   92.020   Conflicting technical codes; application



Gasoline; Flammable Liquids



   92.035   Compliance required



   92.036   Enforcement



   92.037   Code adopted



   92.038   Storage or handling equipment; permits



   92.039   Approval prior to permit



   92.040   Inspection fees



Liquefied Petroleum Gases



   92.055   Definitions



   92.056   Standards adopted



   92.057   Compliance required



   92.058   Equipment installation; permit; inspection



   92.059   Permit issuance; fee



   92.060   Occupancy without permit unlawful



   92.061   Inspection; independent testing



   92.062   Odorizing required



   92.063   Production; license required



   92.064   Storage; license required



Fireworks and Explosives



   92.075   Fireworks prohibited; exception



   92.076   Public fireworks display; permit required



   92.077   Eligible persons



   92.078   Permit application; transfer prohibited



   92.079   Responsible person; conduct and location



   92.080   Storage of TNT or nitroglycerine



   92.081   Explosives use; permit required



   92.082   Explosives storage rules



Buildings for Public Use



   92.095   Duties of responsible person



   92.096   Inspection of premises



   92.097   Fire extinguishing equipment



   92.098   School fire drills; conformance to standards



   92.099   Doors to open outward



   92.100   Theater or hall exit lights



Public Gatherings



   92.115   Public gatherings; appropriate building required



   92.116   Exit and seating standards



   92.117   Door standards



   92.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Air Pollution, see §§ 93.60et seq.



   False fire alarm, see § 133.03



   Fire Department, see Chapter 36



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.001  FIRE PROTECTION TAX.



   A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of fire protection in this city
at the rate of.15% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department
of Revenue, of all the taxable property therein for the first year in which
this tax is levied in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-7-1.



(1969 Code, § 9-1)  (Ord. 1969-42, passed 8-25-1969; Am. Ord. 2004-50,
passed 10-25-2004)



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see Chapter 38



§ 92.002  TAMPERING WITH FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.



   Whoever willfully and maliciously cuts, injures, tampers with,
destroys, or defaces any fire hydrant, or any fire hose, or any fire engine,
or other public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus
appertaining to this equipment, or intentionally opens any fire hydrant
without proper authorization, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. 1972-6, passed 7-24-1972)  Penalty, see § 92.999



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.015  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the NFPA Life Safety Code, 2000 Edition, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended and the whole thereof,
and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling as the official code of fire prevention within
the city’s jurisdiction.



(1969 Code, § 9-11)  (Ord. 2002-28, passed 9-23-2002; Am. Ord. 2008-29,
passed 11-24- 2008; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 8-13-2018)



§ 92.016  ENFORCEMENT.



   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department (Fire Chief) and the Building Inspector.



(1969 Code, § 9-12)



§ 92.017  FIRE LIMITS.



   The limits referred to in § 53b of the code hereby adopted, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred
to in § 74a of the code hereby adopted in which storage of Class I liquids
in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in §
114 of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted, shall be fire district number 1.



(1969 Code, § 9-13)



§ 92.018  MODIFICATION OF CODE.



   The Fire Chief and the Building Inspector, severally, shall have power
to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application
in writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when
there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter
of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public
safety secured, and substantial justice done.  The particulars of the
modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief or
the Building Inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Fire
Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.



(1969 Code, § 9-14)



§ 92.019  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Chief or the Building Inspector shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief or the Building
Inspector to the City Council within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed.



(1969 Code, § 9-15)



§ 92.020  CONFLICTING TECHNICAL CODES; APPLICATION.



   (A)   All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or of the code hereby
adopted are hereby repealed.



   (B)   This section shall not operate to repeal the adoption of
technical codes on specific points, and in case of conflict between another
technical code and the technical codes adopted in this subchapter, the code
which more specifically relates to the subject matter shall apply.



(1969 Code, § 9-16)



GASOLINE; FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS



§ 92.035  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to store, handle, or offer for sale any flammable
or volatile liquids in violation of any provision of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 9-51)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate storage and use of combustibles, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-8-4



§ 92.036  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and of the Building Inspector,
with the cooperation of the Police Department, to see to the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 9-52)



§ 92.037  CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by reference that certain technical code known
as Gasoline and Volatile Oils (as revised August 15, 1965), promulgated by
the State Department of Public Safety, Division of Fire Prevention and
Division of Chemical and Petroleum Safety, as though the same were set out
fully herein, and the provisions of the technical code herein adopted shall
be controlling within the city.



(1969 Code, § 9-53)  (Ord. 2004-50, passed 10-25-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt technical codes, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
1-3-1et seq.



§ 92.038  STORAGE OR HANDLING EQUIPMENT; PERMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to construct, install, or enlarge any tank, pump,
or piping equipment for the storage or handling of flammable or volatile
liquids without having first obtained a permit therefor.  Applications for
these permits shall be made to the Fire Chief and shall be accompanied by a
drawing to scale showing the location of the proposed construction as well as
plans showing the type and nature of installation or alteration.



(1969 Code, § 9-54)  (Ord. 2004-50, passed 10-25-2004) Penalty, see §
92.999



§ 92.039  APPROVAL PRIOR TO PERMIT.



   No permit required by this subchapter shall be issued until the
Building Inspector has certified that the contemplated work fully complies
with the ordinances of the city.



(1969 Code, § 9-55)



§ 92.040  INSPECTION FEES.



   The fees for inspections required by this subchapter shall be:



   (A)   For installation of fuel oil tanks having a capacity of less
than 20,000 gallons:  $50;



   (B)   For installation of tanks for storage of gasoline having a
capacity of less than 10,000 gallons:  $50;



   (C)   For installation of fuel oil tanks having a capacity of 20,000
gallons or more:  $50;



   (D)   For installation of gasoline storage tanks having a capacity
of 1,000 gallons or over:  $50; or



   (E)   For installation of tanks for other flammable liquids:  $50.



(1969 Code, § 9-56)  (Ord. 2004-50, passed 10-25-2004)  Penalty, see §
92.999



LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES



§ 92.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES.  Includes any material composed
predominately of propane, propylene, normal butane, isobutane, and butylene,
or mixtures of them.



(1969 Code, § 9-66)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 430, Act 5, § 1



§ 92.056  STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   The storage, installation, and use of liquefied petroleum gas and
liquefied petroleum gas equipment shall be in accordance with Pamphlets No.
54 and 58 as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, which
are hereby adopted as fully as if set out herein.  Three copies of the
pamphlets adopted by this section shall be on file with the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 9-67)  (Ord. 1969-6, passed 2-17-1969)  Penalty, see §
92.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate storage and use of combustibles, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-8-4



§ 92.057  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to produce, store, or use liquefied petroleum gas,
or to install or maintain any equipment for such production or use, unless
the production, storage, and utilization equipment is constructed and
maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 9-68)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.058  EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION; PERMIT; INSPECTION.



   No person shall install any system utilizing liquefied petroleum gas in
the city without a permit; the person seeking to install this type of
equipment shall give notice to the Building Inspector 24 hours prior to the
completion of the installation.



(1969 Code, § 9-69)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.059  PERMIT ISSUANCE; FEE.



   The Building Inspector shall, upon finding that a liquefied petroleum
gas installation complies with the provisions of this subchapter, issue a
permit to the installer; the fee for the installation permit required by this
subchapter shall be $2.



(1969 Code, § 9-70)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.060  OCCUPANCY WITHOUT PERMIT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any premises upon which a
liquefied petroleum gas installation has been made after the date of the
adoption of this code, unless the installer has first obtained a permit
therefor.



(1969 Code, § 9-71)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.061  INSPECTION; INDEPENDENT TESTING.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector, or other officer or
employee as may be designated by the City Council, to enforce the provisions
of this subchapter, and to make inspections or tests as may be necessary in
connection therewith.  Whenever a test is necessary to determine whether any
equipment or method complies with the standards prescribed or referred to in
this subchapter, the enforcing official may accept the results of a test
conducted by or under the supervision of the Underwriters’ Laboratories,
Inc.



(1969 Code, § 9-72)



§ 92.062  ODORIZING REQUIRED.



   All liquefied petroleum gas used or stored in the city shall be
effectively odorized by an agent of such character as to indicate by a
distinctive odor the presence of gas in the air down to a concentration of
1/5 the lower limit of combustibility.



(1969 Code, § 9-73)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Prohibition against storing or using liquefied petroleum gases in a
manner or under circumstances as may endanger life or property, see Ill. Rev.
Stat., Chapter 430, Act 5, § 2



§ 92.063  PRODUCTION; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a plant for the production of
liquefied petroleum gases or for filling containers with these gases in the
city or make liquefied petroleum gas installations or fill containers in the
city without first having secured a license therefor.



   (B)   Applications for licenses required by this section shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk, and shall conform to the general
provisions of the ordinances relating to business licenses.  The annual fee
for this license shall be $50.



   (C)   No license required by this section shall be issued unless the
premises and equipment thereon to be used in the activity are in full
compliance with the standards prescribed in this chapter; it shall be
unlawful to conduct or operate such an activity unless all buildings and
equipment used in connection therewith comply with the standards prescribed.



(1969 Code, § 9-74)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



Statutory reference:



   Refilling of liquefied petroleum gas containers by other than owner
unlawful, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 430, Act 10, § 3



§ 92.064  STORAGE; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of storing
liquefied petroleum gases within the city without first having secured a
license therefor.



   (B)   Applications for licenses required by this section shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk, and shall conform to the general
provisions of the ordinances relating to business licenses.  The annual fee
for such a license shall be $300.



   (C)   No license required by this section shall be issued unless the
premises and equipment thereon to be used in the activity are in full
compliance with the standards prescribed in this chapter; it shall be
unlawful to conduct or operate such an activity unless all buildings and
equipment used in connection therewith comply with the standards prescribed.



(1969 Code, § 9-75)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES



§ 92.075  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, store, discharge, or set off any
fireworks in the city, except to give a pyrotechnic display in connection
with public exhibitions as provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 9-86)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent use, storage, or sale of fireworks, see Ill. Rev.
Stat., Chapter 425, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.



   Authority to regulate storage and use of combustibles, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-8-4



   Fireworks defined, see ILCS Chapter 425, Act 35, § 1



   Fireworks Use Act, see ILCS Chapter 425, Act 35, §§ 1et seq.



§ 92.076  PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless
a permit therefor is first secured from the Mayor and the City Council.  All
public displays shall be under the supervision of a competent person and
shall be superintended by the Chief of Police or some other member of the
Police Department assigned this duty by him or her.



(1969 Code, § 9-87)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.077  ELIGIBLE PERSONS.



   Permits may be granted pursuant to this subchapter to any groups of 3
or more adult individuals applying therefor.  No permit shall be required,
under the provisions of this subchapter, for supervised public displays by
state or county fair associations.



(1969 Code, § 9-88)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 425, Act 35, § 2



§ 92.078  PERMIT APPLICATION; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 21 days in
advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on the
application within 10 days after the application is made.  After this
privilege shall have been granted, sale, possession, use, and distribution of
fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that purpose only.  No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable.



(1969 Code, § 9-89)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 425, Act 35, § 2



§ 92.079  RESPONSIBLE PERSON; CONDUCT AND LOCATION.



   Every display of fireworks permitted by this subchapter shall be
handled by a competent individual designated by the Mayor and City Council
and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged, or fired, as not
to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.



(1969 Code, § 9-90)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 425, Act 35, § 2



§ 92.080  STORAGE OF TNT OR NITROGLYCERINE.



   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the
explosive commonly known as TNT in the city in any quantities, except for
medicinal purposes or laboratory purposes; and for these purposes no more
than 0.25 ounce shall be stored in any 1 building or premises.



(1969 Code, § 9-91)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.081  EXPLOSIVES USE; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any explosives in
connection with any construction, repair, demolition, or excavation work
without first securing a permit therefor.



   (B)   Applications for permits to use explosives must be secured
from the City Clerk and shall state the nature of the work, the location
where the work is to be done, and the amount of explosives intended to be
used in that work.



(1969 Code, § 9-92)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.082  EXPLOSIVES STORAGE RULES.



   All explosives must be stored or kept in accordance with the rules of
the State Department of Mines and Minerals.



(1969 Code, § 9-93)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   State rules for the storage of explosives, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter
425, Act 3, § 3



BUILDINGS FOR PUBLIC USE



§ 92.095  DUTIES OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON.



   The owner, agent, occupant, or person charged with the custody of any
public building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall, or church, and in
the case of schools, the president of the board of education or the person in
charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipping
and maintenance of such apparatus as is required in this subchapter for the
maintenance and safety of all exits, stairs, doors, windows, or passageways.



(1969 Code, § 9-103)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations; Construction, see  Chapter 151



   Overcrowding prohibited at amusements, see § 120.007



   Premises for public amusements must conform to laws, see § 120.013



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate buildings, accessories, and fire escapes, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-30-4



§ 92.096  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or his or her assistants and the
Building Inspector to inspect all apparatus to be installed and its location,
to make or cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and
accessibility of regular and emergency exits in all such public places.



(1969 Code, § 9-104)



§ 92.097  FIRE EXTINGUISHING EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   All fire extinguishers must be of an approved type.



   (B)   Fire extinguishers of all types must be kept filled with the
proper extinguishing agent at all times.



   (C)   All fire extinguishers of the soda-acid or foam type must be
properly recharged at least once a year and the date of recharge shown on a
tag attached to each extinguisher.



   (D)   All CO2 (carbon dioxide) fire extinguishers shall be kept
sealed at all times.  At any time the seal is broken, the extinguisher shall
be given a weight test to determine if the proper amount of CO2 is present,
recharged if necessary, and resealed.



   (E)   All fire extinguishing equipment shall be located in an easily
accessible and conspicuous place approved by the Fire Chief or an officer of
the Fire Department.



   (F)   The owners or person in charge of any building that is now
equipped or may hereafter be equipped with dry or wet line standpipes with
inlet or outlet connections shall cause these connections and fittings to be
kept well oiled, loose, and ready for immediate use in case of fire.  All
hoses shall be properly cared for at all times.



   (G)   Prior to the installation of any fire extinguishers or fire
extinguishing equipment, the Fire Chief shall be consulted as to the proper
type, size, and location of the installation.



   (H)   No extinguisher of the vaporizing liquid type, carbon
tetrachloride, shall be installed in any location where any number of people
are allowed to congregate, such as lobbies or auditoriums.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any fire
apparatus or appliance except for inspection or in case of emergency.



(1969 Code, § 9-105)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.098  SCHOOL FIRE DRILLS; CONFORMANCE TO STANDARDS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the principal or other person in
charge of the pupils in every school in the city to establish and maintain a
good and efficient fire drill which shall be practiced at least twice a month
during the time the building is used for school purposes.  A written report
shall be made by the principal or person in charge of the building of each
fire drill held, and of the time elapsed from the first signal until the last
person was out.



   (B)   Schools shall be equipped and operated in conformity with the
School Safety Code promulgated by the State Department of Education.



(1969 Code, § 9-107)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.099  DOORS TO OPEN OUTWARD.



   All public buildings which may be or are used for church, school, opera
performance, theater, lecture room, hotel, public meeting, or for similar
purposes, or which may be or are used for the collection of people for
worship, amusement, or instruction, and all buildings used for stores to
which the public is invited, shall be so built that all doors leading from
the main hall or place of assembly shall open outward; all means of egress
for persons within these buildings shall be by means of doors which shall
open outward from the main hall and from the building.



(1969 Code, § 9-108)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.100  THEATER OR HALL EXIT LIGHTS.



   In all theaters and public meeting halls, a red light illuminating the
word “Exit” shall be kept burning over each regular and emergency exit
while the theater or hall is occupied by an audience or by patrons.



(1969 Code, § 9-109)  Penalty, see § 92.999



PUBLIC GATHERINGS



§ 92.115  PUBLIC GATHERINGS; APPROPRIATE BUILDING REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to hold, manage, and conduct any public meeting or
public entertainment of any kind in the city in any premises other than a
building constructed in full compliance with the ordinances and laws
pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater, or lodge room purposes.



(1969 Code, § 9-120)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Cross-reference:



   Premises for public amusements must conform to laws, see § 120.013



§ 92.116  EXIT AND SEATING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises
used for public gathering purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons
attending, and there shall be at least 2 separate exits located at least 30
feet apart.  There shall be 2 lineal feet of doorway or exit space for each
100 people accommodated.



   (B)   Any stands or rows of seats used in the premises shall be so
constructed as to be safe for the use designed, and shall be sufficiently
strong to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the
construction of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than 100
pounds per square foot.  It shall be unlawful to admit to any premises a
number of persons to exceed the number of actual seats maintained for their
accommodation.



(1969 Code, § 9-124)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.117  DOOR STANDARDS.



   All doors or gates on exits from premises used for public gathering
purposes shall open outward, and no exit shall be so constructed or locked
that egress from inside the premises is blocked.



(1969 Code, § 9-125)  Penalty, see § 92.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 425, Act 55, § 1



§ 92.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Whoever violates § 92.002 of this code is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed $500,
or imprisoned in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to
exceed 6 months, or both.



(1969 Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. 1972-6, passed 7-24-1972)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section



Health Officer



   93.01   Appointment



   93.02   Duties



   93.03   Reports; recommendations



Nuisances; Public Health



   93.30   Endangering public health



   93.31   Public place; common drinking cups prohibited



   93.32   Water pollution or obstruction a nuisance



   93.33   Stagnant pool a nuisance



   93.34   Specified and unspecified nuisances prohibited



Contagious Disease Prevention



   93.45   Contagious or epidemic disease; report required



   93.46   Quarantine authority



   93.47   Spreading contagious disease unlawful



   93.48   Food delivery to quarantined premises; container removal



Air Pollution



   93.60   Air pollution; rules adopted



   93.61   Enforcement; violations



   93.62   Combustible refuse; refuse on public ways



   93.63   Outdoor burning



   93.64   Prohibition of burning yard waste and landscape waste



Weeds and Excessive Vegetation



   93.75   Weeds a nuisance; owner responsibility



   93.76   Excessive vegetation height a nuisance



   93.77   Abatement; assessment for costs



   93.78   Lien; notice



   93.79   Foreclosure of lien for nonpayment; disposition of proceeds



   93.80   City Attorney authority to act



Pest Control



   93.90   Pest control activities



Statutory reference:



   Authority to define and abate nuisances, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-60-2



   Authority to promulgate health regulations, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-20-5



HEALTH OFFICER



§ 93.01  APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Health Officer, an executive
office of the city; he or she shall be appointed by the Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 12-29)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create necessary office, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
4-5-4



§ 93.02  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce all ordinances
containing provisions for the protection of public health and to make
inspections of foodstuffs and of the premises used for storing or selling of
provisions as may be provided by ordinance; he or she shall perform such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 12-30)



§ 93.03  REPORTS; RECOMMENDATIONS.



   The Health Officer shall make reports to the City Council as may be
required.  He or she shall also make recommendations for rulings, orders, or
ordinances respecting the public health whenever he or she is requested to do
so, or whenever he or she deems it necessary or advisable.



(1969 Code, § 12-32)



NUISANCES; PUBLIC HEALTH



§ 93.30  ENDANGERING PUBLIC HEALTH.



   It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public
health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public.



(1969 Code, § 12-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.31  PUBLIC PLACE; COMMON DRINKING CUPS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, or cups,
dipper, or other similar utensil, for the use of more than 1 person in any
public hall, theater, store, or other place frequented by the public.



(1969 Code, § 12-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.32  WATER POLLUTION OR OBSTRUCTION A NUISANCE.



   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or
pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the city.



(1969 Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 740, Act 55, § 221



§ 93.33  STAGNANT POOL A NUISANCE.



   Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance
to remain or exist on any property under his or her control.



(1969 Code, § 12-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.34  SPECIFIED AND UNSPECIFIED NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence
of any nuisance on any property under his or her control. This shall include
any use of property, substances, or things within the city, emitting or
causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors
or stenches which are repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons
and which annoy, discomfort, injure, or inconvenience the health of any
persons within the city. The Chief of Police, the Health Officer, or designee
are hereby authorized to abate any such nuisances existing in the city,
whether these nuisances are specifically recognized by ordinance or not.



(1969 Code, § 12-5)  (Ord. 2006-30, passed 9-11-2006; Am. Ord. 2009-7,
passed 6-8-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CONTAGIOUS DISEASE PREVENTION



§ 93.45  CONTAGIOUS OR EPIDEMIC DISEASE; REPORT REQUIRED.



   Every physician called in to care for or treat a person afflicted with
a contagious disease or any epidemic disease shall make a report to the
Health Officer of the disease within 24 hours after being called in.  In
case no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of the person in
charge of or having the care of that person to make a report within 24 hours
from the time the disease is recognized.



(1969 Code, § 12-58)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.46  QUARANTINE AUTHORITY.



   The Health Officer shall have charge of the enforcement of quarantine
rules; he or she shall have the power and the authority to place any premises
within which a contagious or epidemic disease occurs under quarantine, and
the Health Officer shall determine the time when the quarantine ends.



(1969 Code, § 12-59)



Statutory reference:



   Reports of diseases required by law are confidential and maker of
report is immune from slander or libel suit, see ILCS Chapter 745, Act 45, §
1



§ 93.47  SPREADING CONTAGIOUS DISEASE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, willfully or carelessly,
any contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the same.



(1969 Code, § 12-60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.48  FOOD DELIVERY TO QUARANTINED PREMISES; CONTAINER REMOVAL.



   No person engaged in the delivery of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall enter any premises which are quarantined because of
existence of a contagious or epidemic disease; no containers or bottles shall
be removed from any quarantined premises until the termination of the
quarantine; and no container which has been left at the premises during the
quarantine shall be placed in use for carrying food or drink until it has
been thoroughly sterilized.



(1969 Code, § 12-61)  Penalty, see § 10.99



AIR POLLUTION



§ 93.60  AIR POLLUTION; RULES ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by reference that code known as Rules and
Regulations Governing the Control of Air Pollution, as amended March 30,
1967, as promulgated by the State Air Pollution Control Board.  The code
adopted shall be in force as fully as if it were set out verbatim herein.



(1969 Code, § 12-43)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt technical codes, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
1-3-1et seq.



§ 93.61  ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of the code adopted in § 93.60 of this code
shall be enforced by the Health Officer.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to fail to do any
act required by the code adopted in § 93.60, to do any act contrary to the
code, or to fail to obtain any permit or license required by the code; and
any person who has been convicted of an offense under this subchapter shall
be punished as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 12-44)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to legislate against air pollution, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-19.1-11



§ 93.62  COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE; REFUSE ON PUBLIC WAYS.



   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such
a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw away any refuse of any
kind in any alley, street, or other public way in the city.



(1969 Code, § 12-45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Fire Prevention, see Chapter 92



§ 93.63  OUTDOOR BURNING.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability.  This section is intended to
promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health,
comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city
due to air pollution and fire hazards of open burning, outdoor burning and
refuse burning. Open burning, outdoor burning and refuse burning are
prohibited in the city unless the burning is specifically permitted by this
section. This section applies to all outdoor burning and refuse burning
within the city. This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or
natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances;



      (2)   Burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating
device within a building used for human or animal habitation unless the
material being burned includes refuse as defined in this section;



      (3)   The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or
kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance
activities.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CAMPFIRE.  A small outdoor fire, no larger than 4 feet wide by 4
feet deep by 4 feet high, intended for recreation or cooking not including a
fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.



      CLEAN WOOD. Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or
coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with
preservatives and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.



      FIRE CHIEF.  Chief of the City of Paris Fire Department or other
person authorized by the Fire Chief.



      OUTDOOR BURNING.  Open burning or burning in an outdoor furnace.



      OPEN BURNING.  Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney.



      OUTDOOR FURNACE.  A wood-fired, pellet-fired, or corn-fired
furnace, stove or boiler that is not located within a building intended for
habitation by humans or domestic animals.



      REFUSE.  Any waste material except clean wood.



   (C)   Materials that may not be burned.  Unless a specific written
approval has been obtained from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
the following materials may not be burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn
barrel, furnace, stove or any other indoor or outdoor incineration or heating
device:



      (1)   Rubbish or garbage including but not limited to food
wastes, food wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials,
furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other
household or business wastes.



      (2)   Green grass, green leaves or other green vegetation.



      (3)   Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in
a heating device for energy recovery subject to appropriate Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency restrictions.



      (4)   Asphalt and products containing asphalt.



      (5)   Treated or painted wood including but not limited to
plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted,
varnished or treated with preservatives.



      (6)   Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon,
PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films
and plastic containers.



      (7)   Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like
products.



      (8)   Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office
paper or other paper products.



   (D)   Outdoor furnaces.  An outdoor furnace may be installed and
used in the city only in accordance with the following provisions:



      (1)   The outdoor furnace shall not be used to burn any of the
prohibited materials listed in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   As of October 30, 2012, no person shall install an
outdoor furnace unless it has been qualified through the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s voluntary outdoor hydronic heater program to meet the
Phase 2 particulate matter limits.  Each installed unit shall have a U.S.
EPA white tag signifying that it meets the Phase 2 emission limit affixed in
a readily visible or accessible location.  Existing outdoor furnaces
installed in accordance with the then City of Paris Ordinances will be
allowed to remain in place as long as their operation does not cause
environmental or nuisance issues as determined by the City of Paris Health
Officer.



      (3)    No person shall operate an outdoor furnace from May 1
through September 30 unless the unit has been qualified to meet the Phase 2
emission limit in division (D)(2) of this section.



      (4)   The owner or occupant of the property shall obtain an
outdoor furnace permit from the City Clerk in accordance with division (F) of
this section.



   (E)   Fire department practice burns. Notwithstanding divisions (A)
and (C) of this section, the City of Paris Fire Department may burn a
standing building if necessary for fire fighting practice and if the practice
burn complies with the requirements of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   (F)   Outdoor furnace permits. The owner or occupant of the property
shall obtain a permit for an outdoor furnace when the furnace is first
installed or, in the case of units installed prior to the effective date of
this section, within 30 days of adoption. No outdoor furnace may be installed
without obtaining a permit from the city and paying the permit fee
established by the Paris City Council. This section shall apply to all
outdoor furnaces installed within the city.



      (1)   A permit issued under this section shall require
compliance with all applicable provisions of this section.



      (2)   Installation of an outdoor furnace without obtaining a
permit shall be a violation of this section.



      (3)   Any violation of this section shall void the permit.



      (4)   No outdoor furnace already in operation prior to the
effective date of this section may be extended, enlarged, or restored beyond
75% of its original value without being brought into full compliance with
this section.



   (G)   Liability.  A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire
shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability
from damage caused by the fire.



   (H)   Right of entry and inspection.  The Fire Chief, Code
Compliance Officer, or any authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the city who presents credentials may inspect any property
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
section. If the owner or occupant of the premises denies access to the
property for this purpose, a special inspection warrant may be obtained in
accordance with Illinois Statutes.



   (I)   Permit fees.  The fee for a permit required for the
installation of an outdoor furnace in division (F) of this section shall be
$10.



   (J)   Enforcement and penalties.



      (1)   The Fire Chief, Police Chief, The Code Enforcement
Officer and their representatives are authorized to enforce the provisions of
this section.



      (2)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to penalties as provided in § 10.99.



(1969 Code, § 12-46)  (Ord. 1968-26, passed 6-17-1968; Am. Ord. 1999-26,
passed 6-28-1999; Am. Ord. 2006-06, passed 1-23-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-20,
passed 10-22- 2012; Am. Ord. 2015-4, passed 4-13-2015)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.64  PROHIBITION ON BURNING YARD WASTE AND LANDSCAPE WASTE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any yard waste or landscape waste,
including, but not limited to, leaves, twigs, sticks, tree limbs, bushes,
brush or like material, to be burned outdoors.  There is an exception for
recreational campfires and other approved activities as set forth in § 93.63
of this code.



   (B)   Punishment shall be that as directed in § 10.99 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 12-47)  (Ord. 1968-26, passed 6-17-1968; Am. Ord. 1997-12,
passed 4-14-1997; Am. Ord. 1999-26, passed 6-28-1999; Am. Ord. 2010-4, passed
3-22-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Emission of noxious or dangerous odors defined as a nuisance, see ILCS
Chapter 740, Act 55, § 221



WEEDS AND EXCESSIVE VEGETATION



§ 93.75  WEEDS A NUISANCE; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Any weeds such as jimson weed, poison ivy, burdock, ragweed,
thistle, cocklebur, wild lettuce, and all other weeds of a like kind, found
growing in any lot or tract of land or in any alley or on any boulevard in
the city, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such places. 



   (B)   Property owners and the occupants thereof are hereby made
liable for the destruction of weeds growing on their own property and also
those found growing in the alleys and on the boulevards adjoining their
property.



(1969 Code, § 25-11)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to provide for weed destruction at expense of owner of
premises, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-6



§ 93.76  EXCESSIVE VEGETATION HEIGHT A NUISANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any other uncultivated
plants, including hay crops, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other
ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding 8 inches anywhere in the
city; any such plants exceeding this height limit are hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



(1969 Code, § 25-12)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961; Am. Ord. 1991-11,
passed 7-8-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.77  ABATEMENT; ASSESSMENT FOR COSTS.



   Any nuisance, as defined in this subchapter, may be abated by the city,
and the expense of the abatement shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists.  The cost of the
abatement shall include an assessment of $50 per day plus costs for removal
of nuisance.



(1969 Code, § 25-13)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961; Am. Ord. 1991-11,
passed 7-8-1991; Am. Ord. 2004-32, passed 8-9-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-20-6, 11-20-7



§ 93.78  LIEN; NOTICE.



   (A)   Charges for abatement for a nuisance defined in this
subchapter made by the city shall be a lien upon the premises where the
nuisance is abated.



   (B)   Whenever a bill for these charges remains unpaid for 60 days
after it has been rendered, the City Clerk may file with the Recorder of
Deeds of the county a statement of claim of lien.  This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs
incurred and the date the weeds were cut, and a notice that the city claims a
lien for this amount.



   (C)   Notice of the lien shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his or her address is known.



   (D)   Failure of the City Clerk to record a lien under this section
or to mail the prescribed notice, or the failure of the owner to receive the
notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for these charges as
provided in § 93.79 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 25-14)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-7



§ 93.79  FORECLOSURE OF LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges for nuisance abatement
shall be sold for nonpayment of the charges, and the proceeds of the sale
shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting the costs, as is the case
with the foreclosure of statutory liens.  These foreclosure proceedings
shall be in equity in the name of the city.



(1969 Code, § 25-15)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961)



§ 93.80  CITY ATTORNEY AUTHORITY TO ACT.



   The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute lien
foreclosure proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over the matter, against any property for which such bill has
remained unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered.



(1969 Code, § 25-16)  (Ord. 1961-23, passed 8-14-1961)



PEST CONTROL



§ 93.90  PEST CONTROL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   The city shall provide pest control activities on any parcel
of private property located within the within the city limits if, after
reasonable notice, the owners of that parcel refuse or neglect to prevent the
ingress of pests to their property or to exterminate pests on their property.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, PESTS means undesirable
arthropods (including certain insects, spiders, mites, ticks and related
organisms), wood infesting organisms, rats, mice, and other obnoxious and
undesirable animals, but does not include a feral cat, a companion animal as
that term is defined in the Humane Care of Animals Act, ILCS Chapter 510, Act
70, § 1 et seq., animals as that term is defined in the Illinois Diseased
Animals Act, ILCS Chapter 510, Act 50, § 1 et seq., or animals protected by
the Wildlife Code, ILCS Chapter 520, Act 5, § 1 et seq.



   (C)   The municipality may collect from the owner of the underlying
property the cost of removal, which includes the total cost of all pest
control activities, and these removal costs shall become a lien upon the
property in accordance with ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-15 or 11-20-15.1
for abandoned residential property.



(Ord. 2016-19, passed 9-26-2016)



CHAPTER 94:  STREET TREES



Section



   94.01   Planting trees in streets; permit required



   94.02   Tree placement restrictions



   94.03   Removal of street trees; permit required



   94.04   Injury to trees unlawful



   94.05   Signs on trees unlawful



   94.06   Trees causing obstruction or danger; trimming or removal



   94.07   Attaching wire or rope to trees; permission required



   94.08   Franchisees; keeping wires and poles away from trees;
trimming



   94.09   Protecting trees from gas leaks



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 96



§ 94.01  PLANTING TREES IN STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit
therefor.  Applications for permits shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall be referred by him or her to the City Council.  All trees and shrubs
so planted shall be placed subject to the direction and approval of the City
Council.



(1969 Code, § 25-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.02  TREE PLACEMENT RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted in
any parkway within the city, any tree or shrub less than 3 feet from the
outer line of the sidewalk.  No tree shall be planted in parkways or streets
at a distance less than 8 feet from any sidewalk or intersecting street or
alley, and no shrub shall be planted in any parkway or any street at a
distance less than 25 feet from any crosswalk or intersecting street or alley.



(1969 Code, § 25-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.03  REMOVAL OF STREET TREES; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub or portion
thereof in any street, parkway, or other public place without having first
secured a permit therefor.  Applications for permits shall be made to the
City Clerk and shall be referred by him or her to the City Council before
permission shall be granted.



(1969 Code, § 25-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  INJURY TO TREES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public
place.



(1969 Code, § 25-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.05  SIGNS ON TREES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to
any tree or shrub in any street, parkway, or other public place.



(1969 Code, § 25-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.06  TREES CAUSING OBSTRUCTION OR DANGER; TRIMMING OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or
other public place in the city at a less height than 12 feet or in such a way
as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on that public place shall
be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which
the tree or shrub grows, so that the obstruction shall cease.



   (B)   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on
or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the
premises on which the tree grows or stands.



   (C)   The Superintendent of Streets may trim or remove any tree or
shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done
away with.



(1969 Code, § 25-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.07  ATTACHING WIRE OR ROPE TO TREES; PERMISSION REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in
any public street, parkway, or other place without the permission of the City
Council.



(1969 Code, § 25-33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.08  FRANCHISEES; KEEPING WIRES AND POLES AWAY FROM TREES; TRIMMING.



   Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires
in the streets, alleys, or other public places in the city shall, in the
absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep wires
and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in these places so far
as may be possible and shall keep all trees and shrubs properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Streets, so that no
injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by
their contact.



(1969 Code, § 25-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.09  PROTECTING TREES FROM GAS LEAKS.



   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the city shall, in
the absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep
these pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or
shrubs.



(1969 Code, § 25-35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 95:  ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES



Section



   95.01   Title



   95.02   Definitions



   95.03   Abandoned or wrecked vehicle a nuisance; exceptions



   95.04   Notice to remove; owner responsibility



   95.05   Removal by city; notice



   95.06   Disposition; appraisal; public sale



   95.07   Redemption by owner



   95.08   Owner liability for expenses



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Abandoned, Wrecked,
Dismantled, or Inoperative Motor Vehicle Ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975)



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A operable motor vehicle that is more than 25 years of
age or a bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the highways only
going to and returning from a antique auto show or exhibition, or for
servicing or demonstration, or a firefighting vehicle more that 20 years old
which is not used as firefighting equipment but is used only for the purpose
of exhibition or demonstration.



   DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC.  The Chief of Police of the city.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle, as defined in this section,
which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or
plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially
dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle which is self- propelled and designed to
travel along the ground; and shall include, but not be limited to,
automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks,
tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, and trailers.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any real property within the city which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any street or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel; and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is always mandatory and not merely
directory.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975; Am. Ord. 2002-16,
passed 6-10-2002; Am. Ord. 2016-5, passed 4-25-2016)



§ 95.03  ABANDONED OR WRECKED VEHICLE A NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking,
storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is abandoned,
unlicensed, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or in a
partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or
private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours.
The presence of an abandoned, unlicensed, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative,
rusted, junked, or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts thereof, on private
or public property, is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated
as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any vehicle enclosed within a building on private
property;



      (2)   Any vehicle held in connection with a business
enterprise lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city;



      (3)   Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically
adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways;



      (4)   Any vehicles maintained for demolition derby purposes
under the following circumstances:



         (a)   This exception shall only apply from May 1 for the
respective year through September 30 of that same year;



         (b)   There may only be two vehicles visible to the
general public on each property;



         (c)   The vehicles must be maintained on the driveway
and not extend over any sidewalk area and not to be maintained on the
boulevard area of the property;



         (d)   There are to be no parts or tires for the
vehicles, or any other vehicles, accumulating in the yard where these
vehicles are maintained;



         (e)   The property where the vehicles are maintained
must be kept in an orderly fashion without car parts, various car pieces,
tools or equipment visible to the public other than during use in active
repair or maintenance.



      (5)   Any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection
purposes.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975; Am. Ord. 2004-42,
passed 9-13-2004; Am. Ord. 2016-6, passed 4-25-2016)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  NOTICE TO REMOVE; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Notice to remove.  Whenever it comes to the attention of the
director of traffic that any nuisance as defined in § 95.03 of this code
exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of
the land where the nuisance exists, or in the case there is no such occupant,
then upon the owner of the property or his or her agent, notifying them of
the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time
specified in this chapter.



   (B)   Responsibility for removal.  Upon proper notice and
opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on
which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for
its removal.  In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner
or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for
the expenses incurred.



   (C)   Notice procedure.  The director of traffic of the city shall
give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where
it is located, at least 10 days before the time of compliance.  It shall
constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous
place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate
copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private
property at his or her last known address.



   (D)   Content of notice.  The notice shall contain the request for
removal within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall
advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its
designee shall undertake the removal with the cost of removal to be levied
against the owner or occupant of the property.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.05  REMOVAL BY CITY; NOTICE.



   (A)   Removal of motor vehicle from property.  If the violation
described in the notice has not been remedied within the 10-day period of
compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely
filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by
the City Council or its designee, the Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and
remove it from the premises.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter
upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   Notice of removal.  Within 48 hours of the removal of the
vehicle, the Chief of Police shall given notice to the registered owner of
the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private
property from which the vehicle was removed, that the vehicle, or vehicles,
has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter.  The notice
shall give the location where the vehicle, or vehicles, is stored, and the
costs incurred by the city for removal.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975; Am. Ord. 1998-33,
passed 12-15-1998)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.06  DISPOSITION; APPRAISAL; PUBLIC SALE.



   (A)   Disposition of vehicles.  Upon removing a vehicle under the
provisions of § 95.05(B) above, the city shall after 10 days cause it to be
appraised.  If the vehicle is appraised at $75 or less, the Chief of Police
shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle, including
the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of
the vehicle.  The Chief of Police, after complying with the above, may
summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale.  If the
vehicle is appraised at over $75, the Chief of Police shall give notice of
public sale not less than 30 days before the date of the proposed sale.



   (B)   Contents of public sale notice.  The notice of sale shall
state:



      (1)   The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of
the city;



      (2)   A description of the vehicle, including make, model,
license number, and any other information which will accurately identify the
vehicle;



      (3)   The terms of the sale; and



      (4)   The date, time, and place of the sale.



   (C)   Public sale.  The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and
best bidder.  At the time of payment of the purchase price, the Chief of
Police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of
which to be given to the purchaser, and the copy thereof to be filed with the
Clerk of the city.  Should the sale for any reason by invalid, the city’s
liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975)



§ 95.07  REDEMPTION BY OWNER.



   The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter
may redeem the vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the sale
or destruction thereof, upon proof of ownership and payment to the City Clerk
of that sum as the director of traffic may determine and fix for the actual
and reasonable expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising
expenses, not to exceed $50 plus $10 per day for storage for each vehicle
redeemed.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975; Am. Ord. 2003-33,
passed 11-10-2003)



§ 95.08  OWNER LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES.



   Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which
abandoned vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered
expenses incurred by the city in the removal, a lien shall be placed upon the
property for the amount of the expense.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975; Am. Ord. 1998-33,
passed 12-15-1998; Am. Ord. 2002-16, passed 6-10-2002)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $200.  Each act in violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 16-121)  (Ord. 1975-26, passed 10-27-1975)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Superintendent of Streets



   96.001   Establishment; appointment



   96.002   Duties



   96.003   Report of violations



   96.004   Supervision of public ways; enforcement



Construction; Maintenance



   96.015   Construction; permit required



   96.016   Construction bond



   96.017   Conformance to pavement specifications



   96.018   Good repair required



   96.019   Duty to report defects



   96.020   Excavations or defects; barricades and lights



   96.021   Disturbing barricades unlawful



   96.022   Injury to new pavement unlawful



   96.023   Injury to streets and sidewalks unlawful



Use of Ways; Obstructions; Encroachments



   96.035   Obstructions restricted



   96.036   Obstruction of alley prohibited



   96.037   Encroachments unlawful



   96.038   Encroachments; definitions; prohibition



   96.039   Deposits on streets restricted



   96.040   Obstruction of drains prohibited



   96.041   Selling or advertising on public ways restricted



   96.042   Poles and wires restricted



   96.043   Gasoline pumps or tanks prohibited



   96.044   Openings; permit required



   96.045   Unlawful fences



   96.046   Games



   96.047   Animals on sidewalks; restrictions



   96.048   Bicycles and skateboards; restrictions



Driveways



   96.060   Construction; permit required



   96.061   Permit fee



   96.062   Intersection with sidewalk; grade; surface finish



   96.063   Specifications apply



   96.064   Repair and maintenance



Excavations



   96.075   Permit required



   96.076   Application; content; time limit



   96.077   Fees; bond; deposit



   96.078   Manner of excavation; temporary sidewalks



   96.079   Surface restoration; inspection



   96.080   Tunneling; where required



   96.081   Barricades, warning devices, and lights; traffic



   96.082   Clearance for vital structures, traffic crossings



   96.083   Protection and relocation of facilities



   96.084   Abandoned substructures



   96.085   Protection of adjoining property



   96.086   Excavated material; storage; cleanup



   96.087   Protection of watercourses



   96.088   Breaking through pavement; depth of structures



   96.089   Backfill; tests; open trench length



   96.090   Prompt completion; emergency work



   96.091   Noise, dust, and debris



   96.092   Monuments; preservation



   96.093   Inspections; enforcement authority



   96.094   Facility location records



Awnings



   96.105   Permit required; fee



   96.106   Permit term



   96.107   Construction standards



   96.108   Clearance above public way



   96.109   Inspections; insecure awning; securing or removal



House Numbering



   96.120   House numbering required; plan



   96.121   Chart of numbers



   96.122   Building number posting requirements



   96.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   City Engineer, see §§ 32.100et seq.



   Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements, see §§ 31.085et seq.



   Construction Operations, see §§ 151.35et seq.



   Deposit of refuse on streets prohibited, see § 54.02



   Moving Buildings, see §§ 151.50et seq.



   Scaffolds and ladders, see § 133.35



   Street Trees, see Chapter 94



Statutory reference:



   Authority over streets, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-80-1et seq.



SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS



§ 96.001  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Streets, who
shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements and
assigned to his or her department.



(1969 Code, § 22-32)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to appoint superintendent of streets, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 3-7-1



§ 96.002  DUTIES.



   The Superintendent of Streets shall be charged with the duty of keeping
the streets and alleys clean, free from obstruction, and in good repair.  He
or she shall see that all street drains are free and unobstructed, oversee
traffic maintenance operations and park maintenance operations. He or she
shall perform other duties as may be required by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-33)  (Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 7-11-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prescribe duties of superintendent of streets, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3-7-2



§ 96.003  REPORT OF VIOLATIONS.



   The Superintendent of Streets shall report to the City Council any
ordinance violation with relation to the care or use of streets, alleys, or
sidewalks in the city, of which he or she may become cognizant.



(1969 Code, § 22-34)



§ 96.004  SUPERVISION OF PUBLIC WAYS; ENFORCEMENT.



   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public ways in the
city shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Streets; he or
she shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance and code
provisions relating to these public places, except traffic ordinances, and is
hereby authorized to enforce those ordinances.



(1969 Code, § 22-1)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of conservators of the peace, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
3.1-15-25



CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE



§ 96.015  CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to carry on any construction on, or lay any
pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, or to
repair the same without first having secured a permit therefor. 
Applications for these permits shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall
state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof,
and the person or firm who is to do the actual construction work.  No
permits required by this section shall be issued except on order of the City
Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-2)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate openings in streets and other municipal property,
see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-7



§ 96.016  CONSTRUCTION BOND.



   Each applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall file a
bond in the amount and with surety to be approved by the City Council,
conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage resulting from the
work undertaken or the manner of doing the same; however, if the city has
secured a blanket policy to cover this risk, then no such bond shall be
required.



(1969 Code, § 22-4)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.017  CONFORMANCE TO PAVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS.



   All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications on file in the office of the City Clerk or approved by the
City Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-5)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.018  GOOD REPAIR REQUIRED.



   All public street, alley, and sidewalk pavement shall be kept in good
repair.  The repair work, whether done by the city or by the abutting owner,
shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Streets.



(1969 Code, § 22-6)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.019  DUTY TO REPORT DEFECTS.



   It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming
cognizant of any defect in any street or alley or sidewalk, or any
obstruction thereof, to report the same to the Superintendent of Streets as
soon as possible.



(1969 Code, § 22-7)



§ 96.020  EXCAVATIONS OR DEFECTS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.



   (A)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street,
sidewalk, or other public place, or making an excavation in any such place,
shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle
by reason of the work; these barricades shall be protected by light at
nighttime.



   (B)   Any defective pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury;
any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place
shall guard the opening or excavation while the same remains open by proper
barricades and lights.



(1969 Code, § 22-8)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.021  DISTURBING BARRICADES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or
lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street, alley, or sidewalk.



(1969 Code, § 22-9)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.022  INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon,
or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft,
newly laid pavement.



(1969 Code, § 22-10)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.023  INJURY TO STREETS AND SIDEWALKS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street, or alley pavement.



(1969 Code, § 22-11)  Penalty, see § 96.999



USE OF WAYS; OBSTRUCTIONS; ENCROACHMENTS



§ 96.035  OBSTRUCTIONS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any
obstruction of any street, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be
specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Superintendent of Streets when
necessary in an emergency or in connection with any lawful construction,
repair, or removal work.



(1969 Code, § 22-12)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent street obstructions and encroachments, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3



§ 96.036  OBSTRUCTION OF ALLEY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any alley dedicated to public
use by placing or permitting trash and garbage containers, fences,
overhanging trees, or any other object which will interfere with the freedom
of traffic along the alley or interfere with the passage of equipment for
maintaining the alley.



   (B)   The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements is
authorized to remove all objects obstructing and interfering with the use and
maintenance of the alleys of the city.



(1969 Code, § 22-13)  (Ord. 1968-38, passed 9-23-1968)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.037  ENCROACHMENTS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property.



(1969 Code, § 22-14)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent street obstructions and encroachments, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-3



§ 96.038  ENCROACHMENTS; DEFINITIONS; PROHIBITION.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA.  The area lying between the project
right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by
concurrence in the establishment of the project right- of-way lines, will
permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction operations.



      ENCROACHMENT.  Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure
or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road
signs), which is placed, located, or maintained in, on, under, or over, any
portion of the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no
project right-of-way line has been established.



      PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT.  Any existing awning, marquee,
advertising sign, or similar overhanging structure supported from a building
immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a
sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free
and safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of
overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs
supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and
not confined by adjacent buildings.



      PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The areas within the project right-of-way
lines established jointly by the city, state, and the Federal Highway
Administration which will be free of encroachments except as herein defined.



      ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The areas existing or acquired by
dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by
temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect.



   (B)   Encroachment prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or
cause to be retained, any encroachment as hereinabove defined within the
limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established.



(1969 Code, § 22-14.1)  (Ord. 1980-17, passed 4-28-1980)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.039  DEPOSITS ON STREETS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass, or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal, or
property.



   (B)   Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets
preparatory to delivery or use, provided that the deposit does not reduce the
usable width of the roadway at the point to less than 18 feet; provided that
this material or coal, other than material to be used in actual building
construction, shall not be permitted to remain on the street for more than 3
hours.



   (C)   Any deposited material or coal shall be guarded by lights if
the same remains upon any street after nighttime.



   (D)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width is not thereby
reduced to less than 4 feet and provided that no such article shall remain on
the walk for more than 1/2 hour.



(1969 Code, § 22-15)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent deposits on streets, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-80-10



§ 96.040  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.



(1969 Code, § 22-16)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.041  SELLING OR ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, or
other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale,
or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any pavements, unless
express permission is given by the City Council, which is conditioned on the
permittee having insurance as specified by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-17)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate street, sidewalk sales, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-80-20



§ 96.042  POLES AND WIRES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any
poles or wires over any public street, alley, or other public way without
having first secured permission from the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-18)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate placement of poles, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-80-14



§ 96.043  GASOLINE PUMPS OR TANKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in
any public street, alley, or sidewalk.



(1969 Code, § 22-19)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.044  OPENINGS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway
in any public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the City
Council.  All lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable
strong cover or a railing to be approved by the Superintendent of Streets.



(1969 Code, § 22-3)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.045  UNLAWFUL FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain anywhere in the city a fence
equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes, or any similar device or any
electric charge sufficient to cause shock within 7 feet of the ground level.



(1969 Code, § 22-21)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate fences, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-30-1



§ 96.046  GAMES.



   It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place where those games cause unnecessary noise or
interfere with traffic or pedestrians.



(1969 Code, § 22-20)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.047  ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS; RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any domesticated animal,
except cats and dogs, access to any public sidewalk, boulevard, public
grounds or parks within the corporate city limits.  It shall further be
unlawful for any domestic animal owner (including cats and dogs)  to allow
any such animal to discharge excrement upon public sidewalks, boulevards,
public grounds, parks or on private property other than the owner of the
domesticated animal’s property, within the corporate city limits of this
city.



(1969 Code, § 22-22)  (Ord. 1982-13, passed 6-14-1982; Am. Ord. 2005-38,
passed 9-12-2005; Am. Ord. 2006-31, passed 10-9-2006)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.048  BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS; RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or use a skateboard or
bicycle on any public street, sidewalk, or other public property within the
district zoned as C-3 Central Business District and on Main Street and
Central Avenue extending south from the Central Business District to the
south side of Crawford Street within the city limits.  It shall also be
unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk within the district
zoned as C-3 Central Business District and on sidewalks from Main Street and
Central Avenue extending south from the Central Business District to the
south side of Crawford Street within the city limits.  It shall also be
unlawful for any person to ride or use a skateboard or bicycle on any public
or private school property or in Schwarz Park.  It shall further be unlawful
for any person to ride or use a skateboard or bicycle on private property
within the limits of the city unless specific permission has been received
from the owner of that property. 



(1969 Code, § 22-23)  (Ord. 2002-27, passed 8-26-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-12,
passed 6-23-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 2004-44,
passed 9-27-2004)  Penalty, see § 96.999



DRIVEWAYS



§ 96.060  CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any
sidewalk in the city without having first obtained a permit therefor;
applications for permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the fee required.



(1969 Code, § 22-58)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate use of sidewalks, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-80-13



§ 96.061  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for all construction permits required by this subchapter shall
be $1.



(1969 Code, § 22-59)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.062  INTERSECTION WITH SIDEWALK; GRADE; SURFACE FINISH.



   No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk.  The grade shall be as
nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk.  It shall be
unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the surface finish
crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery
and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of that portion vary from
the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.



(1969 Code, § 22-60)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.063  SPECIFICATIONS APPLY.



   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications adopted by the City Council and on file with the City Clerk
and shall not obstruct the surface drainage.



(1969 Code, § 22-61)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.064  REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.



   It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep it in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free from obstructions and
openings.



(1969 Code, § 22-62)  Penalty, see § 96.999



EXCAVATIONS



§ 96.075  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to tunnel
under or to make any excavation in any street, alley, or other public place
in the city without having obtained a permit as is herein required, or
without complying with the provisions of this subchapter or in violation of
or variance from the terms of any such permit.



(1969 Code, § 22-73)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate openings in streets and other municipal property,
see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-7



§ 96.076  APPLICATION; CONTENT; TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   Applications for these permits shall be made to the City
Clerk; and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel,
the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm, or corporation
doing the actual excavating work, and the name, firm, or corporation for whom
or which the work is being done; and shall contain an agreement that the
applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be
done.



   (B)   Each application for a permit required by this subchapter
shall state the length of time it is estimated will elapse from the
commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground,
or until the refill is made ready for the pavement to be put on by the city,
if the city restores the surface pavement.  It shall be unlawful to fail to
comply with this time limitation unless permission for an extension of time
is granted by the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 22-74)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.077  FEES; BOND; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   The fee for these permits shall be (amount per square foot):



      (1)   Excavation in asphalt or Portland cement concrete
pavement or surface:  $2;



      (2)   Excavation in brick pavement or surface:  $2;



      (3)   Excavation in oil treated street surface:  $1; or



      (4)   Excavation in untreated or unimproved street or
surface:  $.50.



   (B)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
therefor has filed with the City Clerk a bond in the sum of $50,000
conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, liability, or damages that
may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence, or manner of
guarding or constructing any such tunnel or excavation.  The bond shall have
as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as a surety
company.



   (C)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
therefor has deposited with the City Clerk a cash deposit in the sum of $40,
if no pavement is involved, and $1,000 if the excavation is in a paved area,
to ensure the proper restoration of the ground and the laying of the pavement
if any.  From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the city of
relaying the surface of the ground or pavement and of making the refill if
this is done by the city or at its expense, and the balance shall be returned
to the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is
completely refilled and the surface or pavement is restored.



(1969 Code, § 22-75)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.078  MANNER OF EXCAVATION; TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in
any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. 
Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining
ground; and in excavations the excavation shall not have anywhere below the
surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.



   (B)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits in
the making of these excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the
persons maintaining any such pipes, cables, or conduits or to the city
department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be
endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before
the pipes, cables, or conduits shall be disturbed.



   (C)   No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or
shrub or the roots thereof.



   (D)   If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users.  The temporary sidewalk is subject to inspection by
the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements and shall not be open for
use until approved by him or her.



(1969 Code, § 22-76)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.079  SURFACE RESTORATION; INSPECTION.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation making any excavation or
tunnel in or under any public street, alley, or other pubic place in the city
shall restore the surface to its original condition if there is no pavement
there.  Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in the tunnel
or excavation shall be left in the ground.



   (B)   Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall
be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant, in compliance with the
ordinances of the city and under the supervision of the Commissioner of
Streets and Public Improvements



   (C)   The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements shall from
time to time inspect or cause to be inspected all excavations and tunnels
being made in or under any public street, alley, or other public place in the
city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter.  Notice
shall be given to him or her at least 10 hours before the work of refilling
any such tunnel or excavation commences.



(1969 Code, § 22-77)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.080  TUNNELING; WHERE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in any portion of a street
or sidewalk in the city which is paved with a concrete or asphalt paving. 
Where necessary, and where a proper permit has been secured, tunnels may be
driven or excavated under any such pavement provided that upon completion of
the work involved the tunnel shall be backfilled with compacted sand.



(1969 Code, § 22-78)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.081  BARRICADES, WARNING DEVICES, AND LIGHTS; TRAFFIC.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an
excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and
warning devices necessary for safety of the general public.



   (B)   Barriers, warning signs, lights, and the like, shall conform
to the requirements of all applicable city ordinances.  Warning lights shall
be flares, torches, lanterns, electrical markers, or flashers used to
indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next
day.  Torches shall be open wick or flame flares or bombs generally used in
connection with roadway repairs or construction and operating on kerosene or
similar fluid.



   (C)   Lanterns shall burn kerosene or a similar fluid, and have
clear red or ruby globes.  Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light
at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance
for safety.  Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement,
but not to replace, light sources.  The City Council may restrict the use of
lanterns or open flame devices in fire hazard areas.



   (D)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that
during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near
normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general
public.



   (E)   When traffic conditions permit, the Superintendent of Public
Works may by written approval permit the closing of streets and alleys to all
traffic for a period of time prescribed by him or her, if in his or her
opinion it is necessary.  This written approval may require that the
permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general
public.  In those cases, the written approval shall not be valid until that
notice is given.



   (F)   Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or
other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with
the instructions of the Superintendent of Public Works.



(1969 Code, § 22-78)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.082  CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES, TRAFFIC CROSSINGS.



   (A)   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not
to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water
gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital
equipment as designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (B)   The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for 2 lanes of
vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings
for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet.  If any excavation
is made across any public street, alley, or sidewalk, adequate crossings
shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians.  If the street is not
wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent
sidewalk, a passageway at least 1/2 of the sidewalk width shall be maintained
along the sidewalk line.



(1969 Code, § 22-79)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.083  PROTECTION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility
without the written consent of Superintendent of Public Works and the owner
of the facility.  If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility,
this shall be done by its owner.  No facility owned by the city shall be
moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of that work be borne by
the permittee.  The cost of moving privately owned facilities shall be
similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the
person owning the facility. 



   (B)   The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be
in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to
support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across the work. 
The permittee shall secure approval of the method of support and protection
from the owner of the facility.  In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles,
wires, or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or
other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure,
the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof.  All damaged
facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the
expense of the repairs shall be charged to the permittee. 



   (C)   It is the intent of this section that the permittee shall
assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or
injury to anyone because of the facility damage and this assumption of
liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee.  The only exception
will be those instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence of
the owning utility.  The city shall not be made a party to any action
because of this section.  The permittee shall inform itself as to the
existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the same
against damage.



(1969 Code, § 22-79)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.084  ABANDONED SUBSTRUCTURES.



   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment
of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning,
using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall within 30 days after
the abandonment file with the Superintendent of Public Works a statement in
writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned.  If
the abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in the way,
of an installation of the city or any other public body, which installation
is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove the abandoned
substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation
for construction of the facility by the city or any other public body.



(1969 Code, § 22-80)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.085  PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.



   (A)   The permittee shall at all times and at his, her, or its own
expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing
proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. 
Where, in the protection of that property, it is necessary to enter upon
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting measures,
the permittee shall obtain consent from the owner of the private property for
that purpose, and if he or she cannot obtain this consent, the Superintendent
of Public Works may authorize him or her to enter the private premises solely
for the purpose of making the property safe. 



   (B)   The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect
all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during
the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage
to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly
to protect and carry out that work.  Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, the area shall be reseeded or the
sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been
backfilled as required in this subchapter.  All construction and maintenance
work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of
earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed
before the work began. 



   (C)   The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or
shrubs which exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent
of the appropriate city department or city official having supervision of the
property.



(1969 Code, § 22-80)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.086  EXCAVATED MATERIAL; STORAGE; CLEANUP.



   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the
trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in a manner so as not
to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property.  Where the confines of the area being
excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside
the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the Superintendent
of Public Works shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul
the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench
site at the time of backfilling.  It shall be the permittee’s
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary
arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.



   (B)   All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side
of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by
the Superintendent of Public Works.  Whenever necessary, in order to
expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe
boards or bins may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works to
prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.



   (C)   As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris
resulting from the work.  All cleanup operations at the location of the
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.  From
time to time, as may be ordered by the Superintendent of Public Works and in
any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall, at
his, her, or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused
materials of any kind resulting from the work, and upon failure to do so
within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the Superintendent of
Public Works, this work may be done by the Superintendent of Public Works and
the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be
liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.



(1969 Code, § 22-81)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.087  PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.



   (A)   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed
for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least 1 foot in width from
the face of that curb at the gutter line.  Whenever a gutter crosses an
intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times
maintained.



   (B)   The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all
surplus water, muck, silt, slickings, or other runoff pumped from excavations
or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for
any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.



(1969 Code, § 22-82)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.088  BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT; DEPTH OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Breaking through pavement.



      (1)   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the
Superintendent of Public Works when the use endangers existing substructures
or other property.



      (2)   Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required
when the nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants.  When
required, the depth of the cut shall be not less than 1 inch in depth;
however, depths greater than 1 inch may be required by the Superintendent of
Public Works when circumstances warrant.  Saw cutting may be required by the
Superintendent of Public Works outside of the limits of the excavation over
cave-outs, overbreaks, and small floating sections.



      (3)   Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of
excavations may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works to confine
pavement damage to the limits of the trench.



      (4)   Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest
score line or joint.



      (5)   Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and
overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.



      (6)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and
neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.



      (7)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or
parallel to the trench line.



      (8)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new
pavement may be required by the Superintendent of Public Works.



      (9)   The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement
damage existing prior to excavation unless his or her cut results in small
floating sections that may be unstable, in which case permittee shall remove
and pave the area.



   (B)   Substructure installation.  No person shall, without written
permission of the Superintendent of Public Works, install any substructure,
except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at a
vertical distance less than:



      (1)   Streets.  Twenty-four inches below the established flow
line of the nearest gutter.  If the flow line is not established, then the
depth shall be at a minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest
outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street;



      (2)   Parkways.



         (a)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 16
inches below established gutter grade when the substructure parallels the
parkway; and



         (b)   The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 12
inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when the
substructure is at right angles to the parkway.



      (3)   Other public places.  The minimum depth of any
substructure in any other public place shall be 12 inches below the surface.



   (C)   Future grade changes.  Nothing in this section shall impose a
duty upon the permittee to maintain the specifications as required herein
upon subsequent changes of grade in the surface unless the grade in the
substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public
street.



(1969 Code, § 22-83)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.089  BACKFILL; TESTS; OPEN TRENCH LENGTH.



   (A)   Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the
spoil shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the
upper level of the substructure.  Above the upper level of the substructure,
backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts
consistent with the type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation
specified by the City Council.  Broken pavement, large stones, roots, and
other debris shall not be used in the backfill.  The number and size of each
lift shall be dependent upon the type of soil involved.  The backfill shall
be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a
density condition not less than that existing prior to excavation unless
otherwise specified.  The Superintendent of Public Works may require soil
tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered
professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his or her
opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted.  In
order for the resurfacing to be permitted, the tests must show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the City
Council.  All expense of these tests shall be borne by the permittee.



   (B)   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time
shall be in accordance with existing ordinances or regulations.



(1969 Code, § 22-84)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.090  PROMPT COMPLETION; EMERGENCY WORK.



   (A)   After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall
prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the
excavation permit and shall promptly complete the work and restore the street
to its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the
public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.



   (B)   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public, or the public interest require that the excavation work be
performed as emergency work, the Superintendent of Public Works shall have
full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men
and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the
end that the excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.



   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the
making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life
or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making
repairs, provided that the person making the excavation shall apply to the
Superintendent of Public Works for such a permit on the first working day
after the work is commenced.



(1969 Code, § 22-85)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.091  NOISE, DUST, AND DEBRIS.



   Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in a manner
so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public
and occupants of neighboring property.  The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of
the excavation work, noise, dust, and unsightly debris and between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except in case of emergency as
herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise
of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property.



(1969 Code, § 22-86)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.092  MONUMENTS; PRESERVATION.



   Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of
any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or
disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the City Council so to do.  Permission to remove
or disturb these monuments, reference points, or bench marks shall only be
granted upon condition that the person applying for that permission shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument by the city.



(1969 Code, § 22-87)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.093  INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Superintendent of Public Works shall make inspections as are
reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this subchapter.  The
Superintendent of Public Works shall have the authority to promulgate and
cause to be enforced those rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 22-88)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)



§ 96.094  FACILITY LOCATION RECORDS.



   (A)   Every public utility, after the enactment of this subchapter,
shall maintain records showing the location of all of its underground
facilities, except relatively minor facilities which connect a particular
premises or building to a facility serving more than 1 premises or building,
and except oil or gas gathering or field lines.



   (B)   Every public utility shall maintain equipment which can locate
these facilities in the field.



(1969 Code, § 22-89)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)  Penalty, see §
96.999



AWNINGS



§ 96.105  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   No person shall erect or maintain any awning or rigid canopy over any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way in the city without having first
obtained a permit therefor.  Permits for awnings or canopies shall be issued
by the City Clerk upon payment of a fee of $10.



(1969 Code, § 22-95)  (Ord. 1994-21, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
96.999



Cross-reference:



   Advertising unlawful business, see § 131.16



   Disfiguring lawful signs, see § 131.18



   Posting bills, see § 131.15



   Signs, see Chapter 158



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate and prevent the use of streets for signs,
awnings, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-80-14



§ 96.106  PERMIT TERM.



   The period for which permits required by this subchapter shall run
shall be the same as the general license year.



(1969 Code, § 22-96)  (Ord. 1994-21, passed 7-11-1994)



§ 96.107  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   All awnings and canopies extending over any public sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public place must be securely fastened and constructed so
that there will be no danger of being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling
from any other cause.



(1969 Code, § 22-100)  (Ord. 1994-21, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.108  CLEARANCE ABOVE PUBLIC WAY.



   The lowest part of any canopy or of any nonrigid awning, or any support
thereof which extends over any public way, shall be at least 8 feet above the
level of the walk or public way over which it extends.



(1969 Code, § 22-101)  (Ord. 1994-21, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
96.999



§ 96.109  INSPECTIONS; INSECURE AWNING; SECURING OR REMOVAL.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect, or cause to
be inspected, every awning or canopy which extends over any sidewalk, street,
alley, or any public way.  If any awning or canopy is found to be insecurely
fastened, he or she shall report this fact to the owner of the awning or to
the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is fastened.  If the
awning or canopy is not made secure within 10 days after the notice it may be
torn down by the Fire Department on order of the Mayor.



(1969 Code, § 22-102)  (Ord. 1994-21, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
96.999



HOUSE NUMBERING



§ 96.120  HOUSE NUMBERING REQUIRED; PLAN.



   All lots, buildings, and structures in the city shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan.



   (A)   Court Street shall be the base or dividing line for numbering
houses on all streets or avenues running north and south; even numbers shall
be on the east side and odd numbers on the west side of the street.



   (B)   Main Street shall be the base or dividing line for all streets
or avenues running east and west; odd numbers shall be on the north side and
even numbers shall be on the south side of the street.



   (C)   There shall be 1 number assigned for each 25 feet of frontage,
and there shall be 100 numbers to each block.



(1969 Code, § 22-45)  Penalty, see § 96.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate numbering of houses and lots, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-80-18



§ 96.121  CHART OF NUMBERS.



   The City Clerk shall keep a chart showing the existing block number of
every lot in the city which shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.



(1969 Code, § 22-46)



§ 96.122  BUILDING NUMBER POSTING REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of each house in the city
to have placed thereon, either in the yard or on the house in a place visible
from the street, figures at least 2½ inches high, showing the number of the
house, building, or other structure owned or occupied by him or her; or if
after receiving notice to do so from the City Clerk, shall continue in his or
her failure to so number the house, building, or structure, shall be subject
to penalties as set forth in this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 22-47)  (Am. Ord. 1976-21, passed 18-23-1976)  Penalty, see
§ 96.999



§ 96.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Violation of § 96.047 of this code shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $1 nor more than $500 for each separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 22-22)  (Ord. 1982-13, passed 6-14-1982)



   (C)   A violation of § 96.048 of this code shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $75 nor more than $750 for each separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 22-23)  (Ord. 2002-27, passed 8-26-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-12,
passed 6-23-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-21, passed 8-11-2003)



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 96.075et seq. of this code shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



(1969 Code, § 22-90)  (Ord. 1985-30, passed 1-27-1986)



   (E)   A violation of § 96.122 of this code shall be punishable by a
fine of $1 for each day during or on which a failure to number occurs.



(1969 Code, § 22-47)  (Am. Ord. 1976-21, passed 18-23-1976)



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



Park Board



   97.001   Establishment



   97.002   Ex officio members



   97.003   Organization; meetings



   97.004   Powers and duties



   97.005   Park Board funds



City Parks



   97.020   Park Board administration



   97.021   Rules and regulations



   97.022   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   97.023   Curfew



Lakes and Boating



   97.035   Definitions



   97.036   Boat and operator licenses required



   97.037   Motorboat license fees



   97.038   License application



   97.039   Registration display



   97.040   Lake use regulations; state law adopted



   97.041   Watercraft length



   97.042   Motorboat license revocation



   97.043   Cabin rental



Water Safety Officer



   97.055   Appointment; term



   97.056   Deputies



   97.057   Compensation



   97.058   Powers and duties



Docks and Similar Structures



   97.070   Authority over docks and the like



   97.071   Construction permit required



   97.072   Permit fee



   97.073   Compliance with specifications



   97.074   Dock inspections



   97.075   Unsafe structures; abatement



   97.076   Docks extending from public property; use



Wildlife Refuge



   97.090   Establishment; hunting prohibited



   97.091   Waterfowl hunting restrictions



   97.092   Release of animals restricted



   97.093   Leash law; motor vehicles restricted



Hunting and Fishing



   97.105   Hunting



   97.106   Unlawful taking of aquatic life



Camping Rules and Regulations



   97.115   Camping area available



   97.116   Limitation on stay



   97.117   Fees



   97.118   Documentation



   97.119   Pets



   97.120   Quiet hours



   97.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Motorboat License Fee Schedule



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipality of under 15,000 population to acquire,
maintain, and regulate parks, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-100-1



PARK BOARD



§ 97.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created a Park Board consisting of 7 members appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council for a 3-year term.



(1969 Code, § 18-13)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 1988-14,
passed 5-23-1988; Am. Ord. 1992-9, passed 4-27-1992; Am. Ord. 1993-10, passed
4-26-1993; Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed
5-5-2003; Am. Ord. 2007-4, passed 5-21-2007)



§ 97.002  EX OFFICIO MEMBERS.



   In addition to the 9 members of the Park Board, the Mayor, and 1
Commissioner to be appointed by the Mayor, shall be ex officio members of the
Park Board, and shall have the power to vote on questions before the Board.



(1969 Code, § 18-14)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 1988-14,
passed 5-23-1988; Am. Ord. 1992-9, passed 4-27-1992; Am. Ord. 1993-10, passed
4-26-1993; Am. Ord. 1995-7, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 2003-8, passed 5-5-2003)



§ 97.003  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.



   The Park Board shall elect one of its number chairperson and one as
secretary.  The Board shall keep a correct record of its proceedings and
shall meet at such times as it may determine.



(1969 Code, § 18-15)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984)



§ 97.004  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Park Board shall serve as an advisory board for the city.  Duties
include making recommendations to the Street Commissioner regarding the
maintenance and operation of recreational areas, the purchase, lease, or sale
of real estate and equipment, and special project proposals to enhance the
city's parks.



(1969 Code, § 18-16)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 2004-38,
passed 9-13-2004; Am. Ord. 2007-8, passed 7-9-2007)



§ 97.005  PARK BOARD FUNDS.



   The City Treasurer shall create appropriate accounts to maintain proper
control over park funds.



(Ord. 2004-69, passed 12-13-2004; Am. Ord. 2007-8, passed 7-9-2007)



CITY PARKS



§ 97.020  PARK BOARD ADMINISTRATION.



   All city parks and any lots or lands used for park purposes heretofore
or hereafter devised or bequeathed to the city or purchased by the city shall
be administered by and be under the control of the Street Commissioner.



(1969 Code, § 18-1)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 2004-38,
passed 9-13-2004)



§ 97.021  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the regulations adopted by ordinance by the City
Council, the Park Board shall make and enforce such other rules and
regulations for the care and control of the park as the City Council may from
time to time approve or ordain.



(1969 Code, § 18-2)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984)



Cross-reference:



   Use of city refuse containers restricted, see § 54.07



§ 97.022  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited from being sold, taken, or consumed
in any city park.



(1969 Code, § 18-3)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 1996-21,
passed 6-24-1996)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.023  CURFEW.



   No person shall be in a city park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., with the following exceptions:



   (A)   Individuals or groups who desire or engage in fishing in any
park located on Twin Lakes may do so, provided they use only such portions of
the park as are reasonably necessary for fishing purposes and they are
actually engaged in fishing.



   (B)   Such other times for special events for individuals or groups
which might be approved by the Paris Park Board, including, but not limited
to events which might occur on Memorial Day, July 4 and Labor Day. Upon the
Park Board approving any such special event which would extend beyond the
curfew established herein, the Park Board shall notify the Police Department
of the issuance of the permit.



   (C)   Police, fire or any other persons authorized by the city in
writing to be in the park after curfew.



   (D)   The curfew does not apply to those residents of the city who
live in a park or who live adjacent to a park and require the use of a park
drive to get to their home, nor does it apply to the guests of those
residents.



   (E)   It shall be illegal to park in a city park after curfew.



(Ord. 2004-2, passed 1-26-2004)  Penalty, see § 97.999



LAKES AND BOATING



§ 97.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPETENT.  Capable of assisting a skier in case of injury or accident.



   EAST LAKE.  Includes East Lake and Third Lake.



   MOTORBOAT.  Any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not that
machinery is the principal source of propulsion; this includes personal
watercraft and specialty prop-crafts, but does not include a vessel which has
a valid marine document issued by the Bureau of Customs of the U.S.
government or any federal agency successor thereto.



   OPERATE.  To navigate or otherwise use a motorboat or vessel.



   OWNER.  A person, other than lien holder, having title to a
motorboat.  The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of
a motorboat subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by
agreement and securing payment of performance of an obligation; but the term
excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association,
or other entity.



   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT.  A vessel that uses an inboard motor powering a
water jet pump as its primary source of motor power and that is designed to
be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel, rather
than the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel, and
includes vessels that are similar in appearance and operation but are powered
by an outboard or propeller drive motor.



   SAILBOAT.  Any watercraft propelled by sail or canvas, including
sailboards.  For the purposes of this subchapter, any watercraft propelled
by both sail or canvas and machinery of any sort shall be deemed a motorboat
when being propelled.



   SPECIALTY PROP-CRAFT.  A vessel that is similar in appearance and
operation to a personal watercraft but that is powered by an outboard or
propeller driven motor.



   VESSEL or WATERCRAFT.  Every description of watercraft used or capable
of being used as a means of transportation on water, except a seaplane on the
water, inner tube, air mattress, or similar device, and boats used for
concession rides in artificial bodies of water designed and used exclusively
for those concessions.



(1969 Code, § 18-28)  (Ord. 1985-22, passed 8-12-1985; Am. Ord. 1995-8,
passed 5-8-1995)



§ 97.036  BOAT AND OPERATOR LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorboat on
any city lake without first having secured a license for each motor from the
City Clerk or his or her designee.  All boat licenses shall be issued or
renewed as of January 1.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor boat on
any city lake unless he or she is over the age of 18 and possesses a valid
automobile driver’s license or is between the ages of 14 and 17 and has
secured a safety boating certificate upon completion of the state boat safety
course and has secured a special permit from the city which shall be issued
only after the giving of a city boat driving test.



   (C)   It shall be lawful for minors 12 and 13 years of age who have
received safety boating certificates from the state boat safety course to
operate a motor boat on the city lakes with a passenger in the boat, when the
passenger shall be over the age of 18 and shall be licensed to operate the
boat.



(1969 Code, § 18-29)  (Ord. 1961-1, passed 3-13-1961; Am. Ord. 1969-35,
passed 8-11-1969; Am. Ord. 1991-7, passed 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed
5-8-1995)  Penalty, see § 97.999



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



§ 97.037  MOTORBOAT LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor boat on any city lake
without having first applied for a license and having paid the fees set forth
in Appendix A of this chapter.



   (B)   There shall be a maximum of 20 daily passes issued during any
one 24-hour period.  The Water Safety Officer, at his or her discretion, for
the purposes of safety, may limit the number of daily passes to fewer than 20
if the types of boats obtaining passes and the number of other boats on the
lake create a hazard in his or her opinion.



(1969 Code, § 18-30)  (Ord. 1961-1, passed 3-13-1961; Am. Ord. 1969-35,
passed 8-11-1969; Am. Ord. 1970-14, passed 5-25-1970; Am. Ord. 1971-8, passed
4-26-1971; Am. Ord. 1975-27, passed 11-24-1975; Am. Ord. 1977-21, passed
6-13-1977; Am. Ord. 1980-9, passed 3-27-1980; Am. Ord. 1988-10, passed
4-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed 5-8-1995)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.038  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Application for licensing of motors and motorboats herein shall be made
during regular business hours at the office of the City Clerk (Monday through
Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.).  Before any license may be issued, the
applicant must submit written evidence of both the engine serial number and
horsepower of the motor or motorboat for which he or she is applying for
license.  Any applicant must also submit evidence of his or her place of
residence and evidence of ownership of the motor or of the motorboat for
which he or she is applying for a license; in addition, the applicant must
submit a current state registration for that motor or motorboat.  No license
may be issued to any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, or other
entity who is not the record owner of the motor or motorboat which is to be
licensed.



(1969 Code, § 18-35)  (Ord. 1980-9, passed 3-27-1980; Am. Ord. 1980-33,
passed 7-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.039  REGISTRATION DISPLAY.



   When a permit is obtained by virtue of the provisions of this
subchapter, a registration sticker shall be issued to the licensee, who shall
then display the sticker on the right side of the motor.  The term right
side, as used herein, means starboard side.



(1969 Code, § 18-36)  (Ord. 1980-9, passed 3-27-1980)  Penalty, see §
97.999



§ 97.040  LAKE USE REGULATIONS; STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   (A)   All motor boats shall be operated with no disturbing wake on
the West Lake and in areas marked by buoys and signs on the East Lake.



   (B)   All operators of motorboats shall maintain a keep-to-the-right
traffic pattern on all city lakes.



   (C)   All persons riding in boats or on water skis, aquaplanes, or
similar contrivances, must wear an approved life jacket.



   (D)   No motorboat shall be operated at a speed creating a
disturbing wake before 10:00 a.m. or after sunset.



   (E)   No swimming shall be allowed within 100 feet of any public
boat launch on the city lakes, or at any other location in the city lakes
designated as “no swimming” by the Water Safety Officer.



   (F)   All provisions of an act entitled Boat Registration and Safety
Act, including the penalties contained therein, are hereby adopted and shall
supersede any provisions of any other ordinance or regulation previously
adopted by the City Council which may be in conflict therewith.



   (G)   Water skiing shall be permitted from 10:00 a.m. until sunset.



   (H)   No motorboat shall be operated on the East Lake at a speed
greater than 35 miles per hour.



   (I)   All watercraft, whether motorized or not, shall be equipped
with a sounding device capable of creating a blast for 2 seconds and audible
for 1/2 mile.



   (J)   All watercraft shall observe and adhere to areas marked as
restricted either by signs or buoys as outlined below:



      (1)   Designated no wake zones; East Lake.



         (a)   Entire portion of cove known as Moss Bayou
directly north of the boat club;



         (b)   Entire portion of area known as Foley Bayou to
entrance of main lake;



         (c)   From an area directly south of the beach, where
the lake turns west to the west edge of the first north and south bayous; and



         (d)   At the public boat launching facility at a point
north of the ramp along the same (west) shoreline, approximately 50 feet,
extending each to 150 feet, then south in line with the closest point south
of ramp, then west to the shoreline (approximately 60 feet of the ramp).



      (2)   Designated restricted areas; East Lake.



         (a)   At all times when there is high water and an
overflow is occurring at the spillway, all watercraft shall be restricted
from being at a distance of any closer than 100 feet of the entire spillway
area.  This restriction shall further apply if so deemed by any authorized
agent of the city or Department of Conservation whether high water exists or
not; such as dam or spillway maintenance.



         (b)   All watercraft shall be restricted from being at a
distance of any closer than 75 feet of the designated public swimming area as
marked by the city.



         (c)   No watercraft shall be allowed under the road
bridge at Route 1 at anytime.



(1969 Code, § 18-31)  (Ord. 1961-1, passed 3-13-1961; Am. Ord. 1969-35,
passed 8-11-1969; Am. Ord. 1971-8, passed 4-26-1971; Am. Ord. 1975-27, passed
11-24-1975; Am. Ord. 1977-18, passed 5-23-1973; Am. Ord. 1977-19, passed
6-13-1977; Am. Ord. 1977-21, passed 6-13-1977; Am. Ord. 1980-9, passed
3-27-1980; Am. Ord. 1980-10, passed 4-14-1980; Am. Ord. 1985-22, passed
8-12-1985; Am. Ord. 1988-19, passed 6-13-1988; Am. Ord. 1990-9, passed
6-25-1990; Am. Ord. 1990-12, passed 8-13-1990; Am. Ord. 1990-17, passed
9-10-1990; Am. Ord. 1993-9, passed 4-13-1993; Am. Ord. 2008-19, passed
7-14-2008)  Penalty, see § 97.999



Statutory reference:



   State Boat Registration and Safety Act, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 45,
§§ 1-1 et seq.



§ 97.041  WATERCRAFT LENGTH.



   With the exception of pontoon barges, no boat or craft may be operated
on any city lake which is in excess of 20 feet in length.



(1969 Code, § 18-37)  (Ord. 1980-9, passed 3-27-1980)  Penalty, see §
97.999



§ 97.042  MOTORBOAT LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any fine or penalty, the Mayor may revoke the motor
license or an operator’s permit of any motorboat operator or dealer of any
violation of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 18-32)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.043  CABIN RENTAL.



   The annual rates to be paid for rental of cabins in Twin Lakes Park
shall be as established by lease granted by the City Council.  Receipts from
the lease of cabins shall be treated as city revenues.



(1969 Code, § 18-33)  (Ord. 2004-38, passed 9-13-2004)



WATER SAFETY OFFICER



§ 97.055  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   There is hereby created the office of Water Safety Officer.  The
Commissioner of Public Property shall be ex officio Water Safety Officer. 
The term of office of the Water Safety Officer shall be coextensive with that
of the Commissioner of Public Property.



(1969 Code, § 18-44)



§ 97.056  DEPUTIES.



   The Water Safety Officer shall have authority to appoint such Deputy
Water Safety Officers as may be necessary, subject to the approval of the
City Council.



(1969 Code, § 18-45)



§ 97.057  COMPENSATION.



   The Water Safety Officer and the Deputy Water Safety Officers shall
receive compensation as the City Council may establish from time to time.



(1969 Code, § 18-46)



§ 97.058  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Water Safety Officer and Deputy Water Safety Officers
shall have the authority to issue boat motor licenses and operators’
permits, to enforce the city ordinances and adopted state regulations
pertaining to the operation of boats on city lakes, to enforce all swimming
and water sports rules and regulations, and to board any boat operated on any
city lake.



   (B)   The Water Safety Officer and Deputy Water Safety Officers
shall be charged with the duty of supervision of the use of the city lakes by
the public and requiring appropriate conduct and boat operation on the city
lakes.



(1969 Code, § 18-47)  (Ord. 1985-22, passed 8-12-1985)



DOCKS AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES



§ 97.070  AUTHORITY OVER DOCKS AND THE LIKE.



   The Commissioner of Public Property shall have charge of, supervise,
and control the installation, maintenance, and use of all docks or other
types of construction extending into the lakes of the city.



(1969 Code, § 18-52)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)



§ 97.071  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No dock or other type of construction shall be built or permitted to
remain on the lakes of the city without the owner first securing a permit
from the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 18-53)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)  Penalty, see §
97.999



§ 97.072  PERMIT FEE.



   There shall be charged a fee of $20 annually for all permits issued,
payable at the office of the City Clerk by May 1 of each year.



(1969 Code, § 18-54)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969; Am. Ord. 2001-14,
passed 7-23-2001)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.073  COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.



   All docks constructed shall comply with the specifications recommended
by the city.



(1969 Code, § 18-55)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)  Penalty, see §
97.999



§ 97.074  DOCK INSPECTIONS.



   All docks built shall be periodically inspected by the Water Safety
Officer or his or her deputy who shall be designated by the Commissioner of
Public Property.



(1969 Code, § 18-56)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)



§ 97.075  UNSAFE STRUCTURES; ABATEMENT.



   Unsafe or unsightly structures shall be repaired or removed as directed
by the Water Safety Officer.



(1969 Code, § 18-57)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)  Penalty, see §
97.999



§ 97.076  DOCKS EXTENDING FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY; USE.



   All docks extending from public property shall be posted as being for
public use subject to preferential use by the owner of the dock.



(1969 Code, § 18-58)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)



WILDLIFE REFUGE



§ 97.090  ESTABLISHMENT; HUNTING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, or pursue
with dogs any species of wildlife on the city wildlife refuge within the
tracts of land hereinafter described:



      (1)   The portion of city lands and waters (in this county)
commonly called Twin Lakes, which includes the portion commonly called the
West Lake and up Sugar Creek to the most westerly property line of the city
in Sections 25 and 26, T14N, R12W of the second P.M., containing
approximately 220 acres;



      (2)   The portion of city lands and waters (in this county)
commonly called the Old East Lake, in Section 25, T14N, R12W of the second
P.M., containing approximately 70 acres; and



      (3)   The portion of city lands and waters (in this county)
commonly called the Third Lake, in Sections 30 and 31, T14N, R12W, containing
approximately 179 acres.



   (B)   The portion of the West Lake west of the Penn Central railroad
bridge on the north shore line, and the portion commonly known as the Third
Lake, shall be open to the hunting of waterfowl during the regular migratory
waterfowl season set by the state, and shall be open to trapping during the
regular trapping season.



(Ord. 1971-10, passed 4-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



Cross-reference:



   Hunting and Fishing, see §§ 97.105et seq.



§ 97.091  WATERFOWL HUNTING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   All blinds where waterfowl may be taken must be at least 150
yards apart, and must not be placed outward and beyond the limits of the
natural covering or any form of vegetation along the shoreline.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or use any
blind within 150 yards of any public road or right-of-way.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to hunt waterfowl from a boat or floating
blind in any of the areas open to hunting waterfowl.



(Ord. 1971-10, passed 4-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



Cross-reference:



   Hunting and Fishing, see §§ 97.105et seq.



§ 97.092  RELEASE OF ANIMALS RESTRICTED.



   No species of wildlife shall be released on or allowed to run free on
any of the lands and waters of the city wildlife refuge without the consent
of the County Conservation Law Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 1971-10, passed 4-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.093  LEASH LAW; MOTOR VEHICLES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No dogs or cats shall be allowed on these lands and waters
unless on a leash, enclosed in pens, or under the direct and immediate
control of the owner.



   (B)   No motor vehicles, motorcycles, or minibikes shall be operated
within the refuge area except upon dedicated thoroughfares.



(Ord. 1971-10, passed 4-12-1971)  Penalty, see § 97.999



HUNTING AND FISHING



§ 97.105  HUNTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any
animal or waterfowl other than as prescribed herein or by other laws within
the limits of the city.



   (B)   Waterfowl may be hunted within the city limits from all
existing duck blinds in use on the East and West Lakes as of November 13,
1990.



(1969 Code, § 17-9)  (Am. Ord. 1990-23, passed 11-13-1990; Am. Ord.
1994-35, passed 11-14-1994; Am. Ord. 1995-26, passed 10-9-1995; Am. Ord.
1996-20, passed 6-10-1996)  Penalty, see § 131.99



Cross-reference:



   Wildlife Refuge, see §§ 97.090et seq.



§ 97.106  UNLAWFUL TAKING OF AQUATIC LIFE.



   (A)   The city and the State Department of Conservation have entered
into a cooperative management agreement for the East and West Lakes.  This
agreement gives the State Department of Conservation the responsibility to
promote sound fishery management practices, establish regulations for the
taking of such fishery, and to enforce the established rules and regulations
as outlined under Administrative Rule 17 on those waters.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, or attempt to
take, any aquatic life, including minnows, in any portion of the East or West
Lakes except as provided under the cooperative management agreement and
subsequent administrative rules; except that minnows may be taken pursuant to
law in Cherry Creek 200 feet northwest of the mouth into West Lake.



(1969 Code, § 17-38)  (Ord. 1974-9, passed 10-15-1974; Am. Ord. 1985-20,
passed 8-12-1985)  Penalty, see § 131.99



Cross-reference:



   Lakes and Boating, see §§ 97.035et seq.



   Wildlife Refuge, see §§ 97.090et seq.



CAMPING RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 97.115  CAMPING AREA AVAILABLE.



   The city and the Park Board provide a camping area for recreational
vehicles (RV's) and tent camping which are open to the general public on an
"as available basis" subject to campground surface and weather conditions in
the opinion of the Superintendent of Parks.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-2005)



§ 97.116  LIMITATION ON STAY.



   The demand for camping spaces has increased significantly, and
therefore necessitates the establishment of a limitation on the length of
consecutive overnight stays to a maximum of 14 consecutive days.  Campers
may return for additional stays up to 14 days upon vacating the campground
for a period of 1 week or longer at the end of each 14-day camping cycle.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-2005)



§ 97.117  FEES.



   In order to remain consistent with the rates charged by state and
national parks, overnight stays shall be established at  a fee of $12 per
day or $75 per week, which includes electrical and water hookups, and there
is hereby established a waste dumping fee of $1 per use.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-2005)



§ 97.118  DOCUMENTATION.



   During their stay all campers must have available documentation which
clearly indicates that their vehicles are licensed and insured.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-2005)



§ 97.119  PETS.



   Campers shall be required to keep all pets attended by their owner(s)
at all times.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-05)



§ 97.120  QUIET HOURS.



   All campers are to observe quiet hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(Ord. 2005-14, passed 3-28-2005)



§ 97.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of
§ 97.022 of this code shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25 nor
more than $500.



(1969 Code, § 18-3)  (Ord. 1984-13, passed 6-25-1984; Am. Ord. 1996-21,
passed 6-24-1996)



   (C)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of §§
97.035et seq. of this code shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be
fined upon conviction of not less than $1, nor more than $500.



(1969 Code, § 18-34)  (Ord. 1975-27, passed 11-24-1975; Am. Ord. 1980-9,
passed 3-27-1980)



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 97.070et seq. of this code shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than
$100 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 18-59)  (Ord. 1969-20, passed 5-26-1969)



   (E)   Any violation of the provisions of § 97.106 of this code is
also a violation of state regulations and, unless otherwise indicated, is a
petty offense and punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and no more than
$500.



   (F)   Any person or group violating the provisions of § 97.023
shall be subject to a penalty of no less than $25 nor more than $500.



(1969 Code, § 17-38)  (Ord. 1974-9, passed 10-15-1974; Am. Ord. 1985-20,
passed 8-12-1985; Am. Ord. 2004-2, passed 1-26-2004)



APPENDIX A:  MOTORBOAT LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE



   (A)   Annual fee.



 


Boat Classification

 

Fee for County Residents

 

Fee for County Nonresidents



1 - 10 horsepower
 

$7.50

 

$15



11 - 25 horsepower
 

$15

 

$30



26 - 49 horsepower
 

$22.50

 

$45



50 horsepower or over
 

$40

 

$80




 



   (B)   Daily fee.



 


Boat Classification

 

Fee for County Residents

 

Fee for County Nonresidents



Any
 

$10

 

$10




 



(1969 Code, § 18-30)  (Ord. 1961-1, passed 3-13-1961; Am. Ord. 1969-35,
passed 8-11-1969; Am. Ord. 1970-14, passed 5-25-1970; Am. Ord. 1971-8, passed
4-26-1971; Am. Ord. 1975-27, passed 11-24-1975; Am. Ord. 1977-21, passed
6-13-1977; Am. Ord. 1980-9, passed 3-27-1980; Am. Ord. 1988-10, passed
4-25-1988; Am. Ord. 1995-8, passed 5-8-1995; Am. Ord. 2016-2, passed
2-23-2016)



Cross-reference:



   Motorboat license fees, see § 97.037



CHAPTER 98:  ANIMALS



Section



Animals and Fowl



   98.01   Cruelty to animals prohibited



   98.02   Dangerous animals at large prohibited



   98.03   Dangerous animals; authority to kill



   98.04   Exhibition of wild animals; permit required



   98.05   Noisy animals prohibited



   98.06   Livestock or poultry at large or in streets prohibited



   98.07   Diseased animals restricted; Health Officer duties



   98.08   Clean conditions required



   98.09   Keeping livestock; location restrictions



   98.10   Impounded animals; disposition



   98.11   Owner's duties in the care of animals



Dogs



   98.25   Vaccinations required



   98.26   Running at large prohibited; impoundment



   98.27   Dog catcher and police duty



   98.28   Impoundment procedure; notice to owner



   98.29   Dangerous dogs at large or biting dogs a nuisance



   98.30   Unlicensed dog; redemption; disposition



   98.31   County boarding fees



   98.32   Dog biting person; quarantine; disposition



   98.33   Muzzles may be required by proclamation



Kennels and Stores



   98.45   Small animal store defined



   98.46   License required; fee



   98.47   Health and sanitation; humane treatment



Cross-reference:



   Animals on sidewalks, see § 96.047



   Hunting and Fishing, see §§  97.105et seq.



   Mistreatment of police dogs unlawful, see § 35.14



   Unattended draft animals, see § 71.062



   Wildlife Refuge, see §§ 97.090et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Rabies Control Act, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 510, Act 5, §§ 1 et
seq.



ANIMALS AND FOWL



§ 98.01  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way; any
person who inhumanely beats, overloads, underfeeds, or abandons any animal
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.



(1969 Code, § 5-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit cruelty to animals, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-5-6



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et
seq.



§ 98.02  DANGEROUS ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any
kind to run at large in the city.



(1969 Code, § 5-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit animals running at large, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-20-9



   Liability of keeper of dog for injury to person by dog, see Ill. Rev.
Stat., Chapter 510, Act 5, §§ 16, 18.1



§ 98.03  DANGEROUS ANIMALS; AUTHORITY TO KILL.



   The members of the Police Department and any other person in the city
are authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the
protection of any person or property.



(1969 Code, § 5-3)



§ 98.04  EXHIBITION OF WILD ANIMALS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   The maintenance of dangerous wild animals is prohibited within
the city limits. Exhibitions or parades of wild animals require a permit to
be issued by City Council.



   (B)   Exhibits or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the
eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the City
Council.



   (C)   The maintenance of dangerous animals which are ferae naturae,
for any purpose other than as set forth in division (B) above is prohibited.



   (D)   The permit fee under division (B) above shall be $100.



(1969 Code, § 5-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Ferae naturae defined, see ILCS Chapter 510, Act 60, § 1



§ 98.05  NOISY ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the
peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.



(1969 Code, § 5-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to declare, prevent, and abate nuisances, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-60-2



   Authority to prevent noises, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-5-2



§ 98.06  LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY AT LARGE OR IN STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats
or poultry to run at large in the city.  Any enumerated animal running at
large in any public place in the city shall be impounded in the manner
provided in this chapter; it shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any
such animal in the streets of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding.



(1969 Code, § 5-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit animals running at large, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-20-9



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 510, Act 55, § 1



§ 98.07  DISEASED ANIMALS RESTRICTED; HEALTH OFFICER DUTIES.



   (A)   No domestic animals afflicted with a contagious disease or an
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of human or beast may be affected; nor shall
such diseased animals be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner
thereof, except under the supervision of the Health Officer.



   (B)   The Health Officer shall secure the disposition of any
diseased animals and treatment of the affected premises so as to prevent the
communication or spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the
State Department of Agriculture is empowered to act.



(1969 Code, § 5-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Definition of infectious disease, contagious disease; Department of
Agriculture duties and authority regarding diseased animals, see ILCS Chapter
510, Act 50, § 1



   Liability of owner of diseased swine, see ILCS Chapter 510, Act 50, §
24



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 510, Act 50, §§ 4et seq.



§ 98.08  CLEAN CONDITIONS REQUIRED.



   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is
or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.



(1969 Code, § 5-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to declare, prevent, and abate nuisances, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-60-2



§ 98.09  KEEPING LIVESTOCK; LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   From and after the date of adoption of this code, it shall be
unlawful to keep any livestock or poultry anywhere in the city for more than
72 hours, except in an enclosure which is at least 300 feet away from any
school, church or public building or any residence other than the residence
of the owner of the livestock or poultry, unless the particular livestock or
poultry was located in a place contrary to this section prior to the adoption
of this code in 1960.



   (B)   No new or replacement livestock or poultry may be brought to a
livestock or poultry enclosure which does not conform to the provisions of
the preceding division which existed prior to the adoption of this code.



(1969 Code, § 5-9)  (Ord. 2004-3, passed 2-9-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.10  IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; DISPOSITION.



   All animals impounded under this chapter shall be taken to the county
animal shelter.



(1969 Code, § 5-10)



§ 98.11  OWNER'S DUTIES IN THE CARE OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   Duties. The following details owner's duties toward animals,
and ANIMAL means every living creature, domestic or wild. It does not include
man. It also includes, but not limited to, canines, felines, and equines.
Each owner shall provide for each of his or her animals:



      (1)   Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and
water;



      (2)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;



      (3)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;



      (4)   Humane care and treatment.



   (B)   Cruel treatment.



      (1)   No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment,
starve, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal.



      (2)   No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a
public charge or may suffer injury, hunger, or exposure.



   (C)   Aggravated cruelty. No person may intentionally commit an act
that causes a companion animal to suffer serious injury or death. Aggravated
cruelty does not include euthanasia of a companion animal through recognized
methods approved by the Department of Agriculture.



   (D)   Animal torture.



      (1)   A person commits animal torture when that person without
legal justification knowingly or intentionally tortures an animal. For
purposes of this section, and subject to division (2), TORTURE means
infliction of or subjection to extreme physical pain, motivated by an intent
to increase or prolong the pain, suffering, or agony of the animal.



      (2)   A person convicted of violating these sections is guilty
of violation of City Ordinance of Paris. Upon conviction for violating this
section, the court may order the convicted person to undergo a psychological
or psychiatric evaluation, and undergo any treatment at the convicted
person's expense that the court determines to be appropriate after due
consideration of the evaluation. If the convicted person is a juvenile, the
court must order the convicted person to undergo a psychological or
psychiatric evaluation and undergo treatment that the court determines to be
appropriate after due consideration of the evaluation. The court may assess a
fine of $50 to $500.



   (E)   Arrests and seizures.



      (1)   Any law enforcement officer making an arrest for an
offense involving 1 or more companion animals under divisions (B) through (D)
of this section may lawfully take possession of some or all of the companion
animals in the possession of the person arrested. The officer, after taking
possession of the companion animals, must file with the court before whom the
complaint is made against any person so arrested an affidavit stating the
name of the person charged in the complaint, a description of the condition
of the companion animal or companion animals taken, and the time and place
the companion animal or companion animals were taken, together with the name
of the person from whom the companion animal or companion animals were taken
and name of the person who claims to own the companion animal or companion
animals if different from the person from whom the companion animal
orcompanion animals were seized. He or she must at the same time deliver an
inventory of the companion animal or companion animals taken to the court of
competent jurisdiction. The officer must place the companion animal or
companion animals in the custody of an animal control or animal shelter and
the agency must retain custody of the companion animal or companion animals
subject to an order of the court adjudicating the charges on the merits and
before which the person complained against is required to appear for trial.
The City Attorney may, within 14 days after the seizure, file a "petition for
forfeiture prior to trial" before the court having criminal jurisdiction over
the alleged charges, asking for permanent forfeiture of the companion animals
seized. The petition shall be filed with the court, with copies served on the
impounding agency, the owner, and anyone claiming an interest in the animals.
In a "petition for forfeiture prior to trial", the burden is on the
prosecution to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the person
arrested violated divisions (B) through (D).



      (2)   An owner whose companion animal or companion animals are
removed by a law enforcement officer under this section must be given written
notice of the circumstances of the removal and of any legal remedies
available to him or her. The notice must be posted at the place of seizure,
or delivered to a person residing at the place of seizure or, if the address
of the owner is different from the address of the person from whom the
companion animal or companion animals were seized, delivered by registered
mail to his or her last known address.



   (F)   Security for companion animals and animals used for fighting
purposes. Security for companion animals, any animal that is commonly
considered to be a pet.



      (1)   In the case of companion animals, the animal control or
animal shelter having custody of the animal or animals may file a petition
with the court requesting that the person from whom the animal or animals are
seized, or the owner of the animal or animals, be ordered to post security.
The security must be in an amount sufficient to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses expected to be incurred by the animal control or animal
shelter in caring for and providing for the animal or animals pending the
disposition of the charges. Reasonable expenses include, but are not limited
to, estimated medical care and boarding of the animal or animals for 30 days.
The amount of the security shall be determined by the court after taking into
consideration all of the facts and circumstances of the case, including, but
not limited to, the recommendation of the impounding organization having
custody and care of the seized animal or animals and the cost of caring for
the animal or animals. If security has been posted in accordance with this
section, the animal control or animal shelter may draw from the security the
actual costs incurred by the agency in caring for the seized animal or
animals.



      (2)   If the court orders the posting of security, the
security must be posted with the clerk of the court within 5 business days
after the hearing. If the person ordered to post security does not do so, the
animal or animals are forfeited by operation of law and the animal control or
animal shelter having control of the animal or animals must dispose of the
animal or animals through adoption or must humanely euthanize the animal. In
no event may the defendant or any person residing it the defendant's
household adopt the animal or animals.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the voluntary, permanent relinquishment of any animal by its owner to any
animal control or animal shelter in lieu of posting security or proceeding to
a forfeiture hearing. Voluntary relinquishment shall have no effect on the
criminal charges that may be pursued by the appropriate authorities.



      (4)   If an owner of a companion animal is acquitted by the
court of charges made pursuant to this section, the court shall further order
that any security that has been posted for the animal shall be returned to
the owner by the impounding organization.



(Ord. 2004-72, passed 12-13-2004)



DOGS



§ 98.25  VACCINATIONS REQUIRED.



   All owners of dogs whose dogs are within or come within the city shall
cause the dogs to have an annual rabies vaccination, which shall be evidenced
by a certificate from the county rabies inspector.



(1969 Code, § 5-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.26  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED; IMPOUNDMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to permit the
same to run at large upon any street, alley, or public place within the city;
any dog found in or upon any street, alley, or public place within the city
shall be impounded and disposed of as provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 5-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of to prohibit animals running at large, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-20-9



§ 98.27  DOG CATCHER AND POLICE DUTY.



   It shall be the duty of the dog catcher and of all police officers in
the city to take up all dogs running at large in the city.



(1969 Code, § 5-25)



§ 98.28  IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE; NOTICE TO OWNER.



   Immediately upon receiving any dog or other animal at the pound, the
dog catcher shall enter in a registry kept for the purpose, the breed, color,
sex of the dog, and whether licensed or not.  If licensed, the dog catcher
shall enter the name and address of the owner and keeper, and he or she shall
keep licensed dogs separated from unlicensed dogs.  When any dog known to be
licensed shall be impounded, notice of the impounding shall be forthwith
given to the owner or keeper of the licensed dog by mail by the dog catcher.



(1969 Code, § 5-26)



§ 98.29  DANGEROUS DOGS AT LARGE OR BITING DOGS A NUISANCE.



   Any dangerous, fierce, or vicious dog running at large in any place
within the city, whether upon private premises or not, and any dog which
unduly disturbs the quiet and peace of any person or neighborhood within the
city, or any dog that shall bite any person or injure any person, shall be
declared a nuisance and that dog shall be taken up and impounded in the
manner provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 5-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to declare, prevent, and abate nuisances, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-60-2



   Liability of keeper of dog for injury to person by dog, see Ill. Rev.
Stat., Chapter 510, Act 5, § 15



§ 98.30  UNLICENSED DOG; REDEMPTION; DISPOSITION.



   Any unlicensed dog caught within the city and impounded under the
provisions of this subchapter may be redeemed by any person within 4 days
from the date of impounding by payment to the City Clerk of the license fee
for the calendar year.  If any unlicensed dog is not redeemed within 4 days,
the dog catcher shall cause the dog to be disposed of.



(1969 Code, § 5-28)



§ 98.31  COUNTY BOARDING FEES.



   In addition to any charges prescribed by the city, any owner seeking to
obtain the release of a dog impounded in the city shall pay to the dog
catcher any fees required by the county.



(1969 Code, § 5-29)



§ 98.32  DOG BITING PERSON; QUARANTINE; DISPOSITION.



   Any dog which shall bite any person or injure any person shall be kept
under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of 2 weeks, and
the veterinarian shall at the end of that period make a written report to the
Health Officer; and should the dog show evidence of rabies, then it shall be
killed in a humane manner.  In the event the dog is pronounced free from
rabies by the veterinarian, then the dog shall be released to the owner or
keeper upon the payment of the veterinarian’s fees.  The owner or keeper
of the dog may claim the dog at the end of the 2-week period by making
payment of the costs involved while the dog is under observation and also the
costs of a license if the dog is not licensed.  If the owner or keeper does
not claim the dog at this time, then in that event any person may redeem it
by making a like payment.  If the dog is not claimed as set forth herein, it
shall be killed in a humane manner.



(1969 Code, § 5-30)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 510, Act 5, §§ 1 et
seq.



§ 98.33  MUZZLES MAY BE REQUIRED BY PROCLAMATION.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be upon any public place or
any private premises not enclosed by an adequate fence or wall unless the
animal is securely muzzled at any time when an emergency exists because of
the prevalence of rabies or for any other cause proclaimed by the Mayor,
Board of Health, or Health Officer.



(1969 Code, § 5-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



KENNELS AND STORES



§ 98.45  SMALL ANIMAL STORE DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SMALL ANIMAL STORE.  Includes any establishment for the raising,
training, boarding, or selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats, or other
small animals for hire or profit, or where more than 3 dogs or cats are
harbored or kept.



(1969 Code, § 5-41)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 225, Act 605, § 2



§ 98.46  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a small animal store anywhere in the
city without first securing a license therefor.  The annual fee for this
license shall be $20.



(1969 Code, § 5-42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



Statutory reference:



   State license required, see ILCS Chapter 225, Act 605, §§ 1et seq.



§ 98.47  HEALTH AND SANITATION; HUMANE TREATMENT.



   Every place used as a small animal store shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to
remain therein for more than 24 hours.  All animals shall be humanely
treated, and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and
treated.



(1969 Code, § 5-43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 225, Act 605, § 18



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



   111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   112.   FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS



   113.   TOBACCO



   114.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS; ADVERTISEMENTS



   115.   JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS



   116.   INSURANCE COMPANIES



   117.   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



   118.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



   119.   AMUSEMENTS



   120.   GAMBLING



   121.   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER



   122.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   License and permit applications



   110.02   Persons required to obtain business license



   110.03   Forms kept by City Clerk



   110.04   Licenses and permits; validating signatures



   110.05   Application investigation and inspection



   110.06   License fee payment; prorating; disposition



   110.07   License year; expiration notice



   110.08   Compliance with laws required



   110.09   Change of location; requirements



   110.10   Nuisance prohibited



   110.11   Operation inspections; license revocation for refusal



   110.12   License and permit revocation



   110.13   Posting license



   110.14   Posting vehicle tags



§ 110.01  LICENSE AND PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance or code
provision shall be made in writing to the City Clerk in the absence of
provision to the contrary.  Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any,
the time covered, and the fee to be paid; each application shall also contain
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the city
officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for.



(1969 Code, § 15-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  PERSONS REQUIRED TO OBTAIN BUSINESS LICENSE.



   Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance,
operation, or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business
or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the
requirement if by himself or herself or through an agent, employee, or
partner, he or she holds himself or herself forth as being engaged in the
business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor, actively or
passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of that business or
occupation in the city.



(1969 Code, § 15-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  FORMS KEPT BY CITY CLERK.



   Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be
prepared and kept on file by the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 15-3)



§ 110.04  LICENSES AND PERMITS; VALIDATING SIGNATURES.



   Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor
and the City Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.



(1969 Code, § 15-4)



§ 110.05  APPLICATION INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where
the ordinances of the city necessitate an inspection or investigation before
the issuance of the permit, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the
proper officer for making the investigation within 48 hours of the time of
receipt of the application.



   (B)   The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within 10
days after receiving the application or a copy thereof.



   (C)   The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made an
inspection in regard to licenses in connection with the care and handling of
food and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease for the
protection of health.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made any
inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures.



   (E)   All other investigations, except where otherwise provided,
shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by
the Mayor.



(1969 Code, § 15-5)



§ 110.06  LICENSE FEE PAYMENT; PRORATING; DISPOSITION.



   In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the City Clerk.  When an applicant has not engaged in the
business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter
or fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be
conducted.  Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a
part of the corporate fund.



(1969 Code, § 15-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.07  LICENSE YEAR; EXPIRATION NOTICE.



   (A)   All annual licenses shall be due on the first day of January
of each year and shall terminate on the last day of December next, where no
provision to the contrary is made.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a
statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if
an annual license, 3 weeks prior to the date of expiration.  Provided, that
a failure to send out this notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive
it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or
a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action from operation
without a license.



(1969 Code, § 15-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.08  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS REQUIRED.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to
be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the
city.  No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business
or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning
ordinance of the city as set forth in Title XV, App. A of this code.



(1969 Code, § 15-8)



§ 110.09  CHANGE OF LOCATION; REQUIREMENTS.



   The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted
act may be changed, provided 10-days’ notice thereof is given to the City
Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary; however, the building
and frontage requirements of the ordinances of the city must be complied with.



(1969 Code, § 15-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.10  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to
amount to a nuisance in fact.



(1969 Code, § 15-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.11  OPERATION INSPECTIONS; LICENSE REVOCATION FOR REFUSAL.



   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or corporation are provided for or
required by ordinance or code provision, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any ordinance or code provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in
charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of
making the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized
or directed to make that inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance or code
provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee of the city whose business is governed by that provision to give to
any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same,
sufficient samples of the material or commodity for that analysis upon
request.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed
business in the city who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is
authorized to make the inspection or take an adequate sample of the
commodity, or who interferes with any officer or employee while in the
performance of his or her duty in making the inspection.  Provided, that no
license shall be revoked for this cause unless written demand is made upon
the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city,
stating that the inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to
make the inspection or obtain the sample.



(1969 Code, § 15-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.12  LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Mayor at
any time during the life of the license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permittee of the ordinance or code provisions relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the
premises occupied; this revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.



(1969 Code, § 15-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.13  POSTING LICENSE.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the city to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for that business at all times.



(1969 Code, § 15-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.14  POSTING VEHICLE TAGS.



   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the
City Clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag or sticker which shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on each licensed vehicle while it is in use.



(1969 Code, § 15-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Sales without license prohibited



   111.03   Possession in automobiles restricted



   111.04   Possession in public



   111.05   Public consumption



Provisions Regarding Minors



   111.15   Sale or delivery to minor prohibited



   111.16   Purchase by minor unlawful



   111.17   Misrepresentation of age by minor



   111.18   Posted notice to minors required



   111.19   Parent or guardian responsibility



Operating Regulations



   111.30   Hours of operation



   111.31   Sales to intoxicated persons, drunkards, and the like



   111.32   Disturbance of peace not to be allowed



   111.33   Nude or obscene activity prohibited



   111.34   Employees; contagious disease prohibited



   111.35   Food handling sanitation standards apply



   111.36   Premises; view of interior required



Licensing



   111.50   Retail sale; license required



   111.51   On-premises consumption; license required



   111.52   Application; content



   111.53   Ineligible persons



   111.54   Ineligible locations



   111.55   Application fee



   111.56   License classes; fees



   111.57   Number of licenses



   111.58   License period



   111.59   Prorated license fee



   111.60   Renewal



   111.61   Renewal fee installments



   111.62   Change of location; permission required



   111.63   License privilege restricted; transfer prohibited



   111.64   Record of licenses



   111.65   License revocation and suspension



   111.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Billiard halls; alcohol and gambling prohibited, see § 119.028



   Public intoxication, see § 132.01



   Taxicab drivers; prohibited conduct, see § 118.30



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license and regulate liquor sales and consumption, see
ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 4-1



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid
containing more than ½% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes.



   CLUB.  A corporation or a fraternal organization organized under the
laws of the state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some
common object other than the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept,
used, and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and
owning or hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of an extent
and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests, provided
that the CLUB files with the Mayor at the time of its application for a
license under this chapter 2 copies of a list of names and residences of its
officers, directors, executive committee, or similar body, and similarly
files within 10 days of the election of any new officer, director, or the
like, his or her name and address; and provided that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and that no
member nor any officer, agent, or employee of the CLUB is paid, or directly
receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the
distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the CLUB or its members or its
guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed
and voted at any annual meeting by the members or other governing body out of
the general revenue of the CLUB.



   MALT BEVERAGES.  All beer, lager beer, ale, and port which have an
alcoholic content of not to exceed 20% by weight.



   RENTAL HALL BUSINESS.  A business organized in such a way that it
provides a place available for rental by members of the general public. The
building housing of the business must be designed to accommodate a minimum of
225 people safely. Such a business is typified by wedding celebrations,
parties, or dances by private clubs or individuals. At this type of business,
a lessor or licensee is paid a fee by lessee for use of the hall and for
providing alcoholic liquor.



   RESTAURANT.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
actually are served and regularly served without sleeping accommodations,
that space being provided within adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining
room equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number
and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its
guests; provided, further, that the business obtains in excess of 60% of its
gross revenue from the sale of food items.



   SALE AT RETAIL.  The sale of any alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale.



(1969 Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. 1995-33, passed 12-21-1995; Am. Ord. 2003-29,
passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 2-27-2006; Am. Ord. 2018-14,
passed 8-13-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-2et seq.



§ 111.02  SALES WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor in the city without an
appropriate license.



(1969 Code, § 3-2)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  POSSESSION IN AUTOMOBILES RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in an automobile to possess any
container of alcoholic liquor with the seal broken.



(1969 Code, § 3-3)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  POSSESSION IN PUBLIC.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any alcoholic
liquor, other than in the original package with the seal unbroken, on any
public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private school grounds,
parking lot of any commercial establishment or on the premises of any
commercial establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the general public.



(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-27-2009)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor on
any public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private school grounds,
parking lot of any commercial establishment, or on the premises of any
commercial establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the general public.



(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-27-2009)  Penalty, see § 111.99



PROVISIONS REGARDING MINORS



§ 111.15  SALE OR DELIVERY TO MINOR PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under 21 years of age, or to knowingly and willfully sell any alcoholic
liquor to a person or persons acting on behalf of a person under the age of
21.



(1969 Code, § 3-4)  (Ord. 1975-3, passed 5-26-1975; Am. Ord. 1980-7, passed
2-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16



§ 111.16  PURCHASE BY MINOR UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase or obtain, or cause to be obtained, alcoholic liquor in any tavern
or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.



(1969 Code, § 3-5)  (Ord. 1975-3, passed 5-26-1975; Am. Ord. 1980-7, passed
2-28-1980)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate sales to minors, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §
4-1



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-20



§ 111.17  MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE BY MINOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic
liquor is sold.



(1969 Code, § 3-6)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-20



§ 111.18  POSTED NOTICE TO MINORS REQUIRED.



   In every tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is
sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed
card which shall be supplied by the City Clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows:



   “WARNING TO MINORS



You are subject to a fine up to $500 under the ordinances of the City of
Paris if you purchase or cause to be purchased alcoholic liquor or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.”



(1969 Code, § 3-7)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate sales to minors, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §
4-1



§ 111.19  PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor
child of which he or she may be parent or guardian to violate any provision
of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 3-9)  Penalty, see § 111.99



OPERATING REGULATIONS



§ 111.30  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any
alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 midnight and
12:00 noon on Sunday. Hours of operation on Sunday for Class A, B, E, F, G,
H, J and K shall be 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight. The sale of liquor shall be
allowed between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays by those
businesses defined as a restaurant and holding a liquor license.



      (2)   December 31 of each year will be an exception to the
operating hours for New Year’s Eve. The permissible hours will be extended
for Class B - bar, Class C and D restaurants, Class E - club, Class F - bar,
Class J - fraternal/religious, and Class K - micro-brewery to allow last
drinks to be served no later than 1:30 a.m. and the establishment to close at
2:00 a.m. The opening hours will remain the same as set by ordinance. Retail
sale of liquor not for consumption must be completed prior to midnight.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the
public to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail
during the hours within which the sale of liquor is prohibited; however, in
the case of clubs, the establishments may be kept open during those hours,
but no alcoholic liquor shall be sold or consumed by the public during those
hours.



   (C)   It is further provided that if the licensee is engaged in
other business on the premises and the sale of alcoholic liquor is secondary
to that business, then the licensee may remain open at any time, but no
alcoholic liquor shall be sold or consumed by the public during the hours
when that type of sale is prohibited.



(1969 Code, § 3-13)  (Ord. 1976-16, passed 6-28-1976; Am. Ord. 1995-33,
passed 12-21-1995; Am. Ord. 1996-22, passed 6-24-1996; Am. Ord. 2003-30,
passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 2015-24, passed 12-14- 2015; Am. Ord. 2017-20,
passed 12-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-11, passed 6-25-2018)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.31  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS, DRUNKARDS, AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer’s
license issued pursuant to this chapter to sell, deliver, or give any
alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person known to him or
her to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feebleminded, or
distracted person.



(1969 Code, § 3-10)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16



§ 111.32  DISTURBANCE OF PEACE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.



   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor license issued
pursuant to this chapter to permit the disturbance of peace by loud,
boisterous, or rowdy behavior, or obscene or vulgar conduct, on the premises
where liquor is sold.



(1969 Code, § 3-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent disorderly conduct, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-5-3



   Disorderly conduct, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 26-1



   Liability of licensee and landlord, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-21



§ 111.33  NUDE OR OBSCENE ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Allowing obscene activities.  It shall be unlawful for any
holder of any liquor license granted hereunder to allow upon the premises
under his or her control, the exhibiting of any bare or uncovered breast at
or below the areola area or the exhibiting of any breast at or below the
areola area of girls or women covered with a transparent or semi-transparent
material which exposes to public view the breast at or below the areola area,
or exhibiting of bare or uncovered buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus of
either girls, women, boys, or men, or the exhibiting of buttocks, genitals,
pubic hair, or anus covered with a transparent or semi-transparent material
which exposes to public view the buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus.



   (B)   Putting on obscene activities.  It shall be unlawful for any
holder of any liquor license granted hereunder to produce or put on any
performance or exhibit that includes the exhibiting of any bare or uncovered
breast at or below the areola area or the exhibiting of any breast at or
below the areola area of girls or women covered with a transparent or semi-
transparent material which exposes to public view the breast at or below the
areola area, or exhibiting of bare or uncovered buttocks, genitals, pubic
hair, or anus of either girls, women, boys, or men, or the exhibiting of
buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus covered with a transparent or
semi-transparent material which exposes to public view the buttocks,
genitals, pubic hair, or anus.



(1969 Code, § 3-12)  (Ord. 2000-22, passed 6-12-2000)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.34  EMPLOYEES; CONTAGIOUS DISEASE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of
any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for
any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work
in or about any premises or to be engaged in any way in the handling,
preparation, or distribution of liquor.



(1969 Code, § 3-14)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Cross-reference:



   Food handlers; health requirements, see § 112.02



Statutory reference:



   Authority to act to suppress diseases, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-20-5



   Authority to regulate sale of beverages, for health purposes, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-2



§ 111.35  FOOD HANDLING SANITATION STANDARDS APPLY.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or the
storage of liquor for retail sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances and code provisions regulating the condition of premises used for
the storage or sale of food for human consumption.



(1969 Code, § 3-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Cross-reference:



   Food handling; sanitary premises required, see § 112.01



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate the sale of beverages, for health purposes, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-2



§ 111.36  PREMISES; VIEW OF INTERIOR REQUIRED.



   (A)   No premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises is licensed pursuant to this chapter, other than
as a club, restaurant, or hotel, shall be permitted to have any screen,
blind, curtain, partition, article, or thing in the windows or upon the doors
of the licensed premises nor inside the premises which shall prevent a clear
view into the interior of the licensed premises from the street, road, or
sidewalk at all times; and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction
nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the
interior of the premises which shall prevent a clear view of the entire
interior from the street, road, or sidewalk. 



   (B)   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises
shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or
artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises
shall be clearly visible.  In case the view into any licensed premises
required by the foregoing provisions shall be willfully obscured by the
licensee or by him or her willfully permitted to be obscured or in any manner
obstructed, then the licensee shall be subject to revocation of his or her
license in the manner herein provided. 



   (C)   In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Mayor
shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans,
drawings, and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.



(1969 Code, § 3-16)  Penalty, see § 111.99



LICENSING



§ 111.50  RETAIL SALE; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city
any alcoholic liquor of any kind without having a city retail liquor
dealer’s license, or in violation of the terms of the license.



(1969 Code, § 3-27)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



§ 111.51  ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a business or club not having a license
providing for consumption on the premises where sold, to offer for sale or
sell any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises or to permit any
alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises.



(1969 Code, § 3-28)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.52  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   (A)   Applications for licenses shall be submitted in writing signed
by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized officer, if the
applicant is a corporation, or by a partner, if the applicant is a
copartnership.



   (B)   All applications shall be verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall contain the following information and statements:



      (1)   (a)   The name, age, and residence address of the
applicant if the person applying is an individual.



         (b)   The names, ages and residence addresses of all
partners, if the applicant is a copartnership.



         (c)   The corporate name, date of incorporation, state
in which incorporated, and, if a foreign corporation, the date when it was
authorized to do business in Illinois as a foreign corporation, and that it
is still licensed as a foreign corporation to do business in Illinois; the
stated objective or purposes of the corporation quoted from its articles of
incorporation and any amendments thereto, or from its  corporate charter;
the names, ages, and residence addresses of all of its officers, directors,
and stockholders who own, directly or beneficially, and of all subscribers to
shares constituting more than 5% of its issued and outstanding stock or stock
to be issued.



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, if an individual or if
a partner in a copartnership, his or her place and date of birth, and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.



      (3)   The character of the business of the applicant.



      (4)   The length of time that applicant has been in a business
of that character.



      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand, if
any, at the time the application is submitted.



      (6)   The location, including street address, and the full
legal description of the premises for which the license is sought. If the
premises are possessed by the applicant under a bona fide, valid, written
lease or memorandum of lease signed by the lessor and all other necessary
parties for the full term of the license being applied for, a certified
photocopy of the lease or memorandum thereof shall be attached to the
application.



      (7)   The application shall contain the applicant's statement
as to whether or not he or she or it has made a similar application for a
similar license on premises other than that described in the application, and
the disposition of such application.



      (8)   The application shall contain a statement that the
applicant has never been convicted of a felony, and is not disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter,
or in the laws of the United States or of the State of Illinois, or in the
provisions of other ordinances of the village.



      (9)   The application shall also state whether or not any
license issued to the applicant by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government, has been revoked, and, if so, the reasons therefor.
The application shall also state whether or not any firm or entity with which
the applicant had been connected previously as principal owner or manager had
been issued any previous license for the sale or handling of alcoholic
liquor, which license had been revoked or suspended by the federal government
or by any state or subdivision thereof, and the reasons or causes for the
revocation or suspension. Any statement shall include information identifying
the previous licensor, as well as its licensee, by names and addresses,
including the address of the licensed premises and name of the licensed
establishment, and the date or dates of the revocation or suspension,



      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the ordinances of the village or any of the laws of the State of Illinois or
of the United States in the conduct of business at the licensed premises.



      (11)   A confirmed or verified financial statement showing the
assets and liabilities of the person applying as of a date recently prior to
the date the application is filed shall be filed with the application. This
financial statement shall be treated and handled as a confidential matter.
The financial statement may be enclosed in a sealed envelope that is filed
with the Village Clerk, and which is to be delivered, unopened, with the
duplicate original of the application to the local Commissioner. The
confidentiality and privacy of the financial statement shall be respected and
maintained by the Village Commission and may be impounded or retained in a
locked file so that same shall not be a public record, and shall be secret
information made available only for the consideration by the Village
Commission and the local commissioner of the application for an initial
license or for renewal of license. Likewise, confirmed or verified financial
statements shall be submitted for all persons who will share the profits or
losses of a copartnership which seeks a license, as well as for stockholders
owning more than 5% of the issued and outstanding share of a corporation
which applies for a license.



      (12)   (a)   The applicant shall also provide a certificate
of insurance verifying proof of insurance of the applicant in the types and
minimums stated below.



         (b)   Workers compensation insurance in full compliance
with the Worker's Compensation Act and Employer's Liability Coverage in the
amount not less than as defined by Illinois State Statutes.



            1.   Commercial general liability insurance in an
amount not less than $1,000,000.



            2.   Dramshop insurance in full compliance with
the Illinois Dramshop Act and in an amount of not less than as defined by
Illinois State Statutes.



   (C)   Said insurance required in this section shall be written by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. The
certificate of insurance shall also contain substantially the following
cancellation provision:



The insurance evidence by this certificate will not be canceled or material
reduced except after 30 days written notice to the City of Paris, Illinois.



(1969 Code, § 3-29)  (Am. Ord. 2009-2, passed 1-26-2009)  Penalty, see §
111.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of local liquor control commissioner to examine license
applicant, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 4-5



   Compensation of local liquor control commissioner, see ILCS Chapter
235, Act 5, § 4-3



   Duties, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 4-4



   Mayor to be city liquor control commissioner, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act
5, § 4-2



§ 111.53  INELIGIBLE PERSONS.



   No license required by this chapter shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city;



   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;



   (C)   A person who is not a resident of the United States;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of
the state;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house
of ill fame;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or a crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (G)   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;



   (H)   A person, who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for that license upon a first
application;



   (I)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of the
copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;



   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof,
or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision;



   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee;



   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any state or
federal law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic
liquor, or who shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court in
answer to charges for such a violation;



   (M)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is issued;



   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, the Mayor, or the
Commissioners; no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor; or



   (O)   A person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer’s license.



(1969 Code, § 3-30)



Statutory reference:



   Persons not eligible for a state liquor license, see ILCS Chapter 235,
Act 5, § 6-2



§ 111.54  INELIGIBLE LOCATIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church; school, other than an institution of
higher learning; hospital; home for aged, or any aged persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children; or any military or naval station;
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels or motels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops,
or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or school where
the church or school has been established within that 100 feet since the
issuance of the original license.  In the case of a church, the distance of
100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for
worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.  In
other cases, it shall be measured to the property boundaries.



(1969 Code, § 3-34)  (Ord. 2000-10, passed 3-27-2000)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-11



§ 111.55  APPLICATION FEE.



   (A)   All applications for licenses received after January 1, 1996,
shall be accompanied by a 1-time application fee of $500 in addition to the
annual fees set forth hereinafter.  All existing license holders as of
January 1, 1996, shall be exempt from this $500 fee.



   (B)   All fees for licenses required by this chapter shall be paid
to the Mayor at the time application is made for the license and shall be
forthwith turned over to the City Clerk.  In the event the license applied
for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is
granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in
such other fund as shall have been designated by the City Council by proper
action.



(1969 Code, § 3-31)  (Ord. 1995-33, passed 12-21-1995)  Penalty, see §
111.99



Cross-reference:



   License fee payment, see § 110.06



§ 111.56  LICENSE CLASSES; FEES.



   (A)   Licenses required by this chapter shall be divided into 11
classes, and each person seeking to obtain or renew a license pursuant to
this chapter shall pay the fee required for the appropriate class of license.



   (B)   The classes of licenses and fees are as follows.



      (1)   Class A shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic
liquors in “original packages” and not for resale of those liquors nor
for consumption on the premises; the fee for this license shall be $1,000 per
year.



      (2)   Class B shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption, as well as the retail sale of liquors not for
consumption on the premises specified; provided, however, that this license
shall not be available to any club or similar organization; the fee for this
license shall be $1,500 per year.



      (3)   Class C shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the premises specified for any restaurant as
defined in this chapter; the fee for this license shall be $1,500 per year.



      (4)   Class D shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
only for consumption on the premises specified for any restaurant as defined
in this chapter; the fee for this license shall be $500 per year.



      (5)   Class E shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption, as well as the retail sale of liquors not for
consumption on the premises specified, for any club as defined in this
chapter; the fee for this license shall be $1,500 per year.



      (6)   Class F shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
only for consumption, as well as the retail sale of beer and wine not for
consumption on the premises specified, for any bar as defined in this
chapter; the fee shall be $500 per year.



      (7)   Class G shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the premises specified, for special occasions
only; the fee for this license shall be $100 per year, plus a fee of $50 per
special occasion.  Each separate special occasion must be specifically
authorized by the liquor control commissioner after authorization is applied
for by the license holder.  Each special occasion application shall be filed
at least 48 hours before the event is to be held, and each special occasion
license shall specify the hours during which the license shall be valid.  In
no event shall any special occasion license be valid for more than 1 event in
any one 24-hour period, nor shall any such license be issued for more than 12
hours’ duration.



      (8)   Class H shall authorize the retail sales or dispensing
of alcoholic beverages, by the drink or pitcher only, for consumption on
property owned by the state, provided that the sale is authorized by state
law and provided further that the licensee is a not-for- profit organization
under the laws of this state.  The events where sales shall occur may be
open to the public in general but must be limited to an identifiable
membership or group invited to the event or events.  The organization’s
activities must be subject to regulations imposed by the state agency in
control of the property upon which the events will be held, those regulations
limiting the dispensing of alcoholic beverages at the scheduled events.  The
organization must comply with the laws of the state and of the city with
respect to closing hours and the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages
to minors.  This dispensing of alcoholic beverages must be for not more than
45 days per year and be limited to not more than 3 days per week and not more
than 7 hours in any given day.  The annual fee for this license shall be $5.



      (9)   Reserved.



      (10)   Class J shall authorize for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises for a religious/fraternal
organization as defined in this chapter; the fee for this license shall be
$500 per year.



      (11)   Class K, micro-brewery license, shall permit an
establishment primarily engaged in the production and wholesale distribution
of beer, ale, and other malt beverages to sell at retail any beer, ale, other
malt beverages, and wine by the drink or by the package for consumption on
the premises, or in original package form for consumption off the premises
where sold, subject to the following requirements.



      (12)   Class L shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises of a rental hall business as defined
in this chapter; the fee for this license shall be $1,000 per year.



(1969 Code, § 3-33)  (Ord. 1975-13, passed 6-23-1975; Am. Ord. 1982-19,
passed 7-12-1982; Am. Ord. 1985-2, passed 1-28-1985; Am. Ord. 1995-33, passed
12-21-1995; Am. Ord. 1996-22, passed 6-24-1996; Am. Ord. 2002-10, passed
5-20-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-31, passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-12-
2015; Am. Ord. 2015-24, passed 12-14-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-20, passed
12-11-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 8-13-2018)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Original packages; definition, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 1-3.06



§ 111.57  NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   There shall be issued in the city not more than 8 Class A licenses, and
not more than 7 Class B licenses. There shall be an unlimited number of Class
C and Class D licenses. There shall be no more than 3 Class E licenses in
effect at any 1 time. The number of Class F licenses shall be no more than 2.
The number of Class G licenses shall be unlimited, and the number of Class H,
Class J, and Class K licenses shall be limited to 1. The number of Class L
licenses shall be limited to 1.



(1969 Code, § 3-35)  (Ord. 1975-13, passed 6-23-1975; Am. Ord. 1977-3,
passed 2-14-1977; Am. Ord. 1982-4, passed 4-12-1982; Am. Ord. 1982-19, passed
7-12-1982; Am. Ord. 1985-2, passed 1-28-1985; Am. Ord. 1989-5, passed
2-27-1989; Am. Ord. 1992-4, passed 2-24-1992; Am. Ord. 1995-33,passed
12-21-1995; Am. Ord. 1997-1, passed 1-13-1997; Am. Ord. 1997-40, passed
10-13-1997; Am. Ord. 1998-16, passed 8-10-1998; Am. Ord. 1999-42, passed
11-29-1999; Am. Ord. 2000-7, passed 3-27-2000; Am. Ord. 2002-11, passed
5-20-2002; Am. Ord. 2003-5, passed 3-10-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-23, passed
9-8-2003; Am. Ord. 2003-32, passed 11-10-2003; Am. Ord. 2004-27, passed
7-12-2004; Am. Ord. 2005-4, passed 1-24- 2005; Am. Ord. 2005-9, passed
2-28-2005; Am. Ord. 2008-2, passed 1-14-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-21, passed
7-28-2009; Am. Ord. 2012-6, passed 4-9-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 6-
25-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 1-12-2015; Am. Ord. 2015-2, passed
1-26-2015; Am. Ord. 2016-18, passed 9-26-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-21, passed
10-11-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-1, passed 1-8-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed
8-13-2018)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to determine number of licenses to be issued, see ILCS
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 4-1



§ 111.58  LICENSE PERIOD.



   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the
thirtieth day of June next following the date of issuance.



(1969 Code, § 3-37)



§ 111.59  PRORATED LICENSE FEE.



   Where there are less than 12 months remaining between the time the
application for a license under this chapter is made and the date on which
the license expires annually, the applicant may reduce the license fee
remitted with his or her application in proportion to the number of full
calendar months which have expired in the license year.



(1969 Code, § 3-32)



§ 111.60  RENEWAL.



   Any licensee under this chapter may renew his or her license at the
expiration thereof, provided that he or she is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable
for the purpose; provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided
for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent
the City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
its jurisdiction.



(1969 Code, § 3-40)



§ 111.61  RENEWAL FEE INSTALLMENTS.



   Renewal fees may be paid in 2 equal semi-annual installments.



(1969 Code, § 3-41)



§ 111.62  CHANGE OF LOCATION; PERMISSION REQUIRED.



   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only on the premises described in the application and license.  The
location may be changed only upon written permission to make a change issued
by the Mayor.  No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under
the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.



(1969 Code, § 3-39)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.63  LICENSE PRIVILEGE RESTRICTED; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed 1 year after issuance unless sooner revoked
as provided in this chapter, and shall not constitute property or be subject
to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated.  The license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided
that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and
the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists
in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise
the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the
death of that decedent, or that insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of the license, but not longer than 6 months after the death,
bankruptcy, or insolvency of the licensee.  A refund shall be made of that
portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall
be prevented from operating under the license in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



(1969 Code, § 3-36)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-1



§ 111.64  RECORD OF LICENSES.



   The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
licenses issued by him or her pursuant to this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 3-38)



§ 111.65  LICENSE REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.



   In addition to any other penalty, the Mayor may revoke or suspend, as
provided by law, any retail liquor dealer’s license for any violation of
any provision of this chapter, or for the violation of any state law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor.



(1969 Code, § 3-42)  Penalty, see § 111.99



Statutory reference:



   Procedure for suspension of municipal license, see ILCS Chapter 235,
Act 5, § 7-5



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
111.33 of this code shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 3-12)  (Ord. 2000-22, passed 6-12-2000)



   (C)   Any minor who shall violate the provisions of § 111.16 of
this code shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100 or more than
$500.



(1969 Code, § 3-17)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-20



CHAPTER 112:  FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS



Section



Food Sales and Storage



   112.01   Sanitary premises required



   112.02   Health requirements; certificate



   112.03   Dining utensils



Food Dealers



   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   Sale of unwholesome food prohibited



   112.17   Adulterated foods prohibited



   112.18   Refuse accumulation prohibited



Slaughterhouses



   112.30   Certain animals not to be slaughtered



   112.31   Slaughterhouse construction standards



   112.32   Location restrictions



   112.33   Inspections



Cross-reference:



   Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, see §§ 31.100et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate sale of foods and beverages, except bread and
wholesale alcoholic beverages, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-2



   Meat and poultry inspections; authority and standards, see ILCS Chapter
225, Act 650, §§ 1 et seq.



FOOD SALES AND STORAGE



§ 112.01  SANITARY PREMISES REQUIRED.



   All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for
human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.  Premises
shall be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds.



(1969 Code, § 10-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverage sales; sanitation standards, see § 111.35



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 410, Act 650, §§ 1et seq.



§ 112.02  HEALTH REQUIREMENTS; CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person affected with any
infectious disease in a communicable form or without a health certificate
provided for in the following divisions to engage or serve in any work,
occupation, or employment which requires or occasions the actual handling of
foods or liquids or material intended for food or drink for human consumption
or the handling of any dishes or other articles used in the preparation or
serving of food or drink for human consumption; it shall be unlawful for any
owner or manager of a food-handling establishment, business, or occupation to
employ for the performance of this type of service any person who may be
without a health certificate, or who is known or reasonably believed to be
infected with a communicable disease, if upon examination, it is determined
that the person actually has such a disease; it shall be unlawful for any
person knowing himself or herself to be affected with a communicable disease,
if upon examination, it is determined that the person actually has a
communicable disease, to seek or continue in this type of employment or
service.



   (B)   Every person engaged in or who desires or intends to engage in
an occupation in which, under division (A) of this section, a health
certificate is required, shall, before he or she engages in any such
occupation or continues therein, secure a health certificate.  Health
certificates shall be in the form of a written statement to the effect that
the holder thereof, naming that holder, has none of the types of diseases
mentioned in division (A).  The certificate shall be issued and signed by a
physician in good standing and duly authorized to practice medicine in the
state.



   (C)   No health certificate shall be issued until an adequate
physical examination of the prospective holder thereof is made by the
physician who signs and issues the certificate, and the certificate shall
show the date of the examination.  It shall be unlawful for any physician to
issue a health certificate without a physical examination or to knowingly
make any false statement of fact therein.  The Commissioner of Public Health
and Safety may require the holder of any health certificate to present
himself or herself for examination by some physician.  The ordered
examination shall be had not less than 4 days after the demand therefor, and
if it discloses the presence of a disease that would prevent the original
issuance of a health certificate, the health certificate issued to the person
so examined shall be revoked and canceled.



   (D)   No health certificate shall have any validity, force, or
effect after 6 months from the date of the previous physical examination, and
the holder thereof shall obtain a new health certificate every 6 months.



   (E)   Any person who may be engaged in any work, occupation, or
service covered by division (A) shall exhibit his or her health certificate
whenever required to do so by the City Health Officer or the employer of that
person.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false
statement or misrepresentation for the purpose of obtaining a health
certificate.  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make any
false statement or to make any incorrect statement without reasonable
foundation or basis therefor with respect to the health certificate if the
statement shall be made for the purpose of causing, or shall actually cause,
the person about whom the statement shall be made to get or fail to get a
health certificate required by this section or to lose any employment from
any occupation for which a health certificate is required by this section.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person who may have obtained a
health certificate to give or lend the same or allow anyone else to use the
same or to borrow, use or claim as his or her own health certificate any
certificate issued to another person.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a health certificate to
continue in any occupation covered by this section after refusing or
willfully failing to submit to the physical examination by a physician as
hereinbefore provided for, or to fail or refuse to surrender to the Health
Officer or the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety his or her health
certificate for cancellation where a physical examination discloses the
presence of diseases as defined in division (A) of this section.



(1969 Code, § 10-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic beverage employees; contagious disease prohibited, see §
111.34



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 410, Act 650, §§ 8, 10



§ 112.03  DINING UTENSILS.



   Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or drink to the
public shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each usage.



(1969 Code, § 10-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FOOD DEALERS



§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD.  Includes beverages.



   FOOD DEALER.  Includes every person engaged in the sale of food or
beverage, other than alcoholic liquor, intended for human consumption.



(1969 Code, § 10-14)



§ 112.16  SALE OF UNWHOLESOME FOOD PROHIBITED.



   No person shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human consumption which
is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for
any reason.



(1969 Code, § 10-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.17  ADULTERATED FOODS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, or to keep for that
purpose, any food or drink intended for human consumption which has been
adulterated by any material harmful in any way or which does not comply with
the statutes governing the same.



(1969 Code, § 10-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Adulterated food defined, see ILCS Chapter 410, Act 620, § 10



§ 112.18  REFUSE ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse or waste of
any kind to remain on any premises used for the storage or sale of food
intended for human consumption for more than 24 hours, and it shall be
unlawful to permit any decaying animal or plant material to remain on the
premises.



(1969 Code, § 10-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SLAUGHTERHOUSES



§ 112.30  CERTAIN ANIMALS NOT TO BE SLAUGHTERED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter or permit the
slaughter of any cattle, swine, sheep, or poultry for human consumption if
the animals or poultry are in a diseased condition, overheated, or feverish.



   (B)   No calf less than 4 weeks old or less than 125 pounds live
weight, no pig less than 6 weeks old, and no ram less than 8 weeks old shall
be slaughtered and sold for human consumption.



(1969 Code, § 10-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.31  SLAUGHTERHOUSE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   It shall be unlawful to use any building for a slaughterhouse unless
the floor is covered with cement or other impervious material and is properly
sloped to a well trapped outlet having contact with a sewer.  The interior
walls of these buildings shall be covered to a height of 7 feet with smooth,
impervious material; the yards and pens shall be paved with brick, cement, or
similar material.



(1969 Code, § 10-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.32  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation
of a slaughterhouse or to keep or permit the keeping of any animals or
poultry for slaughtering purposes within 500 feet of any dwelling house or
building.



(1969 Code, § 10-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.33  INSPECTIONS.



   The Health Officer shall inspect slaughterhouses and appurtenances
thereto as often as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 10-31)



CHAPTER 113:  TOBACCO



Section



Sales to and Possession by Minors



   113.01   Findings



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Purchase, possession; representation of age



   113.04   Employment exemption



   113.05   Delivery to minor prohibited



   113.06   Vendors; required signs



   113.07   Free distributions restricted



   113.08   Seizure



   113.09   Vending machines; restrictions



   113.10   Licensee responsibility



   113.99   Penalty



SALES TO AND POSSESSION BY MINORS



§ 113.01  FINDINGS.



   The City Council finds that the facts stated in the preamble of Ord.
2003-26 are true.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISTRIBUTION.  To give, sell, deliver, dispense, issue, or offer to
give, sell, deliver, dispense, or issue.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who may be required or directed by any employer
in consideration of direct or indirect gain or profit, to engage in any
employment, or to go, or work, or be at any time in any place of employment.



   EMPLOYER.  Any person, firm, corporation, agent, manager,
representative, or other person having control or custody of any employment,
place of employment, or employee.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any physical facility operated by a commercial
enterprise, nonprofit entity, government agency, or other person.



   MINOR.  A person under 18 years of age.



   ORGANIZATION.  A corporation for profit or not-for-profit,
partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association,
estate, trust, or other commercial legal entity.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
or dipping tobacco.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric, or electronic,
self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form
of payment, dispenses tobacco products.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)



§ 113.03  PURCHASE, POSSESSION; REPRESENTATION OF AGE.



   Except as provided in § 113.04 below, no person under 18 years of age
may do any of the following:



   (A)   Buy or attempt to buy or possess any cigarette or tobacco
product; or



   (B)   Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving
or possessing any cigarette or tobacco product.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.04  EMPLOYMENT EXEMPTION.



   A person under 18 years of age may purchase or possess cigarettes or
tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of employment
during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer licensed under
state statute.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)



§ 113.05  DELIVERY TO MINOR PROHIBITED.



   No person shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, sell or possess
with intent to sell, exchange, or give away any cigarette or tobacco products
to any person under 18 years of age, except that a retailer may transfer
cigarette or tobacco products to a child employee, strictly for resale on the
licensed premises to an adult making a purchase.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.06  VENDORS; REQUIRED SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided
for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of
tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco
products for sale.



   (B)   Each sign of this type shall be plainly visible and shall
state:



“The sale of tobacco products to persons under eighteen years of age is
prohibited by law.”



   (C)   The text of these signs shall be in red letters on a white
background, the letters to be at least 1 inch high.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.07  FREE DISTRIBUTIONS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of
selling or otherwise distributing, promoting, or advertising tobacco
products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the
course of the licensee’s or person’s business, to distribute, give away,
or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right-of-way,
park, playground, or other property owned by the city, any school district,
or any public library.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.08  SEIZURE.



   A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product
involved in any violation of this subchapter committed in his or her presence.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)



§ 113.09  VENDING MACHINES; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Distance from school.  No retailer may place a vending
machine within 500 feet of a school.



   (B)   Places open to minors.  No retailer may keep a cigarette
vending machine in any public place that is open to persons under the age of
18 unless the following apply:



      (1)   The vending machine is in a place where it is ordinarily
in the immediate vicinity, plain view, and control of an employee;



      (2)   The vending machine is in a place where it is
inaccessible to the public when the premises are closed;



      (3)    The person who ultimately controls, governs, or directs
the activities within the premises where the vending machine is located shall
make sure that an employee remains in the immediate vicinity, plain view, and
control of the vending machine whenever the premises are open; and



      (4)   The vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric,
or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its
operation by persons under the age of 18 years.



   (C)   Exemption.  Any premises where access by persons under the
age of 18 years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is
generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use
of employees of business located at the premises, shall be exempt from the
requirements of division (B)(4) above.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.10  LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter by any officer, director, manager,
or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of the licensee; and the licensee shall be punishable in the same manner
as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)  Penalty, see
§ 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
§§ 113.01et seq of this code shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 17-3)  (Am. Ord. 2003-26, passed 10-13-2003)



CHAPTER 114:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS; ADVERTISEMENTS



Section



Peddlers



   114.001   License required; bond



   114.002   Entry upon premises; consent required



   114.003   License fee; expiration



   114.004   Application; content; investigation



   114.005   Hours of operation



   114.006   Fraud or misrepresentation; revocation



Solicitors



   114.020   Permit required



   114.021   Application; content; investigation



Auctioneers



   114.035   License required



   114.036   Public officers exempt



   114.037   Application; content



   114.038   Applicant character; investigation



   114.039   Employee limits; licensee liability



   114.040   License fees



Garage Sales



   114.055   Definitions



   114.056   Frequency and length



   114.057   Exceptions



Outdoor Advertisers



   114.070   Definitions



   114.071   License required; limitation



   114.072   Exemptions



   114.073   Application; content



   114.074   License fee



   114.075   Compliance with laws required



   114.076   Premises owner’s consent required



   114.077   Litter accumulation prohibited



   114.078   Maintenance of grounds



   114.079   Unlawful advertisements



   114.080   Licensee name required on advertisement



Sound Amplifiers



   114.095   License required



   114.096   License fee



   114.097   Application; content



   114.098   Issuance



   114.099   Operating restrictions



   114.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Signs, see Chapter 158



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit hawkers and peddlers,
see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-5



PEDDLERS



§ 114.001  LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of hawker
or peddler, house to house solicitation of funds or subscriptions, or to
publicly solicit either in person or by agent upon the public streets,
sidewalks, or other public place in the city, subscriptions for charitable,
religious, or education or other organizations or purposes, whether gifts of
money or promises are sought, without having first filed with the City Clerk
a corporate surety bond, wherein the surety is held and firmly bound unto the
city, in the sum of $10,000, to ensure that should the principal herein named
be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation while acting as a
peddler/solicitor in the city, any citizen so defrauded or cheated may
recover from the surety to the extent of his or her loss.



(1969 Code, § 15-135)  (Ord. 1960-10, passed 6-27-1960; Am. Ord. 2018-6,
passed 4-23-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.002  ENTRY UPON PREMISES; CONSENT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the premises of another
for the purpose of soliciting orders, selling, or peddling without the
consent of or invitation of the owner or occupant. License holders are
prohibited from approaching residences where a “No Solicitors” sign is
displayed.



(1969 Code, § 15-136)  (Ord. 1960-9, passed 6-27-1960; Am. Ord. 2018-6,
passed 4-23-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.003  LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION.



    The fee for any license required by this subchapter shall be $100 per
person. Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall expire on the last
day of December following the date of issuance. License holders must register
with the Paris Police Department before beginning their operation.



(1969 Code, § 15-137)  (Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 4-23-2018)



§ 114.004  APPLICATION; CONTENT; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Applications for licenses required by § 114.001 shall be on
forms provided by the city. These forms shall require the following
information of an applicant: name, signature, address, copy of driver’s
license, number of vehicles, license plate numbers, employer’s name, and
the kind of merchandise to be peddled.



   (B)   No license shall be issued until 3 days after application is
made to the City Clerk. No such license shall be issued if the Police
Department’s investigation shows that an applicant has, within the last 4
years, been convicted of violating any law or ordinance related to the use of
sales or subscriptions methods involving fraud, misrepresentation, and false
or misleading statements.



(1969 Code, § 15-138)  (Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 4-23-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 114.999



§ 114.005  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The hours of operation for license holders under this subchapter shall
be 9:00 a.m. to dusk. Any violation of hours of operation shall result in
revocation of the license.



(Ord. 2018-6, passed 4-23-2018)



§ 114.006  FRAUD OR MISREPRESENTATION; REVOCATION.



   Any licensed peddler or solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud,
cheating, or misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or through
an employee, while acting as a peddler or solicitor in the city, or who shall
barter, sell, or peddle any goods, wares, or merchandise other than those
specified in his or her application for a license shall be subject to a fine,
and the Mayor may revoke his or her license for such an offense.



(1969 Code, § 15-139)  (Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 4-23-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 114.999



SOLICITORS



§ 114.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house
soliciting funds or subscriptions or to publicly solicit either in person or
by agent upon the public streets, sidewalks, or any other public place in the
city, subscriptions for charitable, religious, or educational or other
organizations or purposes, whether present gifts of money or promises are
sought, without having first obtained a permit therefor.



(1969 Code, § 15-150)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.021  APPLICATION; CONTENT; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Applications for permits required by § 114.020 of this code
shall be on forms provided by the city.  These forms shall require the
following information of an applicant:  name, signature, address, social
security number, employer’s name, name of magazines, journals, or books to
be sold or subscribed to, proposed method of operation in the city, and names
of the 3 most recent municipalities where the applicant has solicited house
to house.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued until 3 days after application is
made to the Clerk.  No such permit shall be issued if the Police
Department’s investigation shows that an applicant has, within the last 4
years, been convicted of violating any law or ordinance related to the use of
sales or subscription methods involving fraud, misrepresentation, and false
or misleading statements.



(1969 Code, § 15-151)  (Ord. 1976-27, passed 10-12-1976)  Penalty, see §
114.999



AUCTIONEERS



§ 114.035  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the city
or to do business as an auctioneer, whether the goods sold are owned by the
auctioneer or not, without having first obtained a license therefor as
provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-25)  Penalty, see § 114.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, and regulate auctioneers, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-42-1



§ 114.036  PUBLIC OFFICERS EXEMPT.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be held to apply to any public auction
or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order
or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or
trust deed.



(1969 Code, § 15-26)



§ 114.037  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Applications for auctioneers’ licenses, or for a single auction,
shall state thereon the place of business intended to be occupied, if any, or
the place of the auction; the applications shall give the names of any
employees, not to exceed 2, who are to be authorized to conduct auctions
under the authority of the license.



(1969 Code, § 15-27)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.038  APPLICANT CHARACTER; INVESTIGATION.



   No license shall be issued to anyone except a person of good character;
the Chief of Police shall investigate the character of each applicant before
the license shall be issued.



(1969 Code, § 15-28)



§ 114.039  EMPLOYEE LIMITS; LICENSEE LIABILITY.



   Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate up to 2 employees
who may be authorized by him or her to assist in the conduct of auctions; the
employer shall be liable for any violation of the city ordinances committed
by those employees in conducting an auction.



(1969 Code, § 15-29)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.040  LICENSE FEES.



   The fees for an auctioneer’s license shall be:



   (A)   For a license for 1 day:  $5; or



   (B)   For an annual license:  $20.



(1969 Code, § 15-30)



GARAGE SALES



§ 114.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALES.  Include all sales entitled “garage sale,” “attic
sale,” “rummage sale,” “flea market sale,” or any similar casual
sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby
the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.



   GOODS.  Include any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.



   PERSON.  Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations,
and corporations.



(1969 Code, § 15-176)  (Ord. 1987-10, passed 6-22-1987)



§ 114.056  FREQUENCY AND LENGTH.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
city more than 5 times within a 12-month period; and no garage sale shall be
held for more than 3 consecutive calendar days.  It is specifically
prohibited to sell at a garage sale any items purchased for resale.



(1969 Code, § 15-177)  (Ord. 1987-10, passed 6-22-1987; Am. Ord. 2000-13,
passed 4-24-2000)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.057  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to or affect the
following persons or sales:



   (A)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction;



   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials; or



   (C)   Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed 5 in number.



(1969 Code, § 15-178)  (Ord. 1987-10, passed 6-22-1987)



OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS



§ 114.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISER.  Any person engaged in the business of placing,
posting, or painting any sign, advertisement, notice, or display in or on any
place for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is
visible from any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.



(1969 Code, § 15-89)



§ 114.071  LICENSE REQUIRED; LIMITATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business in the
city without having first secured a license therefor as is herein required;
provided, that no license issued under this subchapter shall be construed to
permit the use of any structures, natural or artificial, for advertising
purposes which are located in any public street, alley, or other public place.



(1969 Code, § 15-90)  Penalty, see § 114.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate and license signs, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-80-15



§ 114.072  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to apply to
the posting of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public
officer in the performance of his or her duties.



(1969 Code, § 15-91)



§ 114.073  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Applications for licenses required by this subchapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a list of all places,
including billboards or natural structures, on which it is intended to place
signs or advertisements; this list shall be added to from time to time by the
licensee as a right to post or place advertisements or signs on additional
places as acquired.



(1969 Code, § 15-92)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.074  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for a license required by this subchapter shall be $20.



(1969 Code, § 15-93)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.075  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS REQUIRED.



   No person shall post or maintain any advertisement or sign on any
poster panel, billboard, or signboard which does not fully comply with the
ordinances of the city.



(1969 Code, § 15-94)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.076  PREMISES OWNER’S CONSENT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to post any advertisements on any premises in the
city without the consent of the owner of the premises.  Consents required by
this section shall be in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 15-95)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.077  LITTER ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in outdoor advertising to
permit any refuse resulting from his or her work to accumulate anywhere in
the city except by placing it in properly established refuse receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or flapping or combustible materials
to hang from or be attached to any billboard or signboard or other place used
for display or advertising purposes.  All refuse resulting from the
operation of the licensed business must be carefully gathered up and properly
disposed of.



(1969 Code, § 15-96)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.078  MAINTENANCE OF GROUNDS.



   It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and
weeds and other growths, except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so
that the same shall not grow to a height greater than 10 inches within 6 feet
of any billboard or signboard used by him or her; provided that this
obligation shall extend only to property controlled by the advertiser.



(1969 Code, § 15-97)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.079  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISEMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display any
advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot or a breach of the peace, or
any advertisement of any unlawful gathering, or advertisement of unlawful
sales.



(1969 Code, § 15-98)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.080  LICENSEE NAME REQUIRED ON ADVERTISEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his or her
business unless the name of the licensee is attached, displayed, or printed
on all billboards or signboards used by him or her, or on any notice,
placard, or advertisement posted by him or her, in lettering so as to be
visible from a distance of at least 5 feet from the notice or advertisement.



(1969 Code, § 15-99)  Penalty, see § 114.999



SOUND AMPLIFIERS



§ 114.095  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business in which
he or she shall maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected
with any radio, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are
magnified and made heard outside his or her place of business or over any
public street or public place in the city without having first secured a
license therefor.



(1969 Code, § 15-162)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.096  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for licenses to be granted under this subchapter shall be $1
for each hour so used or $25 for an annual license.



(1969 Code, § 15-163)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.097  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Any person desiring a license for the use or operation of sound
amplifiers shall file an application therefor with the City Clerk upon a form
provided by him or her, setting forth the name and address of the applicant,
the name of the owner of the device, the date upon which it is intended to be
used, and other information as may be prescribed.



(1969 Code, § 15-164)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.098  ISSUANCE.



   A license required by this subchapter shall be issued upon the payment
of the license fee to the City Clerk and shall permit the use of any device
subject to the terms and conditions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-165)



§ 114.099  OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No licensee shall use or operate or employ any such device
within the city on Sunday, or after the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day or
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of any day.  No licensee shall use, operate, or
employ any such device within a radius of 2 blocks from any hospital or
within the radius of 2 blocks from any church while funeral services are
being held there.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private
pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in a manner so as not to be
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle, nor to noise devices,
bands, or other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which
is operated under a permit in accordance with the ordinances of the city.



   (C)   No licensee shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted
from any such device any lewd, obscene, profane, or indecent language or
sounds, or any false representation of any matter, product, or project
advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance, or
statute.



(1969 Code, § 15-166)  Penalty, see § 114.999



§ 114.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any licensed peddler or hawker who shall be guilty of any
violation as described in § 114.005 of this code shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense, and the Mayor may revoke his or
her license for such an offense.



(1969 Code, § 15-139)



   (C)   Any person, association, or corporation conducting any such
sale as described in §§ 114.055et seq. of this code, or who shall violate
any of the other items and regulations of that subchapter, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.



(1969 Code, § 15-179)  (Ord. 1987-10, passed 6-22-1987)



CHAPTER 115:  JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS



Section



Junkyards



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   License required



   115.03   License application; content



   115.04   License fee; expiration



   115.05   Ineligible persons



   115.06   License content; provision for suspension and revocation



   115.07   Minimum physical requirements



   115.08   Purchase from minors prohibited



   115.09   Right of inspection



   115.10   License revocation



   115.11   Outdoor accumulation; screening required



Cross-reference:



   Zoning, see Title XV, App. A



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, locate, and regulate junk dealers, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-3



JUNKYARDS



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUNK.  Includes scrap and old iron, steel, chain brass, copper,
magnesium, aluminum, tin, lead, or other base metals, scrap lumber, old rope,
old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips,
bagging, rubber, and glass, and empty bottles of different kinds and sizes
when the number of each kind or size is less than 1 gross, any wrecked or
dilapidated motor vehicle, engine, or machinery received, stored, or held
within the city or within 1½ miles of the city, and all articles and things
discarded or no longer used as a manufactured article composed of or
consisting of any 1 or more of the materials or articles herein mentioned.



   JUNK DEALER.  Includes any person who shall engage in the buying,
selling, bartering, or exchanging, or who shall collect, receive, store, or
hold in possession any of the things in and by this section defined as junk.



   JUNKYARD.  Includes the premises on which any person is engaged in the
buying, selling, bartering, exchanging, or collecting, receiving, storing, or
holding in possession any of the things in and by this section defined as
junk.



(1969 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 415, Act 95, § 2



§ 115.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, conduct, or
operate a junkyard within the city or within 1½ miles of the city without
first obtaining a license to do so as provided in this subchapter; a separate
license shall be secured for each junkyard located on noncontiguous lots,
blocks, tracts, or parcels of land.



(1969 Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.03  LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Before any license required by this subchapter is issued, any person
desiring to operate a junkyard in the city shall first make a verified
application in writing to the City Clerk, stating thereon the full name of
the applicant, his or her residence address, the trade name of the applicant,
the legal description of the premises where the junkyard is to be located,
the size and approximate location of each entrance thereto and exit
therefrom, whether or not the premises where the junkyard is to be located is
enclosed on its perimeter with a nonflammable wall or fence of a minimum
height of 8 feet measured from ground level excepting the entrances and
exits, and whether or not the public streets and alleys adjacent to the
premises where the junkyard is to be located have junk thereon.  If the
applicant is a firm or partnership, the names and residence addresses of all
the partners, and in case of a corporation the names and residence addresses
of the president and secretary, shall be stated in the application.



(1969 Code, § 13-3)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.04  LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION.



   The annual license fee for each junkyard shall be $50 payable in
advance with the filing of the application for the license, and shall not be
subject to pro rata reduction for a portion of the year, either because of
application for or because of revocation of a license; provided, however,
that only 1 annual license fee shall be payable for licenses which may be
issued whenever the applicant desires to keep, maintain, conduct, or operate
junkyards on lots, blocks, tracts, or parcels of land which are situated on
directly opposite sides of and abut upon each side of a public street or
alley.  All licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year.



(1969 Code, § 13-4)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.05  INELIGIBLE PERSONS.



   Any applicant for a license to keep, maintain, conduct, or operate a
junkyard shall be disqualified for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   The applicant is not a person of good character;



   (B)   Falsification of the application for a license required by
this subchapter;



   (C)   A license for a junkyard previously issued to the applicant
has been revoked during the preceding 24 months; or



   (D)   Failure to meet any one of the minimum physical requirements
for a junkyard as specified in § 115.07 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 13-5)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)



§ 115.06  LICENSE CONTENT; PROVISION FOR SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall state
that the license is issued in the name of the junk dealer solely for the
purpose of keeping, maintaining, conducting, and operating a junkyard, the
expiration date thereof, the legal description of the premises where the
junkyard is to be located, that the license shall be used and the privileges
thereof exercised only at the described premises, and that the license is
nonassignable and nontransferable.



   (B)   A license required by this subchapter shall provide that it is
issued subject to all the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   The license shall also provide that upon the first conviction
of a licensee under this subchapter for a violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter, in addition to the fine, the junkyard shall remain closed
for a period of 30 days; that upon the second conviction for a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter, the license shall become null and
void, and the licensee shall forfeit all sums paid for the license; and the
licensee by the acceptance of the license expressly agrees to all the terms
and conditions thereof and to the terms and provisions of this subchapter,
and all amendments thereof.



(1969 Code, § 13-6)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)



§ 115.07  MINIMUM PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The minimum physical requirements at all times for each junkyard shall
be as follows.



   (A)   The premises where the junkyard is located shall not have more
than 2 entrances thereto and 2 exits therefrom, each of which shall not
exceed 20 feet in width at the perimeter of the premises.



   (B)   The premises where the junkyard is located shall be enclosed
on its perimeter with a nonflammable wall or fence of a minimum height of 8
feet measured from ground level, except for the entrances and exits permitted
by division (A) of this section.



   (C)   The wall or fence required by this section and the gates or
doors thereto at the entrances and exits, if any, shall not contain any sign,
poster, or advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, except 1 sign of the
licensee thereon not exceeding 100 square feet in size.



   (D)   The public streets and alleys adjacent to the junkyard shall
not have junk thereon.



   (E)   For a distance of 15 feet from the fence within the enclosed
area of a junkyard, junk shall not be piled higher than the height of the
enclosing fence, except that discarded motor vehicles may be piled 2 vehicles
high horizontally.



(1969 Code, § 13-7)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 415, Act 95, § 4



§ 115.08  PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.



   No licensee under this subchapter shall purchase or receive any article
whatsoever from any minor without the written consent of the minor’s
parents or guardian.



(1969 Code, § 13-8)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent junk dealers from buying from minors, see ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-3



§ 115.09  RIGHT OF INSPECTION.



   Any licensee under this subchapter shall at all times allow any police
officer or patrolman of the city and the public health authorities free
access to any and all portions of the junkyard for the purpose of inspection.



(1969 Code, § 13-9)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.10  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   The Mayor of the city may revoke the license of any licensee under this
subchapter for violating, or failing or refusing to comply with any provision
of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 13-10)  (Ord. 1965-8, passed 6-7-1965)



§ 115.11  OUTDOOR ACCUMULATION; SCREENING REQUIRED.



   No person or corporation shall accumulate, store, or allow any junk
outside of any building on any public or private real estate located within
the city, unless screened from view from all locations off the premises. 
This screening may be by landscaping, fencing, or buildings complying with
all applicable laws and ordinances.



(1969 Code, § 13-11)  (Ord. 2000-40, passed 9-11-2000)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 116:  INSURANCE COMPANIES



Section



Out-of-State Fire Insurance Companies



   116.01   Compliance required



   116.02   Tax imposed; payment



   116.03   Reports required



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department; Pension Fund, see §§ 36.40 et seq.



   Fire protection tax, see § 92.001



OUT-OF-STATE FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES



§ 116.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association not
incorporated under the laws of the state to engage in effecting fire
insurance in the city or to transact any business of fire insurance in the
city without fully complying with the provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 15-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.02  TAX IMPOSED; PAYMENT.



   Any corporation or association subject to this subchapter shall pay to
the Treasurer for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the Fire Department
fund a sum of money equal to 2% of the gross receipts each year received for
premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation or association, or
received as premiums in any way for fire insurance policies on any property
in the city.  The payments to the Treasurer shall be made for the year
ending July 1 of each year.



(1969 Code, § 15-42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1



§ 116.03  REPORTS REQUIRED.



   Every person acting as representative for or on behalf of any fire
insurance company or association subject to this subchapter shall, on or
before July 15 of each year, render to the Treasurer or the Municipal League
of the state, with the full remittance of the tax due the city, a full, true,
and just account, verified by his or her oath, of all premiums which have
been received by him or her on behalf of the company during the year ending
the preceding July 1 on fire insurance policies.



(1969 Code, § 15-43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-10-1



CHAPTER 117:  COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



Section



Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Registration of telecommunications providers



   117.03   Telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee



   117.04   Fee collection, enforcement, and administration



   117.05   Compliance with other laws



   117.06   Existing franchises and the like



   117.07   Remedies not exclusive



   117.99   Penalty



TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAD DEBT.  Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail
for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has
become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made.



   GROSS CHARGES.  The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services,
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of the telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever.  In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid.  GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the city, and charges for that
portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the city. 
However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made under:



         (a)   The fee imposed by this subchapter;



         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill
under Chapter 220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 and 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act;



         (c)   The tax imposed by Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et
seq.;



         (d)   911 surcharges; or



         (e)   The tax imposed by I.R.C. § 4251.



      (2)   Charges for sent-collect telecom- munication received
outside the city;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content.  This equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment, and also
includes the usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that
is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein these charges
are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under Chapter
220, Act 5, § 9-222.1 to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the city;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other
than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering these
services;



      (7)   Bad debts as defined in this section;



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated
telecommunications devices; or



      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided to the city.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any municipal street, alley, water, or public
right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities.  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE, or any like
term.  Includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent
or other representative operating within this state under the authority of
the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether that place of
business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether that retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do
business in this state.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.  The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by 1 such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received.  If this is not a defined
location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall
mean the location of the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications
equipment as defined by the location in this state where bills are sent.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.  Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include
wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall
not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications.  Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges
for use of intercompany facilities, and all tele- communications resold in
the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-
to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as
sales for resale.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 et seq.) as now or
hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.



      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and



      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer
that installs, owns, operates, or controls equipment in the public right-of-
way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any
form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER.  Includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at
retail as defined in this section.  The city may, in its discretion, upon
applications, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection
and payment of the fee.  When so authorized, it shall be the duty of this
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications
in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the city.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless devices as defined in § 704(c) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7),
as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services,
and paging services.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-41)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 117.02  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.



   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this
subchapter shall register with the city within 30 days after the effective
date of this subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever
is later, on a form to be provided by the city; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to § 117.04(C)
of this code shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
city pursuant to division (A) above has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by § 117.04(C), as
the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of the occurrence
of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider
in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-42)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.03  TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.



   (A)   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in
the city.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by tele- communications retailers. 
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this
subchapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.



   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in § 117.04 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-43)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.04  FEE COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.



   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Clerk, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the
city infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.



   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City
Clerk, which shall contain that information as the City Clerk may reasonably
require.



   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by the telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by
the telecommunications retailer to the city.  The charge imposed under
division (A) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer
who provides those services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law
in the same manner as the original charge for those services.



   (E)   If it shall appear than an amount of infrastructure
maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this
chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
that amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due,
or to become due, under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Clerk may
request, and the telecommunications retailer shall provide, written
substantiation for that credit.  However, no claim for this credit may be
made more than 3 years after the date of the erroneous payment unless:



      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and



      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.



   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications
retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following
acts as described immediately below:



      (1)   Gross charges for purposes of Chapter 35, Act 630, §§
1 et seq.;



      (2)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax
as prescribed in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2;



      (3)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal
telecommunications tax; and



      (4)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross
revenue of public utilities prescribed in Chapter 220, Act 5, § 2-202.



   (G)   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
subchapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee.  Any
underpayment of the amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to
the city by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5%
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. 
This sum shall be paid to the city within 21 days after the date of issuance
of an invoice for same.



   (H)   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, may promulgate further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of
this subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time, and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are
registered pursuant to § 117.02 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-44)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.05  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;



   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of
or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to
free-standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;



   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with the
generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and



   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code
concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the
right-of-way.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-45)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.06  EXISTING FRANCHISES AND THE LIKE.



   Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the city entered into before the effective
date of this subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall
remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees,
charges, or other compensation to the extent waived.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-46)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)



§ 117.07  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
chapter.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-48)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)  Penalty, see §
117.99



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 117.01et
seq. of this code shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general
penalty provisions in § 10.99 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 6.5-47)  (Ord. 1997-44, passed 10-13-1997)



CHAPTER 118:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



Taxicab Licensing and Operation



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Taxicab license required; application



   118.03   Ineligible persons



   118.04   License fee; tags; vehicle transfer



   118.05   Limitation on number of licenses



   118.06   State license required; equipment; inspections



   118.07   Licensee name and cab number on vehicle



   118.08   Liability insurance required



   118.09   Unlawful use of vehicle



   118.10   Safe and sanitary condition



   118.11   Passenger must pay fare



   118.12   Cab stands; marking; use



   118.13   License revocation



Taxicab Driver; Licensing and Regulations



   118.25   Taxicab driver; license required



   118.26   City permit required



   118.27   Applicant qualifications; examination; permit posting



   118.28   Permit fee



   118.29   Permit revocation



   118.30   Prohibited conduct



   118.31   Duties to passengers



   118.32   Obedience to traffic laws required



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, and regulate certain transportation for
hire, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-6



TAXICAB LICENSING AND OPERATION



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter and §§ 118.25et seq., the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB.  Includes any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire but
not operating a fixed route.



(1969 Code, § 26-11)



§ 118.02  TAXICAB LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab
in the city without first having secured a license therefor.  Applications
for licenses required by this subchapter shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk, and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended place
of business and the number of cabs to be operated.  If the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the president and secretary thereof
shall be given.



(1969 Code, § 26-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.03  INELIGIBLE PERSONS.



   No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a
person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony; no license
shall be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be
ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions.



(1969 Code, § 26-13)



§ 118.04  LICENSE FEE; TAGS; VEHICLE TRANSFER.



   (A)   The annual fee for licenses required by this subchapter shall
be $25.



   (B)   The fee required by this section shall be in lieu of any other
vehicle fees required by ordinance, and the City Clerk shall issue suitable
tags or stickers for the number of cabs covered by each license.  The tag or
sticker shall be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is
in use, and may be transferred to any taxicab put into service to replace one
withdrawn from service.



   (C)   The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the motor number and
state license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding municipal
tag or sticker number.



(1969 Code, § 26-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.05  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be issued not more than 1 taxicab license for each
600 residents of the city.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall be issued more than 50%
of the total number of licenses which are authorized herein.



(1969 Code, § 26-15)



§ 118.06  STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; EQUIPMENT; INSPECTIONS.



   No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly
issued, and no such cab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield
wiper in good condition.  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
inspect every taxicab to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section.



(1969 Code, § 26-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.07  LICENSEE NAME AND CAB NUMBER ON VEHICLE.



   Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side in letters
readable from a distance of 20 feet, the name of the licensee operating it. 
If more than 1 cab is operated by the licensee, each cab shall be designated
by a different number, and that number also shall so appear on each side of
that cab.



(1969 Code, § 26-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.08  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public
liability policy as required by statute.



(1969 Code, § 26-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Financial responsibility requirements for motor vehicles used for
transportation of passengers for hire, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§
8-101 et seq.



§ 118.09  UNLAWFUL USE OF VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the
perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 26-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.10  SAFE AND SANITARY CONDITION.



   All taxicabs shall be kept in proper condition for safe operation, and
the inside shall be kept clean and sanitary.



(1969 Code, § 26-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.11  PASSENGER MUST PAY FARE.



   It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the
lawful fare at the termination of a trip.



(1969 Code, § 26-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.12  CAB STANDS; MARKING; USE.



   (A)   Locations for cab stands shall be those as are designated from
time to time by the City Council for which a rental fee to be determined by
the City Council shall be charged.



   (B)   Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected
under the supervision of the Chief of Police.



   (C)   A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cab stand while the
taxicab is in charge of its driver on duty awaiting a fare.



(1969 Code, § 26-23)



§ 118.13  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed, the Mayor may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this subchapter for any violation by
the licensee of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 26-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TAXICAB DRIVER; LICENSING AND REGULATIONS



§ 118.25  TAXICAB DRIVER; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so
unless he or she is duly licensed as a driver by the state.



(1969 Code, § 26-35)  (Ord. 1996-15, passed 5-23-1996)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 118.26  CITY PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive a taxicab in the city unless he or she shall have
secured a permit therefor as provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 26-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.27  APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS; EXAMINATION; PERMIT POSTING.



   (A)   No permit required by this subchapter shall be issued to any
person who is not competent to operate a motor vehicle or who is not familiar
with the traffic laws and ordinances, and who is not the holder of a valid
Class D driver's license issued by the state.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall examine each applicant for a taxicab
driver's permit to determine the competency of the applicant, and no permit
shall be issued except on certificate of the Chief of Police that the
applicant has demonstrated his or her ability to operate a motor vehicle as
required herein and that the applicant is of good moral character.  The
permit shall be posted in the vehicle.



(1969 Code, § 26-37)  (Ord. 1996-15, passed 5-23-1996; Am. Ord. 2004-71,
passed 12-13-2004)    Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle operator’s license required, see § 71.001



§ 118.28  PERMIT FEE.



   The annual fee for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be $1.



(1969 Code, § 26-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.29  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The City Council may revoke any taxicab driver’s permit for repeated
violations of traffic laws or ordinances, or of any ordinance or code
provision regulating the conduct of these drivers.



(1969 Code, § 26-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.30  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while on duty to drink
any intoxicating liquor, use any profane or obscene language, shout or call
to prospective passengers, disturb the peace in any way, or transport
intoxicating liquors for sale, resale, or delivery.



(1969 Code, § 26-40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



§ 118.31  DUTIES TO PASSENGERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as
a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab; provided the person
is not intoxicated and conducts himself or herself in an orderly manner.  No
person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the
consent of the passenger.



   (B)   The driver shall take his or her passenger to his or her
destination by the most direct available route from the place where the
passenger enters the cab.



(1969 Code, § 26-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.32  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS REQUIRED.



   It shall be the duty of each driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic
rules established by statute or ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 26-42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 119:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   119.001   Scope of application



   119.002   License required for amusements



   119.003   License application; fees



   119.004   Shows in public places; Council approval



   119.005   Athletic exhibitions; license, tax, security, and
inspection



   119.006   Audience to be orderly



   119.007   Overcrowding prohibited



   119.008   Police and fire inspection



   119.009   Indecent shows prohibited



   119.010   Exhibition of criminals prohibited



   119.011   Exhibition causing public disturbance prohibited



   119.012   Smoking prohibitions; notices; exit signs



   119.013   Premises must conform to laws



Billiards and Pool Halls



   119.025   License required



   119.026   Fees; payment



   119.027   Minors prohibited; exception



   119.028   Alcohol and gambling prohibited



   119.029   Hours of operation



   119.030   License revocation



Bowling Alleys



   119.045   License required; application



   119.046   Fees; payment



   119.047   Hours of operation



   119.048   Gambling prohibited



   119.049   License revocation



Circuses



   119.060   License required



   119.061   Application; content



   119.062   License fee



   119.063   Sideshow or concession fee



   119.064   Conformance to laws required; license revocation



   119.065   Police and fire inspection



   119.066   Cheating, fraud prohibited



   119.067   Parade; permit required; bond



Coin-Operated Amusement Devices



   119.080   Definitions



   119.081   License required



   119.082   License fees; terms; exception



   119.083   Coin-operated video game; license fees, terms



   119.084   Video game owner’s license required



   119.085   Jukeboxes; permits



   119.086   Use for gambling prohibited; exception



   119.087   License revocation



Motion Pictures; Theatricals



   119.100   License required; exceptions



   119.101   License application; content



   119.102   Premises license fee



   119.103   Annual license; additional performance fees not required



   119.104   Unlicensed premises; presentation license fee



   119.105   Prohibited motion pictures



   119.106   Crowd control; seating



   119.107   Nonflammable scenery



   119.108   Building requirements



   119.109   Obstruction of exits prohibited



   119.110   Outdoor theaters to conform; washrooms required



   119.111   License revocation



Public Dances



   119.125   License required



   119.126   Application; content



   119.127   Applicant qualifications



   119.128   Investigation of applicant



   119.129   License fee



   119.130   Premises; compliance with laws



   119.131   Closing hours



   119.132   Alcoholic liquor; restrictions



   119.133   Chaperones



   119.134   License revocation



Skating Rinks



   119.145   License required



   119.146   Application; content



   119.147   Applicant qualifications; investigation



   119.148   License fee



   119.149   Exit requirements



   119.150   Conduct regulations; hours for music



   119.151   Hours of operation



   119.152   License revocation



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Provisions, see Chapter 110



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit amusements, peddlers,
and the like, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-5



   Authority to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit billiard tables and
bowling alleys, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-2



   Authority to prevent riots and disturbances, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-5-2



   Authority to regulate, control, tax, and license coin-operated devices,
see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-55-1



   Coin-Operated Amusement Device and Redemption Machine Tax Act, see ILCS
Chapter 35, Act 510, §§ 1et seq.



   Persons under 16 prohibited from working in certain places, see ILCS
Chapter 820, Act 205, § 7



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 119.001  SCOPE OF APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this subchapter, except as to licensing and fees,
shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses, and other amusements
in the city, whether specifically licensed in another subchapter in this
chapter or not.



(1969 Code, § 4-1)



§ 119.002  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR AMUSEMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open
to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without having
first obtained a license therefor; however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any
other ordinance of the city.



(1969 Code, § 4-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.003  LICENSE APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Applications for amusement licenses not otherwise provided for
in this chapter shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall comply with all of
the general provisions of the ordinances relating to these applications.



   (B)   For these licenses, the following fees shall be paid:



      (1)   Menageries, per day:  $20;



      (2)   Carnivals, per day:  $20;



      (3)   Exhibitions of inanimate objects, per day:  $10; or



      (4)   Other amusements, per day:  $10.



(1969 Code, § 4-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.004  SHOWS IN PUBLIC PLACES; COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show,
or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such a
place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be
in a public place, except on order of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 4-4)



Statutory reference:



   Carnival defined, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-54.1-1



   Obtaining carnival permit, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-54.1-2et
seq.



§ 119.005  ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS; LICENSE, TAX, SECURITY, AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate, or exhibit any race
between persons, animals, or vehicles, or any baseball game, boxing or
wrestling match, or any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to
which a fee is charged without having first procured a license therefor. 
The fee for this license shall be $100.



   (B)   The proprietor of an athletic exhibition shall submit to the
City Clerk a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of each
game, contest, or race, within 1 week after the exhibition.  At the same
time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating the exhibition shall
pay to the Clerk a sum equal to 3% of the gross receipts, after deducting the
license fee paid.



   (C)   Sufficient members of the Police Department shall be admitted
free of charge to all exhibitions licensed under this section for the purpose
of preserving and maintaining order.  The City Clerk may post a person, or
any number of persons, at the box office of each performance and may examine
all the books pertaining to the performance showing or tending to show the
gross receipts.



   (D)   None of the fee requirements of this section shall be
applicable to nonprofit or charitable organizations, which shall not be
charged any fee.



(1969 Code, § 4-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license and tax athletic contests and exhibitions, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-54-1



§ 119.006  AUDIENCE TO BE ORDERLY.



   The audience of any amusement, show, or theatrical must be orderly and
quiet at all times; and it shall be unlawful for any person attending an
amusement, show, or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.



(1969 Code, § 4-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.007  OVERCROWDING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks.



(1969 Code, § 4-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings for Public Use; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.095et seq.



   Public Gatherings; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.115et seq.



§ 119.008  POLICE AND FIRE INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief to see that
every exhibition, amusement, theatrical, or other public show or amusement is
inspected by a member of the Police and Fire Department, and to ensure
conformity with the provisions concerning these amusements.



(1969 Code, § 4-8)



§ 119.009  INDECENT SHOWS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct, or
take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition,
or other form of public amusement or show.



(1969 Code, § 4-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.010  EXHIBITION OF CRIMINALS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any criminal or the body
of any criminal or any person who shall have become notorious because of the
commission of a crime in any theatrical, exhibition, carnival, or other
public place.



(1969 Code, § 4-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.011  EXHIBITION CAUSING PUBLIC DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any
kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.



(1969 Code, § 4-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.012  SMOKING PROHIBITIONS; NOTICES; EXIT SIGNS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any
building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than
100 persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures, or other
entertainments are offered, presented, operated, or exhibited.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises described in
the preceding division, or of the occupant in charge, to provide and place
printed signs on which the words “No Smoking” shall appear in letters at
least 4 inches high, in conspicuous places, at least 2 signs being upon the
stage or in the wings thereof and 1 in each dressing room.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of the
premises described in division (A) of this section to provide and place a
sign on which the word “Exit” shall appear in letters at least 6 inches
high, over every door or other opening from that hall to every means of
egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed
at or over this sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire
period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left
the hall.



(1969 Code, § 4-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.013  PREMISES MUST CONFORM TO LAWS.



   It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any
amusement licensed in this chapter unless the premises in which an amusement
is operated or permitted to be operated conforms with all the provisions or
requirements in this code relating to public buildings and public gatherings.



(1969 Code, § 4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings for Public Use; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.095et seq.



   Public Gatherings; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.115et seq.



BILLIARDS AND POOL HALLS



§ 119.025  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate, maintain, or conduct a billiard, pool, or
bagatelle or pigeonhole table open to the public without having first
obtained a license therefor as is required in this subchapter.  All
applications for such a license shall state thereon the intended location of
the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein.



(1969 Code, § 4-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.026  FEES; PAYMENT.



   The fee for a license required by this subchapter shall be $5 quarterly
for the first table and $2.50 quarterly for each additional table up to and
including the fourth table, and $1.25 quarterly for each additional table. 
All fees shall be paid quarterly in advance.



(1969 Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. 1961-25, passed 9-25-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.027  MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   Minors under the age of 18 years shall not under any circumstances
frequent, loiter, go, or remain in any billiard hall licensed under the
provisions of this subchapter in which more than 35% of the revenue is
derived from billiards at any time, unless upon some lawful errand and sent
under the direction and the consent of and knowledge of the parent, guardian,
or other persons having the lawful custody of that minor; and it shall be
unlawful for the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any
minor to frequent, loiter, or remain within the hall in violation of this
section.



(1969 Code, § 4-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.028  ALCOHOL AND GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this subchapter to
sell or permit the sale of alcoholic liquor, or to permit gambling or the
consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises.



(1969 Code, § 4-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



§ 119.029  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No billiard hall, or other hall licensed under the provisions of this
subchapter, shall be open for business or used between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m. on a weekday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon
on Sunday.



(1969 Code, § 4-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.030  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, a license issued
pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked for the violation of any provision
of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



BOWLING ALLEYS



§ 119.045  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public
without having first obtained a license therefor.  Application for this
license shall be made in writing and shall state thereon the intended
location of the place of business and the number of alleys to be used.



(1969 Code, § 4-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-2



§ 119.046  FEES; PAYMENT.



   The fees for any license required by this subchapter shall be $5
quarterly for the first alley and $2.50 quarterly for each additional
alley.  All fees shall be paid quarterly in advance.



(1969 Code, § 4-42)  (Ord. 1961-25, passed 9-25-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.047  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No person shall keep open, operate, or use any alley licensed pursuant
to this subchapter between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(1969 Code, § 4-43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.048  GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet, or permit any form
of gambling or betting in any premises used for a bowling alley, pin or ball
alley.



(1969 Code, § 4-44)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate gambling and suppress fraudulent devices, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-5-1



§ 119.049  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, a license issued
pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked for the violation of any provision
of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-46)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CIRCUSES



§ 119.060  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct or operate a circus or hippodrome in the city
without having first obtained a license as is provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-57)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.061  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   The application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made
to the City Clerk and shall specify the place in or on which the circus or
hippodrome is to be conducted.



(1969 Code, § 4-58)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.062  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for the circus or hippodrome license shall be $25 per day,
except for those circuses or hippodromes sponsored by nonprofit
organizations, for which no fee shall be required.



(1969 Code, § 4-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.063  SIDESHOW OR CONCESSION FEE.



   The license fee for a sideshow or concession operated in connection
with a circus or hippodrome shall be $5 per day.



(1969 Code, § 4-60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.064  CONFORMANCE TO LAWS REQUIRED; LICENSE REVOCATION.



   It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this subchapter to
obey the provisions of this subchapter and all other ordinance and code
provisions relating to circuses or hippodromes or the premises occupied. 
The Mayor shall have the authority to revoke any license issued pursuant to
this subchapter for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-61)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.065  POLICE AND FIRE INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief to see
that inspections as provided for in § 119.008 of this code shall be made of
all circuses, hippodromes, circus or hippodrome performances, and of the
premises used.



(1969 Code, § 4-62)



§ 119.066  CHEATING, FRAUD PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cheat, shortchange, or otherwise
defraud any person attending or about to attend a circus performance within
the city.



(1969 Code, § 4-63)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate gambling and suppress fraudulent devices, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-5-1



§ 119.067  PARADE; PERMIT REQUIRED; BOND.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade connected with a circus or
hippodrome on any public street, alley, or other public way or place in the
city, unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the City Council.  The
permit shall specify the route to be followed, and shall be accompanied by a
bond in the sum of $10,000, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss,
damage, or liability incurred or caused by the conduct of that exhibition or
parade.



(1969 Code, § 4-64)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate use of streets for amusements, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-80-9



COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 119.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any machine which, upon the insertion
of a coin or slug, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill
or amusement of any description, and which contains no automatic payoff
device for the return of money, coins, checks, tokens, or merchandise, or
which provides for no such payoff by any other means, and which in itself
does not constitute a gambling device.  The term shall also include any
machine or apparatus which is used or may be used as a game of skill or
amusement and in which the player propels any ball or other device by any
force exerted by himself or herself, or in which the player uses or directs
any force generated by the device itself.



(1969 Code, § 4-135)



§ 119.081  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall place any mechanical amusement device in any public or
private place for general operation by, or for the amusement of, the public
without first having applied for and received a license for each device of
this type as provided in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-136)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.082  LICENSE FEES; TERMS; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   For each device operated or set up for operation as herein
defined, a license fee of $25 per year shall be required; except that an
annual fee for shuffleboards shall be $10; and except for fees for
coin-operated video games as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   The fees herein required shall be paid in advance, and no
license shall be issued hereunder for less than 1 year.  All existing
licenses shall be renewed as of January 1 of each calendar year for a period
of 1 year; any license which was issued for the first time during the
previous calendar year shall receive a credit on the annual fee equal to the
prorated amount of the previous fee which has not been used.  In no case
shall any portion of a license fee be repaid to the licensee.



(1969 Code, § 4-137)  (Ord. 1982-6, passed 5-10-1982; Am. Ord. 1991-24,
passed 12-9-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.083  COIN-OPERATED VIDEO GAME; LICENSE FEES, TERMS.



   (A)   Each coin-operated video game machine, operated or set up for
operation within the corporate limits of the city, shall be licensed at the
rate of $50 per year per machine.  These fees shall be paid by the owners or
lessors of the coin-operated video game machines. 



   (B)   Any and all fees required under this section shall be paid in
advance, and no license therefor shall be issued for less than 1 year.  All
existing licenses shall be renewed as of January 1 of each calendar year for
a period of 1 year; any license which was issued for the first time during
the previous calendar year shall receive a credit on the annual fee equal to
the prorated amount of the previous fee which has not been used.  In no case
shall any portion of a license fee be repaid to the licensee. 



   (C)   Upon acquisition or lease of any device of this type, the
owner or lessor shall notify the city for licensing of the machine for
operation within 30 days of that acquisition or lease. 



   (D)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class C
misdemeanor.



(1969 Code, § 4-137.1)  (Ord. 1982-6, passed 5-10-1982; Am. Ord. 1991-24,
passed 12-9-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.084  VIDEO GAME OWNER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall own or lease any
coin-operated video game machine within the corporate limits of the city, for
operation, without having heretofore received a license as hereinabove
provided in § 119.081, and without having paid an annual fee therefor in an
amount of $250. 



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      OWNERSHIP.  Actual ownership of the coin-operated video game
machine, or the derivation of any profit or compensation therefrom. 



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as to require a
license fee for any person, firm, or corporation which owns or operates a
coin-operated video game machine within the confines of his, her, or its own
business establishment. 



   (D)   Any license fee under the terms of this section shall be paid
in advance and shall be issued for not less than 1 year.  All existing
licenses shall be renewed as of January 1 of each calendar year for a period
of 1 year; any license which was issued for the first time during the
previous calendar year shall receive a credit on the annual fee equal to the
prorated amount of the previous fee which has not been used.  In no case
shall any portion of a license fee be repaid to the licensee. 



   (E)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A
misdemeanor. 



   (F)   Any license herein issued by the city under this section or
any section under this subchapter shall in no way be construed to be
assignable or transferable, except for coin-operated devices that are
replacements of machines already so located.



(1969 Code, § 4-137.2)  (Ord. 1982-6, passed 5-10-1982; Am. Ord. 1991-24,
passed 12-9-1991)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.085  JUKEBOXES; PERMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to offer or maintain for public use any
coin-operated device, machine, or mechanism to produce or reproduce music
without having first secured a permit therefor.  The annual fee for permits
of this type shall be $25.



(1969 Code, § 4-138)  (Ord. 1976-3, passed 2-9-1976)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.086  USE FOR GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any device licensed pursuant to
this subchapter to be used for any form of gambling or to allow any person
operating a licensed device to receive money or prizes as a result of the
operation of the device.



   (B)   The above prohibition shall not apply to any gambling device,
device or gaming event for which a  license or permit has been issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board, pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS
Chapter 230, Act 40, § 1 et seq.) so long as such gambling device, device or
gaming event is conducted in compliance with all requirements of said Act and
all the rules and regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board.



(1969 Code, § 4-139) (Ord. 2012-13, passed 6-11-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.087  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the Mayor may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this subchapter if the licensee should
violate any provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-140)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MOTION PICTURES; THEATRICALS



§ 119.100  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to give, present, or conduct any motion picture or
professional theatrical for which an admission fee is charged except
performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a
nonprofit, religious, educational, or charitable organization, without having
first secured a license therefor.



(1969 Code, § 4-75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.101  LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made in
conformance with the general provisions relating to such application, and
shall state in addition to the other information required, the place of the
intended performance and the seating capacity thereof.



(1969 Code, § 4-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.102  PREMISES LICENSE FEE.



   For each theater premises the annual license fee shall be $175.



(1969 Code, § 4-77)  (Ord. 1960-20, passed 10-10-1960)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.103  ANNUAL LICENSE; ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE FEES NOT REQUIRED.



   Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures or
theatricals, naming a specific place or building where the performances are
to be presented, may present therein any number of performances, including
theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured, without
having to pay any additional fee.



(1969 Code, § 4-78)



§ 119.104  UNLICENSED PREMISES; PRESENTATION LICENSE FEE.



   For motion pictures or theatricals which are to be presented in
premises which are not covered by a license fee required by this subchapter,
the fee to be paid shall be $10 per day; however, no motion picture or
theatrical shall be presented in or on any premises or building which does
not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances or code provisions
relating to public gatherings and to maintenance of buildings for this
purpose.



(1969 Code, § 4-79)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings for Public Use; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.095et seq.



   Public Gatherings; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.115et seq.



§ 119.105  PROHIBITED MOTION PICTURES.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any person to offer or present any
motion picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of
the peace, or any immoral or indecent picture or performance.



(1969 Code, § 4-80)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent riots and disturbances, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-5-2



   Authority to prohibit exhibition of obscene pictures, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-5-1



   Obscenity as substantive state offense; defined, see ILCS Chapter 720,
Act 5, § 11-20



§ 119.106  CROWD CONTROL; SEATING.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any person, except ushers or other
theater employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion
picture is presented during the time of the performance; it shall also be
unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by
the seating arrangements for the premises.



(1969 Code, § 4-81)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.107  NONFLAMMABLE SCENERY.



   It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than
nonflammable scenery or scenery as shall have been rendered nonflammable by
the application of fire-preventive coatings.



(1969 Code, § 4-82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.108  BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any
building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by
the ordinances of the city or by the laws of the state concerning buildings
or places intended for motion picture performances or in premises which do
not comply with the provisions of this code relating to public gatherings, or
in premises in which the electric wiring does not fully comply with the
ordinances of the city.  All places used for the exhibition of theatricals
must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance and for as long a
time as the audience remains therein.



(1969 Code, § 4-83)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Doors of theaters to open outward, see Ill. Rev. Stat., Chapter 425,
Act 5,§ 1



§ 119.109  OBSTRUCTION OF EXITS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
aisles, corridors, or exits leading from the room or enclosure in which a
motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or in which an
audience for such a performance is gathered.



(1969 Code, § 4-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.110  OUTDOOR THEATERS TO CONFORM; WASHROOMS REQUIRED.



   Outdoor theaters where the audience is not housed in a building shall
be conducted in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this
subchapter.  Each outdoor theater shall be equipped with separate washrooms
for men and women.



(1969 Code, § 4-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.111  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the Mayor may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this subchapter for the licensee’s
violation of any provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PUBLIC DANCES



§ 119.125  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the city
without first having obtained a license therefor as is provided in this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.126  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made in
conformance with the provisions of the ordinances relating to licenses, and
shall specify the location of the proposed dance or dances and the person or
organization sponsoring the same.



(1969 Code, § 4-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.127  APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS.



   No license required by this subchapter shall be issued to a person who
is not a person of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization
which is not represented in the city by a person of good moral character.



(1969 Code, § 4-99)



§ 119.128  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made
an investigation into the character of each applicant for a license hereunder
and report the results of this investigation to the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 4-100)



§ 119.129  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for public dances to be held in any 1 premises shall be $5 for
a single dance, except that no fee shall be required for licenses issued to
nonprofit organizations.



(1969 Code, § 4-101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.130  PREMISES; COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance or operate a dance hall
in any hall or place which does not comply with the provisions of this code
relating to public buildings and public gatherings.



(1969 Code, § 4-102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.131  CLOSING HOURS.



   All public dances licensed pursuant to this subchapter shall close at
1:00 a.m. and shall remain closed for at least 7 hours.



(1969 Code, § 4-103)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.132  ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR; RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license issued pursuant
to this subchapter to permit or suffer the consumption of alcoholic liquor by
those attending the dance or others, if the dance is on premises not licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic liquor.



(1969 Code, § 4-104)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.133  CHAPERONES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person sponsoring dances for persons under
21 years of age to fail to provide an adequate number of suitable chaperones.



(1969 Code, § 4-105)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.134  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the Mayor may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this subchapter if the licensee should
violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-106)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SKATING RINKS



§ 119.145  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a public skating rink in
the city without having first obtained a license therefor as provided in this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-117)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.146  APPLICATION; CONTENT.



   Applications for licenses required by this subchapter shall be made in
conformance with the provisions of the ordinances relating to licenses and
shall specify the location of the proposed skating rink and the person or
organization sponsoring the same.



(1969 Code, § 4-117)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.147  APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS; INVESTIGATION.



   No license required by this subchapter shall be issued to a person who
is not of good moral character, or to a corporation or organization which is
not represented in the city by a person of good moral character.  It shall
be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of
this investigation to the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 4-118)



§ 119.148  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for a skating rink license shall be $10 per month.



(1969 Code, § 4-120)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.149  EXIT REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct a public skating rink in any hall or
building which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits; and no
hall or building which is not provided with at least 2 exits of 4 feet or
more in width shall be used for this purpose.



(1969 Code, § 4-121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.150  CONDUCT REGULATIONS; HOURS FOR MUSIC.



   It shall be unlawful to indulge in any improper conduct or to permit
any improper conduct or the consumption of alcoholic liquor at any public
skating rink; and it shall be unlawful to permit music at any public skating
rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m.



(1969 Code, § 4-122)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.151  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful to have any skating rink open for business between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of
12:00 midnight on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday of each week.



(1969 Code, § 4-123)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.152  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the Mayor may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this subchapter if the licensee should
violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 4-124)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 120:  GAMBLING



Section



Raffles



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Raffle licenses



   120.03   License required; application



   120.04   Ineligible persons



   120.05   Conduct of raffles



   120.06   Records and reports



Gaming Devices and Gaming Events



   120.20   Unlawful activities; exceptions



 



   120.99   Penalty



RAFFLES



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE.  An organization organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public.  The service rendered to those eligible of
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



   EDUCATIONAL.  An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.



   FRATERNAL.  An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.



   LABOR.  An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in that pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.



   NET PROCEEDS.  The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



   NONPROFIT.  An organization or institution organized and conducted on
a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result
of the operation.



   RAFFLE.  A form of lottery, as defined in Chapter 720, Act 5, §
28-2(b), conducted by an organization licensed under this subchapter, in
which:



      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for
a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, 1 or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance; and



      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except
that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS.  Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.



   VETERANS.  An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows,
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the
welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in
such a way as to confer a public benefit.



(1969 Code, § 15-271)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 120.02  RAFFLE LICENSES.



   (A)   Eligibility for license.  Licenses shall be issued only to
bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, or
veteran’s organizations that operate without profit to their members.



   (B)   Duration of license.  Licenses shall permit the applicant to
issue or sell raffle chances at any time during the effective period of the
license. All licenses authorized under this subchapter shall be effective for
a period of not more than 1 year.



   (C)   Maximum value of prizes.  The maximum aggregate retail value
of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single license period
shall not exceed $1,000,000.



(1969 Code, § 15-272)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
120.99



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct a raffle without
having first obtained a license therefor.



   (B)   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms
provided by the City Clerk, and shall contain the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the individual making
application;



      (2)   The name and address of the organization applying for a
license;



      (3)   The approximate number of members of the organization
that reside in the city;



      (4)   The name and address of the raffle manager;



      (5)   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold
or issued;



      (6)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold
or issued;



      (7)   The location(s) at which winning chances will be
determined;



      (8)   The date(s) and time(s) of determination of winning
chances;



      (9)   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer, and
secretary if there is one, of the organization, attesting to the
not-for-profit character of the organization, and attesting to the fact the
organization is not otherwise ineligible to receive a license; and



      (10)   Other information as the City Clerk may require.



   (C)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment
of a fee of $50.



   (D)   Applications for licenses shall be submitted to the City
Clerk.  The City Clerk shall act to either issue or deny the license within
30 days.



(1969 Code, § 15-273)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
120.99



§ 120.04  INELIGIBLE PERSONS.



   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in division
(A), (B), or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable, or credit
interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;



   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A),
(B), or (C) is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
or



   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A),
(B), or (C) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.



(1969 Code, § 15-274)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)



§ 120.05  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions.



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.



   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (D)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances.



(1969 Code, § 15-275)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
120.99



§ 120.06  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined.  All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient.  The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.



   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the state, and placed in a separate account.  Each organization should
have separate records for its raffles.  The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles should not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report
annually to its membership its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by
this section.



   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for 3
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



(1969 Code, § 15-276)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)  Penalty, see §
120.99



GAMING DEVICES AND GAMING EVENTS



§ 120.20  UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be involved in gambling
which includes, but is not limited to, keeping, operating for hire, or using
in such manner as to involve any chance in the determination of the number or
value of any article or articles purchased or played for, any cigar wheel,
slot machine, dice or any piece of mechanism, the operation of which involves
or creates any chance, other than as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   The prohibitions provided for in this section and this chapter
or any other sections of the code of ordinances of Paris, Illinois, shall not
apply to any gambling device, device or gaming event for which a  license or
permit has been issued by the Illinois Gaming Board, pursuant to the Illinois
Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40, § 1 et seq.) so long as such
gambling device, device, game or gaming event is conducted in compliance with
all requirements of said Act and all the rules and regulations of the
Illinois Gaming Board.



(Ord. 2012-13, passed 6-11-2012)



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Penalty for violation of §§ 120.01et seq. of this code shall
be governed by the general penalty section of this code, § 10.99.



(1969 Code, § 15-277)  (Ord. 1999-43, passed 8-23-1999)



CHAPTER 121:  SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER



Section



   121.01   Definition



   121.02   License



   121.03   Display of items



   121.04   Records



   121.05   Unlawful to pledge, pawn, or to loan



   121.06   Dealer to alert Police Department



   121.07   Revocation



 



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER.  A person, corporation, business, partnership
or other entity who is engaged in the business of buying, bartering, trading,
exchanging and selling any items, goods, commodities or appliances which have
previously been sold, exchanged, given away or had title transferred from a
person, firm or corporation that first acquired the same.



      (1)   A SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER does not include a pawnbroker,
which means a person, a business or entity engaged in the business of
receiving personal property in pledge or exchange or as security for money or
other things advanced to the owner or pledger.



      (2)   A SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER does not include any business
where the primary source of business income and its primary business purpose
is the sale of motor vehicles of any kind, tractors, farm implements, riding
lawnmowers, 4-wheelers, snowmobiles or properties of a similar nature to
those listed.



      (3)   Exceptions:



         (a)   The provisions hereof shall not apply to, nor
shall any license be required of, any business that is operated as a
non-profit organization or operated under the auspices of any religious,
fraternal or charitable non-profit organization, including but not limited to
Boy Scouts, Girls Scouts, and Goodwill.



         (b)   The provisions hereof shall not apply to, nor
shall any license by required of, any business operated as a retail business
where the primary operation is the initial sale of items, but also takes
similar items as trade-in and resells them.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.02  LICENSE.



   (A)   License required.  No secondhand goods dealer can operate in
the city limits of Paris, Illinois without first receiving a license to do so
issued by the city.



   (B)   Application.  Application for a license to operate as a
secondhand goods dealer shall be made to the city and shall include such
information as the city authorities require.



   (C)   Fees.  The fee for the license shall be $25 for the first
license, $15 for additional licenses under the same ownership and the license
shall expire on December 31 in each year that it is issued.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.03  DISPLAY OF ITEMS.



   (A)   A secondhand goods dealer may display items for sale outside
the building of the business between 8:00 a.m. and the close of business for
each day provided the display does not interfere or create a hazard for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



   (B)   At the close of business on each day, the display shall be
returned to inside the building.  If the items to be sold are of such in
nature as to not be stored in the building, then at the close of business
each day they shall be stored in an area with a fence of such nature as to be
out of sight from the public way.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.04  RECORDS.



   (A)   All secondhand goods dealers shall maintain a written record
containing a detailed description of each individual item, good, commodity or
appliance accepted or purchased for resale and the person or persons from
whom said were accepted or purchased or to whom permission to sell the same
were given, including the form of identification used.  Before accepting or
purchasing any item, goods, commodities or appliance for resale, the
secondhand goods dealer shall demand from the owner or his or her agent some
form of positive identification including proof of age issued by a public
officer in the performance of his or her official duties.  Said records
shall be maintained by the secondhand goods dealer for 3 years.



   (B)   Records required to be kept shall be open to inspection by
officers of the Police Department.  The inspections shall be made during
regular business hours of the secondhand goods dealer.



   (C)   No items, goods, commodities or appliances acquired in the
regular course of business may be transferred by the secondhand goods dealer
within 72 hours of such being recorded in the required records as set forth
above.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.05  UNLAWFUL TO PLEDGE, PAWN, OR TO LOAN.



   It shall be unlawful for any secondhand goods dealer to receive any
items, goods, commodities or appliances by way of pledge or pawn or to loan
or advance money on the security of any such item, good, commodity or
appliance.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.06  DEALER TO ALERT POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Every secondhand goods dealer shall alert the Police
Department immediately whenever the dealer knows, or in the exercise of
reasonable care, should have known, that an individual is attempting to sell,
trade or exchange any personal property that does not belong to the
individual and for which the individual is not an agent of the owner.



   (B)   Every secondhand good dealer who received or is in possession
of any items, goods, commodities or appliances which may have been lost or
stolen shall, upon demand, produce such property to any member of the Police
Department for examination.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.07  REVOCATION.



   Every secondhand good dealer shall be subject to all the ordinances of
the city in effect from time to time.  The City Council shall have the
authority to revoke any license issued hereunder at any time.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of these provisions shall be subject to the penalties as
provided in § 10.99 of the Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 2013-15, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-20, passed 11-6-2013)



CHAPTER 122:  CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



Section



   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Cable and video service provider fee imposed



   122.03   Applicable principles



   122.04   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   122.05   Audits of cable and video service providers



   122.06   Late fees and payments



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE.



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service; and/or



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.



   COMMISSION.  The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.  All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or
video service area within the city.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES  shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges.



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment.



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges.



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service orders
and service termination charges.



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number
of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel.



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities,
or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business.



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi).



         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder's books and records kept in the regular course of
business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or
similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b), which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER.  A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE.  The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.  The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and that is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



§ 122.02  CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the city.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder's gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least
10 days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the city.



   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address
listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 21-401(b)(6) to the city.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the city in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



§ 122.03  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



§ 122.04  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of any city
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes, or charges.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



§ 122.05  AUDITS OF CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS.



   Audits will be conducted by the city in accordance with the standards
set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-11.05.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



§ 122.06  LATE FEES AND PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of
Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, § 1, et seq.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 6-25-2018)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY



   132.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND PUBLIC CONDUCT



   133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY



Section



   130.01   Impersonating city official



   130.02   Interference with city official



§ 130.01  IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful
authority any city officer or employee.



(1969 Code, § 17-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY OFFICIAL.



   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or
employee of the city while engaged in the duties of his or her office or
employment.



(1969 Code, § 17-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY



Section



Offenses Against Persons



   131.01   Fighting; assault and battery



Signs and Advertising Matter



   131.15   Posting bills



   131.16   Advertising unlawful business



   131.17   Placing advertising matter on vehicles



   131.18   Disfiguring lawful signs



Graffiti



   131.30   Definitions



   131.31   Application of graffiti prohibited



   131.32   Possession of graffiti implements restricted



   131.33   Access to graffiti implements; restrictions



   131.34   Graffiti a nuisance



   131.35   Removal by person applying



   131.36   Anti-graffiti materials



   131.37   Owner to remove prohibited painting



   131.38   Reward for information



   131.39   Parental liability



   131.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Signs, see Chapter 158



   Wildlife Refuge, see §§ 97.090et seq.



OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



§ 131.01  FIGHTING; ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, to
fight, or to commit any assault or battery in any public place in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-6)  Penalty, see § 131.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent fighting, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-5-3



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 12-1, 12-3



SIGNS AND ADVERTISING MATTER



§ 131.15  POSTING BILLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bill or advertisement
on any public property or public utility pole without the authority of the
City Council; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on
any property without the written consent of the owner thereof.



(1969 Code, § 17-16)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.16  ADVERTISING UNLAWFUL BUSINESS.



   It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in
the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-17)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.17  PLACING ADVERTISING MATTER ON VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a licensed bill poster or
not, to distribute handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures,
or any advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, by placing the same in or
upon any motor vehicle standing or parked in the public streets of the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-18)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.18  DISFIGURING LAWFUL SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure in any way any lawful
signs or advertisements in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-19)  Penalty, see § 131.99



GRAFFITI



§ 131.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container which is adapted or
made for the purpose of applying spray paint, or other substance capable of
defacing property.



   FELT TIP MARKER.  Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip
which, at its broadest width, is greater than 1/8 inch, containing ink or
other pigmented liquid which is not water soluble.



   GRAFFITI.  Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, or
other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface of
city-owned property, or non-city- owned property within the unincorporated
area of the city, by or with, but not limited to, any of the following: 
felt tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti implement, to the
extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant
thereof.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  An aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker,
gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool, or any other device
capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete, or
wood, or any other surface.



   PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK.  Any device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied
to a surface by pressure, and upon application, of leaving a mark at least
1/8 inch in width.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)



§ 131.31  APPLICATION OF GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any trees or
structures including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles,
and signs, (“structures” hereinafter in this subchapter) on any
city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on
any non-city-owned property within the unincorporated area of the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.32  POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   Possession by minors restricted.  It is unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any
graffiti implement while on any school property, grounds, facilities,
buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to these specific
locations upon public property or upon private property without the prior
consent of the owner or occupant of that private property.  The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the possession of felt tip markers by
minors attending or traveling to or from school at which the minor is
enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at that school which
formally requires the possession of felt tip markers.  This requirement
shall be an affirmative defense, so that the burden of proof in any
prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to
establish the need to possess a felt tip marker.



   (B)   Possession prohibited in designated public places.  It is
unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti
implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming
pool, recreational facility, or other public building owned or operated by
the city or while in or within 100 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment,
storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized
by the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.33  ACCESS TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Access by minors; parental permission.  It is unlawful for
any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give,
loan, or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned,
or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without the
consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian, which consent
shall be given in advance in writing.



   (B)   Display for sale.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates,
or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements
shall display and store or cause those implements to be displayed and stored
in areas which may be viewable by, but shall not be accessible to the public
without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of the
implements.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.34  GRAFFITI A NUISANCE.



   (A)   Public nuisance declared.  The existence of graffiti on any
city-owned property is expressly declared to be a public nuisance.



   (B)   Abatement.  The City Council hereby declares and finds
graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions
and procedures contained in this subchapter.



   (C)   Postings.  No person shall post, affix, or attach any
handbill, poster, or placard on any city- owned property, or without the
permission of the owner or occupant on any non-city-owned property within the
unincorporated area of the city.  The Chief of Police, the City
Administrator, Street Department, Water Department, Traffic Department, and
any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, is
authorized to order removal of these posters from city-owned property.  The
decision to remove these posters shall not be based on content.  Any person
who is actually or constructively responsible for the posting, creating,
printing, or copying of this type of poster shall be liable for the costs
incurred in the removal thereof; and the Chief of Police, the City
Administrator, Street Department, Water Department, Traffic Department, and
any additional city department head, as authorized by the City Council, is
authorized to effect the collection of those costs.  The costs shall be the
actual or reasonable costs attributable to the removal of the posters. 
Persons billed for the removal costs may appeal the cost assessment to the
City Council in accordance with rules adopted by the Council.  The decision
of the Council will be final for purposes of judicial review.



   (D)   Presumption of responsibility.  For purposes of this section,
there shall be a presumption that a person (corporate or individual), whose
name or telephone number or address or notice of public or private appearance
or business location appears on the poster is a person responsible for
posting the poster.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.35  REMOVAL BY PERSON APPLYING.



   (A)   Any person applying graffiti on city-owned property shall have
the duty to remove the same within 24 hours after notice by the city or
private owner of the property involved.  The removal shall be done in a
manner prescribed by the Chief of Police, the City Administrator or his or
her designee, or any additional city department head, as authorized by the
City Council, and may, at the option of the city, be deemed by the city to
satisfy any payment or penalty that might otherwise be imposed and owed to
the city.



   (B)   Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for its
removal or for the payment therefor.  Failure of any person to so remove
graffiti or pay for its removal shall constitute an additional violation of
this subchapter.  Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the
parents or legal guardians shall also be responsible for its removal or for
the payment therefor.  The Chief of Police, the City Administrator or his or
her designee, or any additional city department head, as authorized by the
City Council, may convert the payment into equivalent forms of community
service hours.  These payments or equivalent forms of community service
hours shall be in addition to any other penalties imposed.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.36  ANTI-GRAFFITI MATERIALS.



   (A)   Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone, or other
utility operating in the city, other than an electric utility, shall paint
their above-surface metal fixtures which are installed after the effective
date of this subchapter with a uniform paint type and color.



   (B)   Each encroachment permit issued by the city shall, among other
things, be conditioned on:



      (1)   The permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the
encroaching object or structure of a type and nature that is acceptable to
the City Administrator or his or her designee;



      (2)   The immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti;



      (3)   The right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the
encroaching structure; and



      (4)   The permittee providing the city with sufficient
matching paint and anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting
of the encroaching object or structure containing graffiti.



   (C)   In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits,
variances, building permits to the extent permitted by law, or approving
other similar land use entitlement or development or design applications, the
city shall, unless the imposition would work an undue hardship, impose the
following conditions or other similar or related conditions:



      (1)   The applicant shall apply an anti-graffiti material of a
type and nature that is acceptable to the City Administrator or his or her
designee to those of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the
site deemed by the Administrator or designee to be likely to attract graffiti
(“graffiti attracting surfaces”);



      (2)   The applicant shall grant, in writing, the right of
entry over and access to those parcels, upon 48-hours’ posted notice, by
authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or painting
over graffiti or graffiti attracting surfaces previously designated by the
City Administrator or his or her designee.  This grant shall be made an
express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land;



      (3)   The applicant, and any and all successors in interest,
shall, for a period of 2 years after approval, provide the city with
sufficient matching paint and anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the
painting over or removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces; and



      (4)   The persons applying for approval of a subdivision
shall, as part of any conditions, covenants, and restrictions, enter into a
covenant, which covenant shall run with the land in a form satisfactory to
the county, that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti
placed on publicly viewable trees and structures thereon.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.37  OWNER TO REMOVE PROHIBITED PAINTING.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property not to remove or
paint over any prohibited sign painted directly on an exterior wall of a
building or on any structure upon that property.  A prohibited sign
includes, but is not limited to, any permanent display of any letter,
numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character, spectacle,
delineation, announcement, or any combination thereof which is painted of a
color different from the color of the exterior of the structure on which it
is painted and which is visible beyond the boundaries of the property,
including signs commonly known as graffiti.  A painted area on the side of a
structure used to cover a prohibited sign or graffiti which is of a different
color or surface material than the remaining exterior surface of that side of
the structure is unlawful.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.38  REWARD FOR INFORMATION.



   (A)   The city may offer a reward in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council for information leading to the identification
and apprehension of any person who willfully damages or destroys any
city-owned property, or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, any
non-city- owned property within the unincorporated area of the city, by the
use of graffiti.  In the event of damage to public property, the offender or
the parent or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor must reimburse the
city for any reward paid.  In the event of multiple contributors of
information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it
shall deem appropriate.  For the purposes of this section, diversion of the
offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a
lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction.



   (B)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the
city in the manner specified by the City Council.



   (C)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the city
investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)



§ 131.39  PARENTAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   Violations a misdemeanor.  It is the city’s intent that all
acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the city shall be prosecuted as
misdemeanors pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   Parental liability.  Any parent or legal guardian having
custody and control of a minor who violates any provision of this subchapter
shall be personally liable for any and all costs to the city or to any person
or business, incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by
conduct of that minor, and for all attorney’s fees and court costs incurred
in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or
reimbursement not to exceed $1,000 for each violation by the minor.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any violation of §§ 131.30et seq. shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000, and by the
performance of community service in the form of graffiti cleanup.  Each
person, firm, corporation, or partnership shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which
any violation of the provisions of that subchapter is committed, or
continued, by such a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, and shall be
deemed punishable thereof as provided in this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 17-40)  (Ord. 1996-38, passed 10-28-1996)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND PUBLIC CONDUCT



Section



Public Conduct



   132.01   Public intoxication



   132.02   Public profanity



   132.03   Soliciting treats restricted; masks



   132.04   Mendicants



   132.05   Possession of cannabis and paraphernalia



   132.06   Alcohol; possession or consumption by minor



Curfew



   132.20   Curfew



   132.21   School curfew



   132.22   Truancy



Cross-reference:



   Tobacco; Sales to and Possession by Minors, see §§ 113.01et seq.



PUBLIC CONDUCT



§ 132.01  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition
in or on any street, alley, or other public place in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent intoxication, see ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §
11-5-3



§ 132.02  PUBLIC PROFANITY.



   It shall be unlawful to use profanity on any street, alley, or other
public place in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  SOLICITING TREATS RESTRICTED; MASKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to solicit treats from door to door in
the city except on those days designated by the City Council for the
observance of Halloween and then not later than that hour specified by the
City Council.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be masked on the
streets of the city except during the hours and on the date established by
the City Council pursuant to the preceding division.



(1969 Code, § 17-29)  (Ord. 1964-9, passed 10-12-1964)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 132.04  MENDICANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for mendicants to frequent any depot, store,
theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other place publicly frequented in
the city; any person found sleeping in any such place and who has not any
established domicile or residence shall be considered to be a mendicant.



(1969 Code, § 17-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.05  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CANNABIS. The meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois Cannabis
Control Act, ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 3(a), as that definition is set
forth from time to time and is incorporated herein.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any
kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in
Section 10 of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, which
are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the Cannabis Control Act, the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or a
synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois
Food,  Drug and Cosmetic Act.  It includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (b)   Isomerization devices intended to be used
unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (c)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully
in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of cannabis or controlled substances;



         (d)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used
unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;



         (e)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish,
hashish oil, or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of
the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body including, where
applicable, the following items:



            1.   Water pipes;



            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            5.   Carburetor pipes;



            6.   Electric pipes;



            7.   Air-driven pipes;



            8.   Chillums;



            9.   Bongs;



            10.   Ice pipes or chillers;



         (f)   Any item whose purpose, as  announced or
described by the seller, is for use in violation of the Act.



   (B)   Possession of cannabis. It shall be a violation of this
section for any person to knowingly possess cannabis in the amount up to 100
grams.



   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It shall be a violation of
this section for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing cannabis or a controlled substance in the human body, or in
preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.



   (D)   Exceptions.  This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Legal use and possession as authorized in the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program, ILCS Chapter 410, Act
130, §10, or other laws of the State of Illinois.



      (2)   Items marked for use in the preparation, compounding,
packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful
research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale or personal use; or



      (3)   (a)   Items marketed for, or historically and
customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or other
lawful substance.



         (b)   Items exempt include,  but are not limited to,
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies,  tobacco pipes and cigarette rolling
papers.



      (4)   Items described in division (D)(1) above which are
marketed for decorative purposes, where  such items have been rendered
completely inoperable or incapable of being used as an item of drug
paraphernalia.



   (E)   Seizure and forfeiture. All items of drug paraphernalia shall
be seized and forfeited as contraband of the county.



   (F)   Penalty. Any person found to have violated this section shall
be fined pursuant to § 133.99.



(Ord. 2016-22, passed 10-24-2016)



§ 132.06  ALCOHOL; POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION BY MINOR.



   (A)   Possession.  It shall be a violation of this  section for
any person under the age of 21 years to  have alcoholic liquor as that is
defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934, ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §
1-3.05, in his or her possession on any street or public place in the city.



   (B)   Consumption. It shall be a violation of  this  section for
any person under the age of 21 years to consume any alcoholic liquor as that
is defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934, ILCS Chapter 325, Act 5, §
1-3.05.



   (C)   Penalty. The penalty shall be as set forth by § 133.99.



(Ord. 2016-23, passed 10-24-2016)



CURFEW



§ 132.20  CURFEW.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURFEW HOURS.



         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday;



         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day.



      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited including but not limited to any
place of amusement or entertainment.



      GUARDIAN.



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor; or



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court.



      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.



      PARENT.   A person who is:



         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent
of another person; or



         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      PUBLIC PLACE.   Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



      REMAIN. To:



         (a)   Linger or stay; or



         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by
a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.



      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in
custody or control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly
permits the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)
that the minor was:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other
person in custody or control of the minor;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate  travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's  residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or is an  emancipated minor
under the Emancipation of Minors Act.



   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this
section, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in division (C) is present.



   (E)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than
$10 nor more than $500, except that neither a person who has been made a ward
of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, nor that person's legal
guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or instead of the fine
imposed by this section, the court may order a parent, legal guardian, or
other person convicted of a violation of division (B) to perform community
service as determined by the court, except that the legal guardian of a
person who has been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of
1987 may not be ordered to perform community service. The dates and times
established for the performance of community service by the parent, legal
guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of division (B) shall not
conflict with the dates and times that the person is employed in his or her
regular occupation.



§ 132.21  SCHOOL CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 who is
enrolled in any public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school
to be present in any public place, building, street or location other than
school, during any hours when such person is enrolled in school during the
regular school term, unless he or she is:



      (1)   Traveling to or from school by the most direct route;



      (2)   Engaged in school-related activities with written
approval of school authorities, or is otherwise authorized by a written
school policy; or



      (3)   Engaged in personal business, including but not limited
to employment, medical care and religious activities with prior written
notice from a parent or legal guardian to school authorities.



   (B)   A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer
reasonably suspects to be in violation of this section for a limited period
of time for the purpose of verifying the person’s identity, age, school
enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall
immediately inform the person of the reason for the detention and that he or
she will be promptly released upon verification of authorization to be absent
from school. The person so detained shall not be removed from the scene of
the detention unless he or she refuses to provide the officer with the
information necessary to complete the investigation.



   (C)   To the extent practical, any person in violation of this
section shall be taken to school authorities or a parent or legal guardian.



(Ord. 2004-46, passed 9-27-2004)



§ 132.22  TRUANCY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
enrolled in a public, private or parochial school to absent himself or
herself from attendance at school without parental permission. Any person who
so shall absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy
and be subject to the penalties set forth in the  Code. Emergency or
unforeseen absences due to illness or causes beyond the control of the person
so absenting himself or herself from school without parental permission shall
not constitute truancy if permission for such absence has been substantially
obtained from the parent or guardian of said person and such permission is
submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within 24 hours
immediately following said absence.



   (B)   It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or other
person having the legal care and custody of any person under 18 years of age
to allow or to permit any such child, ward or other person under such age
enrolled in a public, private or parochial school to absent himself from
attendance without fully complying with the policies and requirements of the
school district in which the child is enrolled.



   (C)   Each day that such person under 18 years of age absents
himself or herself from school attendance shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such.



   (D)   Each day that any parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care and custody of any person under the age of 18 years of age
violates the provisions of division (B) herein shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.



(Ord. 2005-32, passed 8-8-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY



Section



Public Order and Peace



   133.01   Disturbing lawful assembly



   133.02   Unlawful assembly



   133.03   False fire alarm



   133.04   Noise restrictions



   133.05   Steam whistles



Weapons; Dangerous Objects



   133.20   Concealed weapons



   133.21   Carrying firearms



   133.22   Firearms discharge



   133.23   Throwing missiles; dangerous objects on streets



Public Hazards



   133.35   Scaffolds and ladders



   133.36   Objects on window ledges



   133.37   Obstruction of passageways



   133.38   Lodgings; smoking in bed



Health Hazards



   133.50   Expectorating



   133.51   Cemeteries; burials in city



   133.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prevent or suppress noises, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-5-3



   Authority to prevent riots and disturbances, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 11-5-2



PUBLIC ORDER AND PEACE



§ 133.01  DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-7)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.02  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It shall be unlawful to collect, gather, or be a member of any
disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered for any unlawful purpose.



(1969 Code, § 17-8)  Penalty, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 25-1



§ 133.03  FALSE FIRE ALARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any
false alarm of fire in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-14)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  NOISE RESTRICTIONS.



   Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all days, it shall be
unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued,
in the operation of any machine or the exercise of any trade or calling or
otherwise, any noise which either annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, or safety of others, unless the making and continuing of the
noise is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the
health, safety, life, or limb of a person.  The restrictions in this section
shall not apply to any location more than 100 yards from any residence or
hotel or motel.  The restrictions in this section do not prohibit speech of
any kind.



(1969 Code, § 17-41)  (Ord. 1999-38, passed 10-25-1999)  Penalty, see §
133.99



§ 133.05  STEAM WHISTLES.



   It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown any steam whistle of
any stationary engine or steam engine in the city except as a signal for
starting or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid injury to persons or
property.



(1969 Code, § 17-23)  Penalty, see § 133.99



WEAPONS; DANGEROUS OBJECTS



§ 133.20  CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the city in
violation of the laws of this state.



(1969 Code, § 17-10)  Penalty, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1



§ 133.21  CARRYING FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any firearm, air gun, or
spring-loaded gun in the city unless the gun is carried in a case which is
closed.



(1969 Code, § 17-11)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.22  FIREARMS DISCHARGE.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms, spring-loaded guns, or
air guns in the city, except to hunt animals or water fowl in accordance with
§ 131.50 of this code; and provided that this section shall not be construed
to prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance
of his or her duty, nor prohibit any citizen to discharge a firearm when
lawfully defending his or her person or property.



(1969 Code, § 17-12)  (Am. Ord. 1990-22, passed 11-13-1990)  Penalty, see
§ 133.99



§ 133.23  THROWING MISSILES; DANGEROUS OBJECTS ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any
street, alley, or other public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or
deposit any glass, nails, tacks, or other similar articles on any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place in the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-15)  Penalty, see § 133.99



PUBLIC HAZARDS



§ 133.35  SCAFFOLDS AND LADDERS.



   Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a way that it overhangs or can
fall onto any public street, alley, or other public place in the city shall
be firmly constructed and safeguarded, and it shall be unlawful to place or
leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same
can fall onto any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place from a
height greater than 4 feet.



(1969 Code, § 17-21)  Penalty, see § 133.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 96



§ 133.36  OBJECTS ON WINDOW LEDGES.



   It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge
on other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height
above 4 feet from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or is in
danger of falling onto any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place.



(1969 Code, § 17-22)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.37  OBSTRUCTION OF PASSAGEWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel,
school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge, or other public hall, or any
building used by 2 or more tenants or families, in such a manner that it
interferes with the free use of the stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit.



(1969 Code, § 17-24)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.38  LODGINGS; SMOKING IN BED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke while in or upon a bed in
any hotel, lodge, inn, or in any other public rooming house within the city.



(1969 Code, § 17-26)  Penalty, see § 133.99



HEALTH HAZARDS



§ 133.50  EXPECTORATING.



   It shall be unlawful to expectorate on any public street or upon any
public sidewalk or in any other public place, or in any public vehicle, or
any store, assembly hall, corridor, or other place open to and used by the
public.



(1969 Code, § 17-25)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.51  CEMETERIES; BURIALS IN CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or enlarge a cemetery
in the city or to bury any person within the city limits or within 1½ miles
thereof, except in an established cemetery.



(1969 Code, § 17-28)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalties as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
133.04 of this code shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 17-41)  (Ord. 1999-38, passed 10-25-1999)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



   152.   ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION REGULATIONS



   153.   PLUMBING INSTALLATION REGULATIONS



   154.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



   155.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



   156.   FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION



   157.   MOBILE HOMES



   158.   SIGNS



   159.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



   APPENDIX A:  ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Plan Commission; Comprehensive Plan



   150.01   Plan Commission; composition



   150.02   Member terms; vacancies; compensation



   150.03   Organization; records; annual report



   150.04   Powers and duties



   150.05   Employees; appropriations



   150.06   Comprehensive plan; subdivision compliance



   150.07   Public improvement data



   150.08   Comprehensive plan adopted



Cross-reference:



   Board of Local Improvements, see §§ 31.009 and 33.15et seq.



   Zoning, see Title XV, App. A



PLAN COMMISSION; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



§ 150.01  PLAN COMMISSION; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Plan Commission for the city.



   (B)   The Plan Commission shall consist of 7 members, to include the
following:



      (1)   The Mayor as ex officio member without the power to
vote; and



      (2)   Seven other members, citizens of the city, appointed by
the Mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for duty on the Plan
Commission and subject to the approval of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 19-11)  (Am. Ord. 1999-14, passed 5-10-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Plan Commissions; members; expenditures, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-12-4



§ 150.02  MEMBER TERMS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION.



   The ex officio member shall serve for the term of his or her elective
office; appointed citizen members shall serve for a period of 3 years. 
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for unexpired terms only.  All
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except that, if
the City Council deems it advisable, the secretary may receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the City Council and
provided for in the appropriation ordinance.



(1969 Code, § 19-12)



Statutory reference:



   Plan Commissions; members; expenditures, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-12-4



§ 150.03  ORGANIZATION; RECORDS; ANNUAL REPORT.



   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan
Commission shall meet, organize, elect those officers as they may deem
necessary, and adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws. 
The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be
open at all times to public inspection.  The Commission shall also file an
annual report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its transactions
and recommendations.



(1969 Code, § 19-13)



§ 150.04  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To prepare and recommend in the City Council a comprehensive
plan of public improvements, looking to the present and future development
and growth of the city.  Such a plan, after its adoption by the City
Council, will be known as the “official plan.”  The official plan shall
include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys, and public
grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of
and distant not more than 1½ miles from the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality, those requirements to be effective whenever
these lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of the plan;



   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time
those changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by
the City Council or by the Plan Commission;



   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time
plans or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the
official plan;



   (D)   To give aid to the city officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further
the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of
the official plan;



   (E)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding;



   (F)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions
and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to
assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area; and



   (G)   To exercise those other powers germane to the powers granted
under authority of the state.



(1969 Code, § 19-14)



§ 150.05  EMPLOYEES; APPROPRIATIONS.



   The Commission may, at the discretion of the City Council, employ
necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be
provided for by adequate appropriation made by the City Council from public
funds.  If the Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the City Council and
appropriations by the City Council therefor.



(1969 Code, § 19-17)



§ 150.06  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; SUBDIVISION COMPLIANCE.



   Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed in
this subchapter, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record,
affecting land within the corporate limits of the city or in contiguous
territory outside of and distant not more than 1½ miles from those limits
and not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or
shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets,
alleys, and public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable
thereto of the official plan.



(1969 Code, § 19-15)



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision Control, see Chapter 159



§ 150.07  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DATA.



   The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration
a copy of all ordinances, plans, and data relative to public improvements of
any nature.  The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto if it deems
a report necessary or advisable for the consideration of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 19-16)



§ 150.08  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.



   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan, May 2002, City of Paris, Illinois, is
hereby adopted, this plan to include the following planning elements and
related text, copy of which is attached to the ordinance as Exhibit A:



      (1)   Sec. 1:  Introduction;



      (2)   Sec. 2:  Background for Planning;



      (3)   Sec. 3:  Land Use Plan;



      (4)   Sec. 4:  Major Street Plan; and



      (5)   Sec. 5:  Community Facilities Plan.



   (B)   This official plan of the city shall be in full force and
effect within the city and the unincorporated area within 1½ miles of the
city, from and after the passage of this section and the recording with the
County Recorder of Deeds of notice of the adoption of this plan, as provided
by law.



(1969 Code, § 19-18)  (Ord. 1961-8, passed 3-27-1961; Am. Ord. 1982-30,
passed 9-27-1982; Am. Ord. 2002-21, passed 7-22-2002)



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision Control, see Chapter 159



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



Building Code; Permit



   151.01   Territorial application



   151.02   Building code adopted



   151.03   Building permit required; exceptions



   151.04   Permit application; plans required



   151.05   Plan approval or rejection



   151.06   Inspection fee



   151.07   Variation from plans; approval required



   151.08   Permit expiration



   151.09   Contractor’s insurance; completion and restoration



Building Inspector



   151.20   Establishment; appointment



   151.21   Duties and authority



   151.22   Right of entry



   151.23   Stop order



Construction Operations



   151.35   Standards apply



   151.36   Storage on street or sidewalk; permit and bond required



   151.37   Noise; hours restricted



   151.38   Sidewalk obstruction or removal; permit required



   151.39   Proper care; safety devices



   151.40   Installation of factory-built structures



Moving Buildings



   151.50   Permit; application



   151.51   Bond required



   151.52   Cutting wires; additional bond



   151.53   Permit fees



   151.54   Traffic safety precautions



   151.55   Protection of pavement



Licensed House Mover



   151.70   License required



   151.71   Bond required



   151.72   License fee



   151.73   Duties of licensee



   151.74   Compliance inspections



The International Property Maintenance Code



   151.85   Adoption



   151.86   Amendments



Cross-reference:



   Buildings for Public Use; Fire Prevention, see §§ 92.095et seq.



BUILDING CODE; PERMIT



§ 151.01  TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this chapter controlling the construction of
buildings or other structures are applicable to and extended to constructions
in the territory contiguous to the city not more than 1½ miles beyond the
corporate limits of the city, in keeping with the requirements of the city
zoning ordinance as set forth in Appendix A of this title.



(1969 Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 151.02  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The regulations contained in the current editions of the International
Building Code and the International Residential Code For One- and Two-Family
Dwellings published by the International Code Council, Inc. (ICC), 4051 West
Flossmore Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, in book form, are
hereby adopted as the regulations governing the construction of buildings and
other structures in the city; and it shall be unlawful to erect or construct
any building or structure in the city in violation of, or without complying
with the appropriate provisions of those regulations.  Copies of the code
shall be kept on file in the Paris Public Library for inspection, and 2
copies shall be furnished to the Code Enforcement Officer.



(1969 Code, § 6-9)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 2005-10,
passed 2-28-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-13, passed 3-14-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.03  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct any building or structure,
other than a fence, within the territory described in § 151.01 of this code,
where the cost of that construction exceeds $1,000, or to alter or remodel
any building or structure so as to change the bearing walls, beams, supports,
or the roof thereof, without having first procured a permit therefor.



   (B)   Failure to secure the above-mentioned building permit before
initiating construction, without the consent of the Building Inspector, shall
result in a penalty to be added to the inspection fee, in the amount of $50
or 25% of the permit fee, whichever is greater.



(1969 Code, § 6-2)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 1996-27,
passed 8-26-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate construction of buildings, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 11-30-4



§ 151.04  PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS REQUIRED.



   Application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be made to
the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in
duplicate showing the work to be done, and the plans shall be verified by the
signature either of the owner of the premises or by the architect or
contractor in charge of operations.  Each application shall state the
estimated cost of the proposed construction, alteration, or remodeling.  The
proposed structure must be staked and the staking approved prior to the
approval of the building permit.



(1969 Code, § 6-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.05  PLAN APPROVAL OR REJECTION.



   Applications with plans appended thereto shall be referred to the Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall examine them to determine whether the proposed
construction or alteration will comply with the ordinance or code provisions
relating thereto.  Upon approval by the Code Enforcement Officer, 1 set of
plans shall be returned by the Code Enforcement Officer to the applicant. 
Permits required by this subchapter shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer after approval of the plans and payment of the fee provided for in
this subchapter.  Permits rejected by the Code Enforcement Officer may be
appealed to the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 6-4)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 1994-13,
passed 4-25-1994; Am. Ord. 2003-27, passed 10-27-2003)



§ 151.06  INSPECTION FEE.



   The building inspection fee required by this subchapter shall be:



   (A)   When the cost of the proposed building or alteration is from
$500 to $5,000:  $10;



   (B)   For each additional $1,000, or fraction thereof, of costs up
to $100,000:  $2 additional;



   (C)   For each additional $1,000 of costs over $100,000, up to and
including $1,000,000 of costs:  $1 additional; and



   (D)   Per $1,000, or fraction thereof, of costs over $1,000,000: 
$.50 additional.



(1969 Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 151.07  VARIATION FROM PLANS; APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the approved plans and
specifications deposited with the City Clerk and approved by the Building
Inspector unless amended plans and specifications showing the proposed
alteration or variation are first filed with the City Clerk and approved by
the Building Inspector.  If the proposed variation involves an increase in
the total cost of the work, a statement to that effect shall be made and the
necessary additional fee shall be paid.



(1969 Code, § 6-6)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.08  PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   No building permit shall be valid if the work has not been started
within 1 year of the date of issuance of the permit.



(1969 Code, § 6-7)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 151.09  CONTRACTOR’S INSURANCE; COMPLETION AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commence work on any excavation, or on
any construction work in the city involving driving or hauling machinery,
trucks, or equipment over any parkway or sidewalk area or involving
excavating or leveling of any parkway or sidewalk area, unless the person
doing that work shall first have secured liability insurance in an amount
equal to at least $50,000.



   (B)   Where the work contemplated includes the making of any
excavation for any structure or foundation, the building or structure
contemplated shall be begun within 6 months and completed within 1 year from
the date of commencement of work, or the excavation refilled and the surface
restored to its original condition.



(1969 Code, § 6-8)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



BUILDING INSPECTOR



§ 151.20  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.



(1969 Code, § 6-20)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create offices, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-4



   Building inspector defined; general duties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-31.1-1



§ 151.21  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or any lawfully
appointed deputy building inspectors to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.  The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to make inspections as
may be necessary to see to the enforcement of these provisions, and to make
any tests or examinations of materials or methods to be used, for the purpose
of seeing if they comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 6-21)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



Statutory reference:



   Building inspector defined; general duties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-31.1-1



§ 151.22  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Building Inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be made
entry, at any reasonable hour, into any building or premises where the work
of altering, repairing, or constructing any building or structure is going
on, for the purpose of making inspections.



(1969 Code, § 6-23)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 151.23  STOP ORDER.



   (A)   Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, or at variance with the terms of any permit issued for that
work, the Building Inspector may order all work on the job stopped until the
violation or variance is eliminated and any work or installation made in
violation of this chapter corrected.  The stop order, if oral, shall be
followed by a written stop order within 24 hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday,
or holidays).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of
a stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property.



   (C)   The stop order may be revoked by the Building Inspector or the
City Council.



(1969 Code, § 6-22)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CONSTRUCTION OPERATIONS



§ 151.35  STANDARDS APPLY.



   (A)   All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good, workmanlike
manner, according to accepted standards and practices in the trade. 
Theprovisions of the International Building Code (IBC) and the International
Residential Code (IRC) shall be considered to be standard and acceptable
practice for all matters concerning building construction not otherwise
provided for by ordinance.



   (B)   The following sections and articles of the International Codes
are excluded, as they are in conflict with existing city ordinances:



      (1)   International Building Code:




   Article 105.2    Work exempt from permit





   Article 105.3.2    Time limitation





   Article 105.5    Expiration





   Section 112    Board of Appeals




      (2)   International Residential Code:




   Article R105.2     Work Exempt from permit





   Article R105.3.2     Time limitation





   Article R105.5    Expiration





   Section R112    Board of Appeals




(1969 Code, § 6-24)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 2005-10,
passed 2-28-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-13, passed 3-14-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.36  STORAGE ON STREET OR SIDEWALK; PERMIT AND BOND REQUIRED.



   The use of streets or sidewalks for the storage of materials in the
process of construction or alteration of a building or structure may be
granted for a period of 2 weeks by the City Council where the same will not
unduly interfere with traffic and will not reduce the usable width of the
roadway to less than 18 feet; no portion of the street or sidewalk other than
that directly abutting on the premises on which work is being done shall be
used except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises
abutting on that portion.  Any person seeking to make such a use of the
street shall file an application for a permit therefor with the City Clerk,
together with a bond with the amount to be fixed and the sureties to be
approved by the City Council to indemnify the city for any loss or damage
which may be incurred by the occupation of the street or sidewalk.  The fee
for the permit shall be $25.



(1969 Code, § 6-62)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate use of streets, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-80-2



§ 151.37  NOISE; HOURS RESTRICTED.



   No construction or altering operations shall be carried on prior to
7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. if the operations will cause or produce loud
noises.



(1969 Code, § 6-63)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.38  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building construction
or alteration without a special permit from the City Clerk; whenever removal
of a sidewalk is required in such work, a special permit from the City
Building Inspector shall be obtained as is provided in § 151.36 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 6-64)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate use and opening of sidewalks, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-80-13



§ 151.39  PROPER CARE; SAFETY DEVICES.



   It shall be the duty of any person doing any construction, altering, or
wrecking work in the city to do the same with proper care for the safety of
persons and property.  Warnings, barricades, and lights shall be maintained
whenever necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic, and
temporary roofs over sidewalks shall be constructed whenever there is danger
to pedestrians from falling articles or materials.



(1969 Code, § 6-65)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.40  INSTALLATION OF FACTORY-BUILT STRUCTURES.



   All factory-built structures or manufactured or modular homes, as
defined by the Illinois Department of Public Health, to be located in any
district other than those currently zoned as "Nonconforming Use Sites," shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable current
regulations established by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) and the Illinois Department of Public Health, along with
the following additional requirements:



   (A)   All manufactured and modular housing must be placed upon a
continuous closed permanent perimeter foundation consisting of mortared block
or brick or poured concrete that extends below the frost line and actually
supports and anchors the structure.



   (B)   All manufactured and modular housing must have a minimum
7-foot 6-inch (8-foot flat) sidewalls with residential standard windows. 
Sidewalls shall be constructed with 2-inch by 4-inch minimum top plates.



   (C)   All manufactured and modular housing must have a vented roof
with a minimum 5/12 pitch and boxed eaves.



   (D)   All manufactured and modular housing must  be furnished with
rigid plumbing meeting the specifications of the Illinois Plumbing Code. 
Flexible couplings will not be allowed.



   (E)   All manufactured and modular housing shall be placed with the
main entry facing the adjacent street. In addition, placement shall be in
accordance with all applicable zoning regulations for the real estate where
the installation is to take place.



   (F)   All manufactured and modular housing shall have a minimum
warranty from structural defect of 5 years.



   (G)   Any other applicable regulations of this chapter regarding
building regulations and construction shall apply, and the owner must meet
all other aspects of the chapter regarding permitting and the construction
process.



(Ord. 2005-15, passed 4-11-2005; Am. Ord. 2005-22, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord.
2005-35, passed 8-22-2005)



MOVING BUILDINGS



§ 151.50  PERMIT; APPLICATION.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any building on, through, or
over any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city without
having obtained a permit therefor from the City Council.  Applications for
permits required by this section shall be made in writing to the City Clerk
and shall state thereon the proposed route and the number of days it is
intended that the building shall occupy any portion of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place.



(1969 Code, § 6-75)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.51  BOND REQUIRED.



   Every person, firm, or corporation applying for a permit under this
subchapter shall submit with his or her application a cash bond with a lawful
corporate surety to be approved by the City Council, conditioned on the
applicant’s compliance with all the provisions of this subchapter, agreeing
to pay and holding the city harmless from any claim which may be made against
it by reason of the occupation of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place by the building or structure moved.  This bond should be in the
minimum amount of $250,000.



(1969 Code, § 6-76)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.52  CUTTING WIRES; ADDITIONAL BOND.



   Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a
public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special or franchise
ordinance governing that public utility shall apply and the bond therein
specified shall be given.  If no such terms apply, then the City Building
Inspector shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and the bond to be
given to cover that expense.



(1969 Code, § 6-77)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.53  PERMIT FEES.



   Upon approval of the intended route by the City Council, a fee of $100
for each day or fraction thereof that it is intended that the building shall
occupy any such portion of any such public place shall be paid.  Additional
payment of $100 for each day or fraction thereof over and above the time
stated on the permit during which any building shall occupy any such public
place shall be paid.



(1969 Code, § 6-78)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.54  TRAFFIC SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.



   (A)   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure
which is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the Police
Department so as to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of
the street so blocked.



   (B)   The person, firm, or corporation moving any building through
the streets shall keep warning signs and lanterns or lights on the building
so as to guard against any person or vehicle colliding with it.



(1969 Code, § 6-79)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.55  PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT.



   Where a building is being moved over a street, but is not carried on
another vehicle or on a unit equipped with tires that comply with traffic
regulations, the road surface, whether paved or not, shall be protected by
planking or other device effective to prevent injury to the roadway or
pavement.



(1969 Code, § 6-80)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



LICENSED HOUSE MOVER



§ 151.70  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house moving,
raising, or shoring without first having secured a license therefor. 
Applications for licenses required by this subchapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 6-87)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license, tax, and regulate transportation businesses, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-42-6



§ 151.71  BOND REQUIRED.



   Every licensee under the provisions of this subchapter shall file with
the Clerk a bond in the sum of $50,000, with sureties to be approved by the
Mayor and City Council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss,
damage, or expense occasioned by the licensee, by any act or failure to act
of the licensee, or by any failure of the licensee to comply with this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 6-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.72  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for licenses required by this subchapter shall be $15.



(1969 Code, § 6-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.73  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   Persons licensed under this subchapter must comply with all the
ordinance and code provisions relating to the work being done, must pay the
permit fee required for moving buildings, and must keep lights and warnings
maintained as are required by § 151.54 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 6-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.74  COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Building Inspector
to make or cause to be made those inspections of the house mover’s
operations, equipment, and business as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 6-91)



THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 151.85  ADOPTION.



   There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of ensuring the
public health, safety and welfare insofar as they area affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises in the city,
and to prevent blight and deterioration of neighborhoods, a property
maintenance code known as the International Property Maintenance Code, First
Printing 2003, published by the International Code Council, Inc. (ICC) with
specific additions, deletions, modifications and amendments as hereinafter
set forth. The provisions of said 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as set out at length, and
the provisions thereof as added, deleted, inserted, modified and amended by
§ 151.86 shall be controlling in regard to all premises, buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the city. Not less than 1 copy of
said Property Maintenance Code with the specified additions, deletions,
insertions, modifications and amendments shall be filed and kept at the
Office of the City Clerk of the city and at the Paris Public Library. As
editions and amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code are
officially adopted and published by the International Code Council (ICC),
such new additions and amendments are hereby adopted by the City of Paris
without further action by the City Council and such new editions and
amendments shall be effective when published by the International Code
Council (ICC), except for those sections which are specifically modified,
amended or deleted by § 151.86.



(Ord. 2005-25, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 151.86  AMENDMENTS.



   Additions, deletions, insertions, modifications and amendments to the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2003, are as follows:



   (A)   Insert the phrase "City of Paris" in all locations in the
International Property Maintenance Code where parenthetical reference is made
to the "name of jurisdiction".



   (B)   All references to the "International Plumbing Code" shall be
considered reference to the Illinois Plumbing Code.



   (C)   All references to the "International Electrical Code" shall be
considered reference to the National Electrical Code.



   (D)   All reference to the "International Zoning Code" shall be
considered reference to the City of Paris Zoning Ordinance.



   (E)   In any conflicts between the "International Building Code" or
the "International Residential Code" and the "Illinois Accessability Code,"
the Illinois Code shall be given precedence.



   (F)   Section 102.2 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- delete the last sentence and substitute therefor the following:



“The owner and the owner's designated agent shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of building structures and premises.”



   (G)   Section 103.1 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- the Code Enforcement Department, along with the City of Paris Health
Officer, shall be the "Department of Property Maintenance Inspection" as that
term is used in this Code.



   (H)   Section 103.5 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
shall be deleted.



   (I)   Section 106.2 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Notice of violation. Add the following sentence:



"However the failure to serve a notice shall not prevent the prosecution of
legal actions against a violator seeking fines and compliance with this code."



   (J)   Section 106.4 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Violation penalties. Delete the existing language and substitute the
following:



“Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code, upon
being found guilty, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more
than $200 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.”



   (K)   Section 107.1 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Notice to person responsible. Delete this section and substitute the
following:



“Notice to owner or agent. Whenever the code official determines that there
has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation
has occurred, notice may be given in the manner prescribed in §§ 107.2 and
107.3 to the owner or person responsible for maintenance of the property as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall comply with
§ 108.3.”



   (L)   Section 107.2 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Form.  Delete § 107.2(4) of this section and substitute the following:



“4.   May include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit and structure
into compliance with provisions of this code.”



   (M)   Section 107.3 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Method of Service. Add the following language before the semi-colon in
subsection 107.3(2):



“or the address listed in the Edgar County Tax Assessor's Office for
receipt of the property tax bill for the property.”



   (N)   Section 108.1 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- General.  Delete this section and substitute the following:



“When a structure, property or equipment is found by the code official to
be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such a structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions
of this code.”



   (O)   Section 108.1.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Unsafe structures. Delete this section and substitute the following:



“Unsafe property or structures.  An unsafe property or an unsafe structure
is one that has any condition that is found to be an imminent danger to the
life, health or safety of the occupants or the public. A structure is to be
deemed unsafe if it does not contain minimum safeguards to protect fire and
to warn occupants in the event of fire.



A structure is to be deemed unsafe if it contains unsafe equipment.



A structure or property shall be deemed unsafe if it has holes in the floors
or ground such that a person could fall through the floor or into the hole,
except for excavation, which is lawfully fenced.



A structure or property shall be deemed unsafe if it so damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable
foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible.”



   (P)   Section 111 of the "International Property Maintenance Code" -
Means of appeal. Delete this section and substitute the following:



“All persons shall have the right to appeal any decision of the Code
Official to the City Council of the City of Paris.”



   (Q)   Section 301.2 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Responsibility. Insert the words "including the interior of the structure"
after the word structure "structures" in the first sentence. Insert the word
"exclusively" after the word "they" in the third sentence.



   (R)   Section 302.4 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Weeds.  Delete this section and substitute the following:



“302.4 - Vegetation.



   a.   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from noxious weeds or turf grass which exceeds 8 inches in height.



   b.   All areas not containing a structure, paved pathway, driveway
or permitted hard surfaced parking area must be covered with vegetation such
as grass, shrubs, trees or gardens. Where the vegetation has died, the area
must be re-planted.



   c.   All dead trees, tree limbs and shrubs shall be removed.



   d.   All vegetation and trees must be trimmed to allow for free
passage along sidewalks and streets, and to allow for adequate line of sight
for vehicular and pedestrian traffic along streets and sidewalks.



   e.   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property
to cut and destroy weeds or other vegetation after service of a notice of
violation, the City of Paris shall be authorized to enter upon the property
in violation and cut and destroy the weeds or other vegetation growing
thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent
responsible for the property and such costs may become a special real estate
tax assessment or a lien on the property.”



   (S)   Section 302.7 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Accessory structures.  Add the word "sheds" after the word "garages".



   (T)   Section 304.14 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Insect screens. Insert the dates "April 15" and "October 15" as the
beginning and ending dates for the requirements for insect screens.



   (U)   Section 306 of the "International Property Maintenance Code" -
Handrails and Guardrails.



Delete number "30" wherever it appears in this Section and substitute the
number "34".



   (V)   Section 307.1.1 - Outdoor Storage of Indoor Upholstered
Furniture. Add the following:



“Section 301.1.1 - Outdoor Storage of Indoor Upholstered Furniture. No
personal shall place, use, keep, store or maintain outdoors any indoor
upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, but not
limited to upholstered chairs and couches, except when said indoor
upholstered furniture is placed at the curb on the customary collection day
for it to be removed or when said indoor upholstered furniture is placed
outdoors as part of a garage sale allowed under Ch. 114 of the Code of
Ordinances of the city. No real property owner or real property manager or
other person in control of such real property shall permit indoor upholstered
furniture to remain on such real property after it has been placed there in
violation of this section. As used herein, indoor upholstered means any
furniture constructed with stuffing, cushions or springs and not intended for
outdoor use. As used herein, outdoors means any place visible from a public
place and exposed to precipitation, including, but not limited to yards,
rooftops, unenclosed porches, decks, patios and balconies.”



   (W)   Section 307.2.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Rubbish storage facilities. Add the phrase "of adequate size and
number" for the word "and".



   (X)   Section 308.2 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Owner.  Delete the phrase "within the structure prior to renting or
leasing the structure.”



   (Y)   Section 308.3 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Single occupant. Delete this section.



   (Z)   Section 308.4 of the "International Property Maintenance Code"
- Multiple occupant. Delete this section.



   (AA)   Section 308.5 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Occupant. Delete this section.



   (BB)   Section 404.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Privacy.   Add at the end of this section the following language:



“No dwelling unit shall be constructed so that access to the street or
additional facilities such as laundry rooms or heating facilities requires a
person to pass through any other dwelling unit or commercial unit.”



   (CC)   Section 404.7 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Food preparation. Add the following at the end of this section:



“In dwelling units, all kitchens shall include a refrigerator for the
storage of food, a stove for the preparation of cooked foods and a sink and
faucet connected to both hot and cold water supplies. Any appliance furnished
by the owner shall be in good and safe working order and in a condition in
which they may be kept clean and sanitary. No more than one kitchen per
dwelling unit shall be permitted.”



   (DD)   Section 501.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Scope. Add the following at the end of this section:



Nothing in this code shall abridge the requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code. In places where this Code and the Illinois Plumbing code conflict, the
stricter requirement shall control.



   (EE)   Section 507.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Storm drainage. Delete the words "a public nuisance" and substitute
therefore



"the accumulation of standing water, either on the property or other
property. Gutters and downspouts shall be required and shall be in good
repair."



   (FF)   Section 602.2 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Residential occupancies. Delete the exception and the phrase "based
on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in
Appendix D of the Plumbing Code" and substitute therefore "when the outdoor
temperature is -10°F. Portable heating equipment shall not be considered as
heating facilities".



   (GG)   Section 602.3 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Heat supply. Insert October 1 and May 1 for the starting and ending
dates of the heating season.  Delete the exception and add the following at
the end of the sentence:



"when the outdoor temperature is above -10F. When the outdoor temperature is
below -10°F, the heating system must be operating at full capacity.”



   (HH)   Section 602.4 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Occupiable workspaces. Insert October 1 and May 1 for the starting
and ending dates of the heating season.



   (II)   Section 702.5 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Arrangements.  Add the following:



“Arrangements.  Exits from dwelling units, guest rooms or dormitory units
shall not lead through other such units or through toilet rooms or
bathrooms.”



   (JJ)   Section 702.6 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Exit signs. Add the following:



“Exit signs. All means of egress shall be indicated with approved exit
signs as required by the Building and Fire Codes”



   (KK)   Section 702.7 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Emergency escape. Add the following:



“Emergency escape.  Every sleeping room located below the third story in
residential occupancies shall have at least one operable window or exterior
door approved for emergency egress or rescue, or shall have access to not
less than two approved independent exits, except for buildings equipped
throughout with an automatic fire suppression system.”



   (LL)   Section 703.1 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Add the word "ceilings" after the
word "walls".



   (MM)   Section 704.5 of the "International Property Maintenance
Code" - System certification. Add the following:



“System certification.  Every fire alarm, smoke alarm, smoke detector,
fire detector and fire suppression system shall be tested in the manner and
frequency prescribed in the Fire Code. Every fire suppression system and
every fire alarm system, smoke alarm, smoke detector and smoke detector
system which is not able to be easily tested by the Code Official must be
tested by a licensed Illinois Fire Equipment Distributor or a license
Illinois Private Alarm Contractor as set forth in the Fire Code, but in no
event less than on an annual basis. Any building owner or owner's agent,
shall produce a copy of the fire alarm, smoke alarm and fire suppression
system certificate  with a date not more than one year old upon demand by
the Code Official.”



(Ord. 2005-25, passed 7-25-2005)



CHAPTER 152:  ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Electrical codes adopted



   152.03   Authority to operate for hire a public electric utility



Installations; Permits; Inspections



   152.15   Electrical work; permit; application



   152.16   Permit fees



   152.17   Inspection; certificate of approval required



   152.18   Classification of wiring



Electrical Inspector



   152.30   Establishment; appointment



   152.31   Conflict of interest



   152.32   Right of entry; enforcement authority



   152.33   Inspections; wiring to be visible



   152.34   Certificate of approval



   152.35   Stop order



Cross-reference:



   Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, see §§ 31.100et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prescribe manner of construction of all buildings, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-30-4



   Authority to prevent installation of dangerous wiring, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-8-2



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  Includes conductors and equipment installed for
the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat, or power; but does
not include radio apparatus or equipment for the wireless reception of sound
and signals, nor ordinary household appliances such as toasters, vacuum
cleaners, and washing machines; and does not include apparatus, conductors,
and other equipment installed for and by public utilities, including common
carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the State Commerce Commission,
for use in their operations as public utilities.



(1969 Code, § 8-1)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-37-1



§ 152.02  ELECTRICAL CODES ADOPTED.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted that technical code promulgated by the
National Fire Protection Association known as the National Electrical Code,
most current edition, as the controlling electrical code within the city’s
jurisdiction.



   (B)   There is also adopted the rules and regulations promulgated by
the Electrical Supply Company regarding the installation, alteration, and use
of electrical equipment; and the rules and regulations hereby adopted are
published and filed with the State Commerce Commission.



   (C)   Copies of the National Electrical Code and a copy of the rules
and regulations of the Electrical Supply Company as adopted by this section
are on file in the offices of the City Clerk and of the Electrical Inspector.



(1969 Code, § 8-2)  (Ord. 1969-6, passed 2-17-1969; Am. Ord. 2004-31,
passed 7-26-2004)



§ 152.03  AUTHORITY TO OPERATE FOR HIRE A PUBLIC ELECTRIC UTILITY.



   Pursuant to the ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-117-4, the City is
authorized to operate for hire a public electric utility for the use and
benefit of private consumers and users, and charge for such consumption and
use.



(Ord. 2007-18, passed 11-26-2007)



INSTALLATIONS; PERMITS; INSPECTIONS



§ 152.15  ELECTRICAL WORK; PERMIT; APPLICATION.



   It shall be unlawful to install or alter any electric equipment or
wiring without having first secured a permit therefor from the Electrical
Inspector.  Application for permits required by this section shall be in
writing and filed with the City Clerk, who shall forward the application to
the Electrical Inspector.  The application shall contain the name of the
owner of the premises to be served, the name of the contractor doing the
work, and the nature of the work to be done; and where the work consists of
new installations or extensive repairs or alterations, plans and
specifications of the work shall accompany the application.



(1969 Code, § 8-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.16  PERMIT FEES.



   The fees for permits required by this subchapter shall be:



   (A)   Permits for all electrical work except electric signs and
fixtures:  $3;



   (B)   Electric signs:  $2;



   (C)   Each reinspection of any overhead, underground, or interior
wire or equipment shall be charged for at the rate:  $3 hourly; and



   (D)   Whenever extra inspections are made necessary on account of
inaccurate or incorrect information, failure to make required reports, or a
similar reason, a charge of $3 per hour shall be made for the extra
inspection.



(1969 Code, § 8-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.17  INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   Inspection; approval; certificate issuance.  The Electrical
Inspector shall inspect the electrical work for which a permit was obtained
and shall issue a certificate of approval after each inspection in which the
wiring or apparatus is found to be in compliance with the terms of this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 8-5)



   (B)   Electricity not to be used without certificate of approval. 
It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into any wires or apparatus
hereafter installed for which a certificate of approval has not been issued
by the Electrical Inspector.



(1969 Code, § 8-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.18  CLASSIFICATION OF WIRING.



   All wiring above 50 volts used for light, heat or power shall be
classed "A" or "B".



   (A)   Class A: Commercial Wiring. In factories, public buildings,
commercial establishments, and new apartment buildings, with over two 
apartments, electrical wiring shall be Class A. Class A wiring shall be
installed in metallic raceways in all cases except by special permission in
rewiring of existing apartments and residences of multiple occupancy, branch
circuit conductors may be installed with non-metallic sheathed cable with a
grounding conductor as an integral part of the cable assemblage. All metallic
raceways shall be electrically bonded and connected to all non-metallic cable
grounding conductors throughout the system and grounded at a common point at
the main service entrance. Non-metallic conduit may be used when in
compliance with the current National Electric Code.



   (B) Class B: Residential Wiring.



      (1)   Residential branch circuit conductors at a minimum shall
be installed in non-metallic sheathed cable with a grounding conductor. In
basements, the cable shall be installed no less than two inches above the
bottom of joists. Below the bottom of joists, all wiring shall be installed
in acceptable raceways. All metallic raceways shall be electrically bonded
and connected to all non-metallic cable grounding conductors throughout the
system and grounded at a common point at the main service entrance.



      (2)   Upon rehabilitation of an existing non-residential
building (building that the use is other than a single-family or two-family
dwelling), the owner, contractor, or other person having control of the
building shall meet with the Electrical Inspector for a determination as to
how the electrical system within the structure shall be modified to comply
with the requirements for Class A: Commercial Wiring of this section. As a
minimum, all wiring exposed during the course of construction shall be
brought into compliance with the requirements for Class A: Commercial Wiring
of this section. The Inspector shall determine, based upon hazards to the
occupants due to the proposed use of the building, what further changes will
be required to the electrical system.



(Ord. 2009-14, passed 8-10-2009)



ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR



§ 152.30  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the position of Electrical Inspector, who shall
be appointed by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 8-17)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create office of Electrical Inspector, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, § 11-37-2



§ 152.31  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   It shall be unlawful for the Electrical Inspector, except in the
performance of his or her duties, to engage in the business of installation,
alteration, maintenance, or sale of electric wiring, electric devices, or
electrical material, either directly or indirectly; and he or she shall have
no financial interest in any concern engaged in this type of business in the
city.



(1969 Code, § 8-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.32  RIGHT OF ENTRY; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during
reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his or her
official duties, or for the purpose of making an inspection or test of the
electrical equipment therein.



   (B)   He or she shall have the authority to enforce all the
ordinance or code provisions relating to electrical wiring and equipment.



   (C)   He or she shall have the power to cause the current in any
wire or conduit to be turned off whenever this is necessary in an emergency
for the protection of life and property.



(1969 Code, § 8-19)



§ 152.33  INSPECTIONS; WIRING TO BE VISIBLE.



   The Electrical Inspector shall make all inspections necessary to see
the enforcement of the appropriate city ordinances and code provisions; and
no electric wiring shall be covered until it has been inspected.



(1969 Code, § 8-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.34  CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.



   The Electrical Inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the
owner or person in charge of the premises which he or she has inspected,
where he or she finds that the electric apparatus and wiring therein fully
comply with the ordinances of the city.



(1969 Code, § 8-21)



§ 152.35  STOP ORDER.



   The Electrical Inspector shall have the power to verbally or in writing
order all work stopped on construction, alteration, or repair of buildings in
the city when that work is being done in violation of any provision of any
ordinance or code provision relating thereto.  Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of a stop order except on the written permission of the
Inspector; however, if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by
a written stop order within 24 hours.  A written stop order may be served by
any police officer.  A stop order may be revoked by the Commissioner of
Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 8-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 153:  PLUMBING INSTALLATION REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Plumbing code adopted



Installations; Permits; Inspections



   153.15   Installation; permit required



   153.16   Permit fees



   153.17   Inspections



   153.18   Test of fixtures



   153.19   Installations to be exposed for inspection



Plumbing Inspector



   153.30   Establishment; appointment



   153.31   Powers and duties



   153.32   Stop orders



   153.33   Right of entry



Cross-reference:



   Commissioner of Public Health and Safety, see §§ 31.100et seq.



   Construction and Connections; Water, see §§ 51.015et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate plumbing, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-5



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   All plumbing installations in the city shall be governed by the State
Plumbing Code, which is hereby adopted as fully as if it were set out in full
herein.  Three copies of the code hereby adopted shall be on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 20-6)



INSTALLATIONS; PERMITS; INSPECTIONS



§ 153.15  INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No plumbing shall be installed in any place in the city unless a permit
therefor is obtained.  Applications for these permits shall be made to the
City Clerk and shall state thereon the name of the person or contractor
intended to have charge of the installation.



(1969 Code, § 20-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.16  PERMIT FEES.



   The fee for a permit required by this subchapter shall be $10.



(1969 Code, § 20-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.17  INSPECTIONS.



   The Plumbing Inspector shall make or cause to be made those inspections
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 20-3)



§ 153.18  TEST OF FIXTURES.



   All plumbing fixtures installed shall be subjected to either the air or
water test under the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector.



(1969 Code, § 20-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.19  INSTALLATIONS TO BE EXPOSED FOR INSPECTION.



   (A)   In all buildings erected after the adoption of this code, both
public and private, and in all buildings already built or erected wherein any
plumbing is to be installed or wherein any sewer-connected pipe shall be
repaired or changed, except for minor repairs, on the sewer side of the trap
the drain, soil, rainwater, and other pipe or pipes connected directly or
indirectly with drain, soil, and water pipe, and all traps, shall be exposed
to view for inspection and test by the Plumbing Inspector and shall not be
covered until the inspection and test are made.  Following the inspection
and test, a written report thereof shall be made on a form provided by the
City Clerk, signed by the Inspector and property owner, and filed with the
office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Where any water main is tapped for any public or private
building being built or already built, the installation shall be exposed to
view for inspection by the Plumbing Inspector and shall not be covered until
inspection is made.  Following inspection, a written report thereof shall be
made on a form provided by the City Clerk, signed by the Plumbing Inspector
and property owner, and filed with the office of the City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 20-5)  (Ord. 1960-14, passed 7-11-1960)  Penalty, see §
10.99



PLUMBING INSPECTOR



§ 153.30  ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT.



   There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector, an executive
office of the city.  The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety and shall be assigned to the
Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 20-17)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create offices, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 4-5-8



§ 153.31  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector and he or she is hereby
empowered to enforce all city ordinances or code provisions relating to the
installation, care, and standards of plumbing.  He or she shall make all
necessary inspections and tests which may be needed in the performance of his
or her duties.



(1969 Code, § 20-18)



§ 153.32  STOP ORDERS.



   Whenever the Plumbing Inspector shall find plumbing work being done in
violation of the city ordinances or code provisions, he or she shall have the
power to order the work stopped until the ordinances and code provisions are
complied with.  It shall be unlawful to continue any such work after a stop
order has been issued, except upon written order of the Mayor or of the
Plumbing Inspector; provided that when a stop order is a verbal order, it
shall be followed by a written stop order within 24 hours.  A stop order may
be revoked by the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety.



(1969 Code, § 20-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.33  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to enter any building or
premises on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being installed,
altered, or repaired, at all reasonable hours, to make inspections or ensure
compliance with the ordinances of the city relative thereto.



(1969 Code, § 20-20)



CHAPTER 154:  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



Section



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   Dangerous buildings a nuisance



   154.03   Existence or occupancy unlawful



   154.04   Notice of declaration; abatement



   154.05   Building to be secured



   154.06   Rehabilitation or demolition; notice



   154.07   Demolition; permit required



   154.08   Notification of starting work



   154.09   Sewer and water line disconnection; inspection



   154.10   Demolished structures; leveling and filling



   154.11   Completion; inspection



   154.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority to define nuisances, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-60-2



   Municipality may repair or demolish unsafe buildings, see ILCS Chapter
65, Act 5, §§ 11-31-1 and 11-31-2



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.  Include:



      (1)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure
which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which
may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the
occupants of it or neighboring structures;



      (2)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure
which because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any
other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire
hazard;



      (3)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure
which by reason of faulty construction, or any other cause, is liable to
cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of
the structure; and



      (4)   Any building, shed, or other human- made structure which
because of its condition, or because of lack of doors or windows, is
available to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not
lawful occupants of the structure.



(1969 Code, § 6-48)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 154.02  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS A NUISANCE.



   Any dangerous building in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



(1969 Code, § 6-49)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.03  EXISTENCE OR OCCUPANCY UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
dangerous building in the city; and it shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same
to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy the building or permit it to
be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.



(1969 Code, § 6-50)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.04  NOTICE OF DECLARATION; ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, or the Health
Officer shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is
a dangerous building, the City Clerk shall be notified. The Clerk and/or
Building Inspector shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the
owner thereof, and upon any occupant thereof, by registered mail or by
personal service. The notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in a dangerous condition, and that the dangerous condition must be
removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or demolishing; and
that the condition must be remedied at once. The notice may be in the
following terms:



   "To _______________ (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known
and described as ___________:



   You are hereby notified that ___________ (described building) on the
premises above mentioned has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous
building after inspection by the Building Inspector.



   The causes for this decision are _____  ______ (here insert the facts
as to the dangerous condition).



   You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 15 days,
or the City of Paris will proceed to do so and any costs shall be your
responsibility and a lien upon the property."



   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith
or taken an appeal from the determination of the office or employee finding
that a dangerous building exists, within 15 days from the time when this
notice is served upon the person by personal service or registered mail, the
Building Inspector may, upon orders of the Mayor and City Council, proceed to
remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building.



(1969 Code, § 6-51)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 2015-9,
passed 8-24-2015) Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.05  BUILDING TO BE SECURED.



   After any building or structure or portion thereof has been vacated by
Health Department or Building Inspector order, pursuant to city ordinances or
state statutes, or is vacant and is in such a condition that no residential,
commercial, or other authorized use could be made of same, the Building
Inspector shall require that the building, structure, or portion thereof, and
any and all windows without glass or with broken glass, be boarded up, and
all doors or other openings securely fastened to prevent unauthorized
entrance into the building or structure, pursuant to state statute.



(1969 Code, § 6-52)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.06  REHABILITATION OR DEMOLITION; NOTICE.



   (A)   Rehabilitate or demolish. The owner, agent, or other person
responsible shall, within 15 days after a written notice, pursuant to
division (B) of this section, is mailed, served or published, rehabilitate
the structure and make it fit for human habitation or for commercial or other
authorized uses, or, in the alternative shall demolish and remove same. The
time period may be extended for good cause, upon written application to the
Building Inspector, where the public health,  safety and welfare are not
endangered.



(1969 Code, § 6-53)



   (B)   Notice. A written notice shall be mailed or served upon the
owner or his or her agent, and all lien holders of record, by registered
mail, personal service, or publication. Notice as provided in § 154.04 of
this Code, shall satisfy this condition. In the event, upon diligent search,
the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of the building, including
lien holders  of  record,  is  not ascertainable, notice mailed to the
person or persons in whose name the real estate was last assessed is
sufficient notice. If notice is served by publication, notice shall also be
posted at the premises. The notice shall state the date of the vacation
order, the date by which repair or demolition must be commenced, and that if
no action is taken the Building Inspector shall cause the building to be
demolished and removed and costs shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the building is located and shall be a lien upon that real estate.



(1969 Code, § 6-54)



(Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 2015-9, passed 8-24-2015) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.07  DEMOLITION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to demolish any building or structure within the
territory described in § 151.01 of this code without having first procured a
permit therefor.  The fee for this demolition permit shall be $5.



(1969 Code, § 6-55)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.08  NOTIFICATION OF STARTING WORK.



   Every person to whom a permit is issued shall notify the inspection
department when actual work of demolishing the building is to be commenced.



(1969 Code, § 6-56)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.09  SEWER AND WATER LINE DISCONNECTION; INSPECTION.



   (A)   Disconnection and capping.  Prior to razing any portion of
any building the person to whom the permit is issued shall cause all sanitary
sewer and water laterals to be disconnected and capped by a licensed master
plumber, these disconnections to be at the property line.



(1969 Code, § 6-57)



   (B)   Notice to inspect.  Upon the completion of the capping, the
inspection department shall be notified prior to backfilling the excavation.



(1969 Code, § 6-58)



(Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.10  DEMOLISHED STRUCTURES; LEVELING AND FILLING.



   Whenever a building or structure has been demolished, the foundation
thereof, if any, shall be leveled to at least 42 inches below grade and
filled in with 95% noncombustible fill material, with the top 42 inches of
fill material being of dirt, sand, or gravel; and no combustible material may
be placed in the foundation which is not from the site.  The fill material
must be capable of supporting vegetative growth.



(1969 Code, § 6-59)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 1997-7,
passed 2-24-1997)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.11  COMPLETION; INSPECTION.



   Upon completion of the demolition and backfill and leveling of the
property, the owner shall notify the Building Inspector of the completion,
and the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of acceptance of the
demolition.  All demolition work must be completed within 90 days of the
issuance of the demolition permit.



(1969 Code, § 6-60)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1969 Code, § 6-61)  (Ord. 1994-10, passed 4-11-1994)



CHAPTER 155:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Purpose



   155.02   Definitions



Historic Preservation Commission



   155.15   Members; terms



   155.16   Organization



   155.17   Meetings; procedures



   155.18   Powers and duties



   155.19   Surveys and research



Statutory reference:



   Historic Areas Preservation Act, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
11-48.2-1et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the city by:



   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic
and architectural characteristics of the city which represent elements of the
city’s cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;



   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as represented in the city’s landmarks and historic areas;



   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of
the city’s landmarks and historic areas;



   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to
have buyers, visitors, and shoppers, and thereby supporting business,
commerce, industry, and providing economic benefit to the city; and



   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of
structures, areas, and neighborhoods, and thereby preventing future urban
blight.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this
chapter shall be interpreted to give them the same meaning as they have in
common usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADDITION.  Any act or process which changes 1 or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure designated for preservation,
by adding to, joining with, or increasing the size or capacity of the
structure.



      ALTERATION.  Any act or process that changes 1 or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited
to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.



      AREA.  A specific geographic division of the city.



      BUILDING.  Any structure created for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the land.



      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  A certificate from the Historic
Preservation Commission authorizing plans for alteration, construction,
removal, or demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic
district.



      COMMISSION.  The City Historic Preservation Commission.



      COMMISSIONERS.  Voting members of the City Historic Preservation
Commission.



      CONSTRUCTION.  The act of adding an addition to an existing
structure, or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot
or property.



      COUNCIL.  The City Council of this city.



      DEMOLITION.  Any act or process that destroys in part or in
whole a landmark or site within a historic district.



      DESIGN GUIDELINE.  A standard of appropriate activity that will
preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or area.



      EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL AP- PEARANCE.  The architectural and
general composition of the exterior of a structure, including, but not
limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the
type, design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and
appurtenant elements.



      HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area designated as a HISTORIC DISTRICT by
ordinance of the City Council and which may contain within definable
geographic boundaries 1 or more landmarks and which may have within its
boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic or
architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless
contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks
located within the HISTORIC DISTRICT.



      LANDMARK.  Any building, structure, or site which has been
designated as a LANDMARK by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to
procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration,
and preservation because of its historic or architectural significance to the
city.



      OWNER OF RECORD.  The person, corporation, or other legal entity
listed as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.



      REHABILITATION.  The process of returning a property to a state
of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property
which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.



      REMOVAL.  Any relocation of a structure on its site or to
another site.



      REPAIR.  Any change that does not require a building permit,
that is not construction, relocation, or alteration.



      STRUCTURAL CHANGE.  Any change or repair in the supporting
members of a building, structure, roof, or exterior walls which would expand
the building in height, width, or bulk.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground; including, but
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings; fences; gazebos;
advertising signs; billboards; backstops for tennis courts; radio and
television antennae, including supporting towers; swimming pools; satellite
dishes; solar panels; and wind generation devices.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 155.15  MEMBERS; TERMS.



   (A)   Establishment; members.  The City Historic Preservation
Commission is hereby established.  It shall consist of 5 voting members,
residents of the city, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council.



   (B)   Qualifications.  The members shall be appointed on the basis
of expertise, experience, or interest in the area of architectural history,
building construction or engineering, finance, historical and architectural
preservation, neighborhood organizing, or real estate.



   (C)   Terms.  Members of the Commission shall be appointed for
terms of 3 years.  Of those members first taking office, 2 shall be
appointed for 3 years, 2 for 2 years, and 1 for 1 year.  Alternate members
may be appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of regular
members.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.  Members
shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



§ 155.16  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Officers.  Officers shall consist of a chairperson, vice
chairperson, and a secretary elected by the members of the Preservation
Commission, and serve a term of 1 year, and shall be eligible for re-
election.  The chairperson shall preside over meetings.  In the absence of
the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform the duties of the
chairperson.  If both are absent, a temporary chairperson shall be elected
by those present.



   (B)   Secretary; duties.  The secretary of the Preservation
Commission shall have the following duties:



      (1)   To take minutes of each Preservation Commission meeting;



      (2)   To be responsible for distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports, and decisions of the Preservation Commission to all members
of the Commission;



      (3)   To give notice as provided herein or by law for all
public hearings conducted by the Preservation Commission;



      (4)   To advise the Mayor of vacancies on the Preservation
Commission and expiring terms of members; and



      (5)   To prepare and submit to the City Council a complete
record of the proceedings before the Preservation Commission on any matter
requiring Council action.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



§ 155.17  MEETINGS; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Quorum and voting.  A quorum shall consist of a majority of
the members.  All decisions or actions of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be made by a majority vote of those members present and
voting at any meeting where a quorum exists.



   (B)   Meeting times.  Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled
times, to be established by resolution of the Commission at the beginning of
each calendar year, or at any time upon the call of the chairperson.



   (C)   Conflict of interest.  No member of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall vote on any matter that may materially or apparently affect
the property, income, or business interests of that member.



   (D)   Property owners; hearing.  No action shall be taken by the
Commission that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of property
in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition until the
owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at a public meeting of
the Preservation Commission, as provided herein.



   (E)   Witnesses.  The chairperson, and in his or her absence the
acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.



   (F)   Open to the public.  All meetings of the Preservation
Commission shall be open to the public.



   (G)   Minutes and records.  The Preservation Commission shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Preservation Commission, and
shall be a public record.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



§ 155.18  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission has the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;



   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures, and areas;



   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the City Council to adopt
procedures to protect properties or structures having special historic,
community, or architectural value;



   (D)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of
properties or structures which have special historic, community, or
architectural value;



   (E)   To advise property owners on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on the State or National Register of Historic Places;



   (F)   To inform and educate the citizens of the city concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the city by publishing appropriate
maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and
seminars;



   (G)   To accept and administer on behalf of the city, upon
designation by the City Council, such gifts, grants, and money as may be
appropriate for the purpose of this chapter;



   (H)   To call upon available city staff members as well as other
experts for technical advice;



   (I)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the
City Plan Commission, on any matter affecting historically and
architecturally significant properties; and



   (J)   To periodically research the zoning ordinance, as set forth in
Appendix A of this title, and to recommend to the City Plan Commission and
the City Council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued
use of historically or architecturally significant properties.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



§ 155.19  SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.



   (A)   The City Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake an
ongoing survey and research effort in the city to identify neighborhoods,
areas, sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community,
architectural, or aesthetic importance, interest, or value.  As part of the
survey, the Commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and
studies by any unit of government or private organization and compile
appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs.



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall identify
significant structures based upon the following criteria:



      (1)   Architecturally or historically sig- nificant properties
in 1 identifiable neighborhood or distinct geographical areas of the city;



      (2)   Association with a particular person, event, or
historical period;



      (3)   Representation of a particular architectural style or
school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer, or
craftsperson; or



      (4)   Other criteria as may be adopted by the Historic
Preservation Commission to assure a systematic survey of all significant
properties within the city.



(Ord. 1999-46, passed 12-13-1999)



CHAPTER 156:  FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION



Section



   156.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 156.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Regulations regarding development in floodplain areas set forth in
Ordinance 2010-18 are adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. A
copy of Ordinance 2010-18 is on file in the Clerk's office and available for
public inspection during normal business hours.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-13-2010)



CHAPTER 157:  MOBILE HOMES



Section



   157.01   Definitions



   157.02   Mobile homes; location



   157.03   Nonconforming use sites



   157.04   Mobile home parks



   157.05   Regulations; compliance required



   157.06   Mobile home parks; license; inspection; standards



   157.07   Periodic inspections



   157.08   Denial, suspension, or revocation; hearing



   157.09   Violations; remedies



   157.99   Penalty



§ 157.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPER.  A mobile living unit designed to be mounted upon and conveyed
by a vehicle.  No CAMPER unit shall be occupied in the city except as
provided in the zoning ordinance, as set forth in Appendix A of this title.



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure less than 7 years of age, and designed for
permanent habitation, and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels
temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its
construction to the location or subsequent locations at which it is intended
to be a permanent habitation, and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as
a dwelling place of 1 or more persons.  This definition shall include this
type of structure, regardless of whether wheels are in place on or removed
from the structure.  A prefabricated home shall not be included in this
definition.  A home complying with the terms of the city building code
relating to construction of single-family homes, and placed on a foundation
complying with all of the terms of the city building code relating to
single-family homes, shall not be deemed to be a MOBILE HOME.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  A tract of land, or 2 or more contiguous tracts of
land, upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for 5 or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and including any building, structure, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of that MOBILE
HOME PARK.  Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not
preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a MOBILE HOME PARK if
they are maintained and operated jointly.  Neither an immobilized mobile
home nor a motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being a part
of a MOBILE HOME PARK.



   TRAVEL TRAILER.  A mobile home or trailer designed for human
occupancy, and not more than 8 feet or more than 2.4 meters in width, nor
more than 33 feet or 10 meters in length.



   UNIT.  A mobile home or similar portable structure as defined in this
section.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-1)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 1998-22,
passed 9-9-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-39, passed 9-12-2005)



§ 157.02  MOBILE HOMES; LOCATION.



   No mobile home shall be permitted within the boundaries of the city
zoning ordinance, as set forth in Appendix A of this title, unless located in
a licensed mobile home park.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-2)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.03  NONCONFORMING USE SITES.



   (A)   All sites upon which a mobile home is located within the city
zoning limits but not within a licensed mobile home park at the time of the
effective date of this chapter shall be designated as nonconforming use
sites.  The lawful nonconforming use of these sites may be continued,
although that use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter,
provided that the use complies with the conditions for nonconforming use
sites hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   A nonconforming use shall not be extended or expanded.  The
extension or expansion of a nonconforming use to any portion of the site
designated specifically for a nonconforming use, which existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, shall not be deemed an extension or expansion
of the nonconforming use.  Any such valid extension or expansion must meet
the requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   A mobile home on a nonconforming use site may be replaced by
another mobile home, provided that the replacement mobile home is less than 7
years old and, except for location outside of a licensed mobile home park,
conforms with this section.



   (D)   If a nonconforming use has ceased for a period of 1 year or
more, it shall not be reestablished.  If the mobile home shall remain
unoccupied for residency purposes for a period of 1 year or more, it shall be
treated as a cessation of the nonconforming use.  Once changed to a
conforming use, no site shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use,
and the site shall no longer be designated a nonconforming use site.



   (E)   No person shall maintain any unit on a site within the city,
or use any unit for living or sleeping quarters, or make application for a
permit pursuant to this section, unless he or she has first complied with the
following conditions:



      (1)   Each unit shall be equipped with a complete toilet, wash
bowl, and shower bath or bathtub;



      (2)   Each unit shall have an adequate supply of wholesome
water with a separate connection to the regular water system of the city;
provided, however, if city water is not available to the unit, then the unit
shall be connected to an approved well; all of which connections shall be
made in accordance with established rules, regulations, codes, and ordinances
of the city;



      (3)   Each unit shall have a separate liquid waste outlet,
connected with the regular established sewer system of the city; provided,
however, if city sewer is not available to the unit, then the unit shall be
connected to an approved septic system; all of which connections shall be
made in accordance with established rules, regulations, codes, and ordinances
of the city;



      (4)   Each unit shall be equipped with a smoke detector in
working order, as required by existing state law;



      (5)   Each unit shall have electric service connected with the
regular established electrical system of the city, which electrical
connection shall be in accordance with the rules, regulations, codes, and
ordinances of the city;



      (6)   Each unit shall be securely anchored in accordance with
the Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, ILCS Chapter 210, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (7)   Each unit shall be equipped with secure skirting so as
to enclose the space between the bottom of the unit and the ground;



      (8)   Garbage, rubbish, and trash shall be disposed of in a
manner which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health;



      (9)   Each unit shall have no less than 2 entranceways.  Each
entranceway shall be easily useable and shall have steps or a porch to
facilitate use; and



      (10)   Each unit shall be equipped with fire extinguishers in
working order, 1 in each end of the mobile home.



   (F)   No person shall maintain any unit on a site within the city or
use a unit within the city for living or sleeping purposes without first
having obtained a permit from the city.



   (G)   A person desiring to use a unit for living or sleeping
purposes on a nonconforming site shall make application in writing with the
City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk.  An application in writing
for a permit shall be made for any unit that is situated on a site in the
city, and this application shall be made within 10 days of the time the unit
is placed on the site.  All nonconforming sites in existence at the time of
the passage of this chapter shall have 1 year during which to make
application for the permit.



   (H)   Promptly upon application being made, the Mayor shall appoint
a representative of the city to inspect the unit and the nonconforming use
site where the unit is located and determine if the person making application
has complied with the conditions and provisions of this section.  If the
written application and the inspection of the unit and site show compliance
with the conditions and provisions of this section, the City Clerk shall
issue a permit certificate as hereinafter described.



   (I)   If a permit is granted for a nonconforming use site and unit
by the city, it shall issue a certificate showing the name of the permittee,
the date of issuance, and the location of the unit, and shall be signed in
the name of the city by the Mayor and Clerk and be impressed with the city
seal.  The City Clerk shall keep a record of all such permits issued.



   (J)   No nonconforming use site permit shall be transferable or
assignable.



   (K)   The permit granted under this section shall be perpetual, so
long as the permittee complies with the conditions and provisions of this
section.



   (L)   Any permit issued by the city under this section shall be
suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement
contained in the application;



      (2)   Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the permit
granted;



      (3)   Violation of any of the conditions or provisions of this
chapter applicable to the activity for which the permit has been granted;



      (4)   Failure to continuously comply with all conditions
required as precedent to the approval of the permit;



      (5)   Using or maintaining the unit in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of peace or a menace to the health, safety, or welfare of
the public; or



      (6)   Violation of any statute of the state or ordinance of
the city which protects the health and safety of the public, or prohibits
nuisances, or otherwise regulates the condition of buildings or structures.



   (M)   (1)   A unit used or maintained in the city contrary to the
provisions of this section is declared a nuisance, and the city shall have
available all remedies as provided in the city ordinances and code provisions.



      (2)   Further, a unit that is not on an approved nonconforming
use site, or which is on a site no longer an approved nonconforming use site
pursuant to division (D), is declared a nuisance and shall be removed by the
owner of the unit or owner of the site at the respective owner’s expense.
Failure to do so within a reasonable time after demand from the city shall be
a violation of the city ordinances. In addition to any remedy available to
the city under this Code of Ordinances, the city can seek permission from the
court to abate the nuisance by allowing the city to remove the mobile home
and dispose of it and any fees and costs of such removal shall be at the unit
and/or site owner’s expense, which are recoverable by the city from the
unit and/or site owner.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-3)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994; Am. Ord. 1998-22,
passed 9-9-1998; Am. Ord. 1998-27, passed 10-12-1998; Am. Ord. 2005-39,
passed 9-12-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-1, passed 1-9-2017)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.04  MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   Mobile home parks are allowed by license under this chapter, but are
otherwise strictly prohibited.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-4)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.05  REGULATIONS; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every mobile home park hereafter established in the city
shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements of:



      (1)   An Act to Provide for License, and Regulate Mobile Homes
and Mobile Home Parks, ILCS Chapter 210, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (2)   Rules and Regulations for Mobile Home Parks, State
Department of Public Health, Consumer Protection Division, as now or
hereafter amended; and



      (3)   This chapter.



   (B)   In case of conflict between any provisions of the above, the
more stringent provision shall control.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-5)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.06  MOBILE HOME PARKS; LICENSE; INSPECTION; STANDARDS.



   (A)   A mobile home park constructed prior to the effective date of
this chapter but not licensed by the city shall not require a construction
permit.  A written application for an original license shall be submitted to
the city, and shall include all of the necessary information on the
application except for the actual construction information.



   (B)   Any person seeking to establish, maintain, conduct, or operate
a mobile home park after the effective date of this chapter shall first
obtain a license from the City Clerk.  All plans shall be submitted to the
City Clerk for approval prior to the granting of a license.



   (C)   A license does not relieve the applicant from complying with
this chapter or any other applicable ordinance or code provision.



   (D)   Upon completion of the proposed construction of a mobile home
park or a proposed alteration of an existing mobile home park, the applicant
shall notify the City Clerk in order that an inspection of the complete
facilities can be made.  Notification to the City Clerk shall be in writing
and addressed to the Clerk’s office at City Hall.  Inspection shall be
made by persons designated by the Mayor.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall review each application and all plan
documents submitted.  When the application and plan documents are found to
be in compliance with this chapter and the Rules and Regulations for Mobile
Home Parks, as promulgated by the State Department of Public Health, the City
Clerk may issue a license to conduct or operate a mobile home park to the
applicant.  The City Clerk shall not issue a license until the Council shall
have issued a certificate of occupancy certifying compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.  Licenses shall be nontransferable and shall
expire on the May 1 subsequent to the date of issuance of the license.



   (F)   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation
or suspension by the City Council.  However, the City Council shall first
serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall
be specified the way or ways in which the licensee has failed to comply with
the statutes or this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated by the
state or city pertaining thereto.  The notice shall require the licensee to
remove or abate the nuisances, or unsanitary or objectionable conditions,
specified in the notice, within 5 days or within a longer period of time as
may be allowed by the City Council.  If the licensee fails to comply with
the terms and conditions of the notice within the time specified or the
extended period of time, the City Council may revoke or suspend the
license.  Service may be had either by personal service or by mail to the
licensee or agent named in and to the address listed in the most recent
annual license application.



   (G)   In order to obtain a license to construct or alter, or an
original license to operate a mobile home park, the applicant shall file with
the City Clerk a written application and plan documents.  Two copies of the
plan document shall accompany the application filed with the city to obtain a
license to construct or alter a mobile home park or an original license to
operate a mobile home park not previously licensed by the city.  These plans
shall include, but not be limited to, the design and construction criteria
set forth herein.



   (H)   The application shall be completed by the applicant or an
engineer or architect and shall include:



      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or
applicants, or names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a
partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a
corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time
of the filing of the application.  If the applicant is a corporation, the
name and address of the corporation’s registered agent shall be provided;



      (2)   The address, location, and legal description of the
tract of land upon which it is proposed to construct, operate, and maintain a
mobile home park;



      (3)   The name of the mobile home park;



      (4)   Detailed plans and specifications which include a
general plot plan of the mobile home park with all sites and structures
shown, building plans and specifications for existing buildings and
facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities
or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, the water supply system,
the sewage disposal system, the electrical system, the fuel supply system,
the lighting system, the method of disposal of solid waste, all streets and
sidewalks, swimming and bathing facilities, fire hydrants, and details of all
auxiliary structures;



      (5)   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the
matters contained in the application shall be attached; and



      (6)   A nonrefundable application fee of $200 for a license to
construct or a nonrefundable application fee of $50 for a license to alter or
to change the size of the park.



   (I)   Sites selected for mobile home development shall be well
drained and free from topographical or geological hindrances and from other
conditions unfavorable to a proper residential environment.  The mobile home
development shall not be located near swamps, marshes, or other breeding
places of insects, rats, and mice.  When good, natural drainage is not
available, storm drainage shall be provided, and this drainage shall not
endanger any water supply or surface watercourse.



   (J)   All streets in mobile parks with fewer than 50 units shall
have a minimum road width of 28 feet.  If a mobile home park has more than
50 units, then a 40-foot road width shall be required.  When sidewalks and
walkways are constructed abutting a street in a mobile home park, they shall
be a minimum of 4 feet in width; provided, however, there shall be no minimum
width requirement for sidewalks for each individual site.  No portion of a
mobile home shall block, in any way, the pedestrian traffic on the walkways.



   (K)   Size, area, width, and yard requirements include the following:



      (1)   Minimum area.  Each mobile home site rented or used in
a mobile home park shall contain a contiguous area of at least 3,000 square
feet per mobile home;



      (2)   Front yard.  The minimum distance between the mobile
home and the pavement edge of the street serving the mobile home site shall
be 15 feet;



      (3)   Side yard.  The minimum distance between mobile homes
shall be 20 feet, excluding hitches and steps.  Bay windows or other
projections of a mobile home shall be considered the outer wall of a mobile
home when considering the side and rear requirements;



      (4)   Rear yard.  There shall be a rear yard provided for
each mobile home, of at least 10 feet.  The rear yard is the yard farthest
from the street; and



      (5)   Mobile home stand.  A mobile home stand shall be
provided for each mobile home site, of sufficient size to accommodate the
mobile home to be located thereon.  A mobile home stand shall be solid,
continuous concrete slab constructed so as not to shift or settle unevenly
under the weight of the mobile home or other forces due to frost, vibration,
wind, or water.  The mobile home shall be secured to the ground with an
approved tie-down or anchoring device, as required by state statutes.



   (L)   Miscellaneous restrictions include:



      (1)   Not more than 1 mobile home shall be parked in 1 space;



      (2)   No travel trailer or camper shall be permitted in any
mobile home park, except for periods of 6 months or less during any calendar
year;



      (3)   All mobile home spaces shall be located in a licensed
mobile home park except those mobile homes totally in place on the effective
date of this chapter or replaced pursuant to § 157.03 of this code;



      (4)   All mobile home spaces shall have individual utilities;
and



      (5)   Each mobile home lot shall be required to provide 2
off-street parking spaces.



   (M)   The annual license fee per mobile home park shall be $25, and
shall be due and payable on or before May 1 of each year.  The annual
license fee shall be nonrefundable.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-6)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.07  PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.



   A committee designated by the City Council shall periodically inspect
all mobile homes and all mobile home parks to verify compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-7)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 157.08  DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION; HEARING.



   In the event the city shall deny an application or suspend or revoke a
permit under this chapter, it shall notify the applicant or permittee of that
denial, suspension, or revocation.  Any person aggrieved by this action by
the city shall have the right to a hearing before the Council, provided a
written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within 10 days after
receipt of the denial, suspension, or revocation.  The action taken by the
Council after such a hearing shall be final.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-8)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)



§ 157.09  VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.



   (A)   In case any unit is located, replaced, altered, added to, or
maintained, or any person constructs, alters, changes the number of spaces,
operates, or maintains a mobile home park in violation of this chapter or of
any ordinance or other regulation made under the authority conferred hereby,
the proper authorities of the city, or any owner or tenant of real property
within 1,200 feet in any direction of the property on which the alleged
violation occurred who shows that the owner’s or tenant’s property will
be affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding:



      (1)   To prevent the unlawful location, replacement,
alteration, addition, maintenance, construction, change, or operation;



      (2)   To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or
land;



      (3)   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in
or about the premises; or



      (4)   To restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



   (B)   When any such action is instituted by an owner or tenant,
notice of the action shall be served upon the city at the time suit is begun,
by serving a copy of the complaint on the Mayor of the city and mailing a
copy of the complaint to the City Attorney, and no such action may be
maintained until this notice has been given.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-9)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
157.99



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
offense.  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(1969 Code, § 15.5-9)  (Ord. 1994-12, passed 4-11-1994)



CHAPTER 158:  SIGNS



Section



General Provisions



   158.01   Definitions



   158.02   Zoning regulations apply



Permits



   158.15   Permit required; expiration



   158.16   Installer; license or certification required



   158.17   Property owner’s consent required



   158.18   Application



   158.19   Fee



   158.20   Issuance; suspension, revocation, or denial



   158.21   Appeal



   158.22   Limitations on effect



   158.23   Owner or user change; notice required



   158.24   Inspections; maintenance



Construction and Design Specifications



   158.35   Compliance with other codes



   158.36   Additional specifications



   158.37   Free-standing signs



   158.38   Electric signs



   158.39   Glass



   158.40   Plastic



   158.41   Strength of parapet, wall, or roof



   158.42   Supports and braces



   158.43   Wind loads



   158.44   Anchoring



Prohibited, Permitted, and Exempt Signs



   158.55   Permit-exempt alterations



   158.56   Exempt signs



   158.57   Prohibited signs



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations; Construction, see Chapter 151



   Zoning, see Title XV, App. A



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prescribe manner of construction for all structures, see
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-30-4



   Authority to regulate billboards, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-80-15



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Building Inspector.



   ADVERTISING MESSAGE.  The copy on a sign describing products or
services being offered to the public.



   ANIMATED SIGN.  Any sign which includes action or motion.  For
purposes of this chapter, this term does not refer to flashing, changing, or
indexing, all of which are separately defined.



   ARCHITECTURAL BLADE.  A roof sign or projecting sign with no visible
legs or braces; designed to look as though it could have been part of the
building structure, rather than something suspended from or standing on the
building.



   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION.  Any projection not intended for occupancy
which extends beyond the property line, not including signs, canopies, or
marquees.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign, free- standing or affixed to a wall
or fence, which identifies a neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a
multiple residential complex, or a commercial or industrial complex.



   AREA OF SIGN.  The area of the largest single face of the sign within
a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, forms an
integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed.  If the sign consists of more than
1 section or module, all areas will be totaled.  Where poster panels or
bulletins are installed back to back, 1 face only is considered as AREA.  If
there is a difference, the larger face will be counted.



   AWNING.  A movable or fixed shelter supported entirely from the
exterior wall of a building and composed of rigid or nonrigid materials
except for the supporting framework.



   BACKGROUND AREA.  The entire area of a sign on which copy could be
placed, as opposed to the copy area, where copy is in fact posted or painted.



   BANNER.  A long, narrow flag hung over a street or entrance.



   BANNER SIGN.  A temporary sign composed of lightweight material
secured or mounted so as to allow movement caused by wind.



   BILLBOARD.  See OFF-PREMISES SIGN, OFF-SITE SIGN, or OUTDOOR
ADVERTISING (posters and bulletins).



   BUILDING FACE OR WALL.  All window and wall area of a building in 1
plane or elevation.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE.  The linear width of a building facing the
right-of-way or the linear length of the right-of-way facing the building,
whichever is smaller.



   BUILDING SIGN.  A sign lettered to give the name of a building itself,
as opposed to the name of occupants or services.



   CANOPY or MARQUEE.  A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part
or all of a building face over a public right-of-way and constructed of some
durable material such as metal, glass, or plastic.



   CANOPY SIGN or MARQUEE SIGN.  Any sign attached to or constructed in
or on a canopy or marquee.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL).  A sign on which copy or sign panels
may be changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters
or changeable pictorial panels.



   CHANGING SIGN (AUTOMATIC).  An electronically or electrically
controlled time, temperature, and date sign, message center of readerboard,
where different copy changes are shown on the same location.



   COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN PLAN.  Building design and signs integrated into
1 architectural plan, the comprehensive plan being complete in all other
building, structural, and electrical requirements.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign identifying a building or
construction site and the architects, engineers, financial institutions,
contractors, and suppliers involved.



   COPY.  The wording on a sign surface.



   COPY AREA.  The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure
which describes the area enclosed by the actual copy of a sign.  For facia
signs, the COPY AREA limits refer to the message, not to the illuminated
background.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council.



   DETACHED SIGN.  See FREE-STANDING SIGN.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  Any sign which serves solely to designate the
location of any place or area.



   DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign designed to provide artificial
light either through exposed lighting in front of the face or through
transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign.



   ELECTRICAL SIGN.  Any sign containing electrical wiring which is
attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.



   EMBELLISHMENT.



      (1)   General.  Letters, figures, characters, or
representations in cut-outs or irregular forms or similar ornaments attached
to or superimposed upon the sign.



      (2)   Decorative only.  A purely decorative EMBELLISHMENT on
a free-standing sign.



   ERECTED.  Attached, altered, built, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, or moved, and shall include the painting of wall signs, but does
not include copy changes on any sign.



   FACE LIFT.  The remodeling of a building’s frontage which is visible
from a public right-of-way, so that the building material, door frames,
window frames, and signs are designed in harmony with each other.



   FACE OF SIGN.  See SIGN FACE.



   FACIA SIGN or WALL SIGN.  A sign attached to or erected against a wall
of a building, with the face parallel to the building wall and extending not
more than 1 foot therefrom.



   FIELD FABRICATED SIGN.  A sign constructed in the field instead of
being completed at the factory.



   FLAG.  A piece of cloth or other flexible material varying in size,
shape, color, and design, usually attached at 1 edge to a staff or cord and
used as a symbol of a nation, state, or organization.  May also be imprinted
with an advertising message or design, or be of bright colors to attract
attention.



   FLASHING SIGN.  Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing
light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light
source.  Automatic changing signs such as public service time, temperature,
and date signs or electronically controlled message centers are classified as
changing signs, not FLASHING SIGNS.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  A sign erected on a free-standing frame, mast, or
pole and not attached to any building.



   FRONTAGE.  The length of the property line of any 1 premises parallel
to and along each public right- of-way it borders.



   FUTURE DEVELOPMENT SITE.  A temporary sign indicating the future
construction or development of a building or area, but not a construction
sign.



   GROUND LEVEL.  Street grade.



   GROUND SIGN.  A free-standing sign installed directly on the ground.



   HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the adjacent
street grade or upper surface of the street curb to the highest point of the
sign.  Elevated roadways shall not be used to measure height.



   IDENTIFICATION FACIA SIGN.  A sign which is limited to the name of the
building or institution on which the sign is erected.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which is limited to the name, address,
and number of a building, institution, or person and to the activity carried
on in the building, or institution, or the occupancy.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which is lighted from within or without.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN.  A secondary sign not directly describing goods,
products, services, or facilities which are available on the premises where
the sign is located; such as credit cards accepted, official notices required
by law, trade affiliations.



   INDEXING.  Turning and stopping action of the sections of a
multi-prism sign designed to show several messages in the same area.



   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it, for example, by means of floodlights,
gooseneck reflectors, or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures.



   INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN.  Any sign made of self-contained letters that
are mounted on the face of a building, top of a parapet, roof edge of a
building, or on top of or below a marquee.



   INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD.  A sign which primarily displays the
name of the organization or upcoming events of that organization.



   INTERIOR PROPERTY LINE.  Property lines other than those fronting on
street, road, or highway.



   LINTEL.  In this context, the line above the display on a store
(usually approximately 9 feet from grade).



   LOT.  A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area and to provide the yards and other
open spaces required.  These LOTS shall have frontage on an improved public
street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:



      (1)   A single lot of record;



      (2)   A portion of a lot of record; or



      (3)   A combination of single lots or portions of lots of
record.



   LOW PROFILE SIGN.  A free-standing sign erected near ground level and
limited to identifying the name of the building or institution on the
premises.



   MAINTAIN.  To permit a sign, structure, or any part of each to
continue; or to repair or refurbish a sign, structure, or any part of either.



   MANSARD ROOF.  A sloping roof where the angle of the roof is no more
than 30 degrees from perpendicular.  Signs on these roofs shall be
considered facia signs.  (See also SLOPING ROOF.)



   MARQUEE.  See CANOPY.



   MARQUEE SIGN.  See CANOPY SIGN.



   MESSAGE.  The wording or copy on a sign.



   MULTI-PRISM SIGN.  A sign made with a series of sections that turn and
stop, or flip to show several pictures or messages in the same area.



   NAMEPLATE.  A nonelectric sign identifying only the name and
occupation or profession of the occupant of the premises on which the sign is
located.  If any premises includes more than 1 occupant, NAMEPLATE refers to
all names and occupations or professions as well as the name of the building
and directional information.



   NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.  The code prepared by the National Board of
Fire Underwriters known as the National Electrical Code, in the last edition
published before the date of passage of this chapter, namely the 1993
edition.  Three copies of that code will be kept by the City Clerk for
public inspection.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to the time that it came within the
preview of this code and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform
to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this code; or a
nonconforming sign for which a special permit has been issued.



   NONELECTRICAL SIGN.  Any sign that does not contain electrical wiring
or is not attached to or intended to be attached to an electrical energy
source.



   OBSCENE.  A thing is OBSCENE if, in consideration of the whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest; that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; and, if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits or candor in description or representation of such matters.
A thing is OBSCENE even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of
undeveloped photographs.



   ON-PREMISES SIGN or ON-SITE SIGN.  Any sign identifying or advertising
a business, person, activity, or goods, products, or services located on the
premises where the sign is installed and maintained.



   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN or OFF- SITE SIGN.  Outdoor advertising signs
which advertise goods, products, or services not necessarily sold on the
premises on which the sign is located, are of 3 main types:



      (1)   Poster panels or bulletins normally mounted on a
building wall, roof, or free-standing structure with advertising copy in the
form of pasted paper;



      (2)   Multi-prism signs alternating advertising messages on 1
displayed area; or



      (3)   Painted bulletins, where the advertiser’s message is
painted directly on the background of a wall-mounted, roof, or free-standing
display area.



   OWNER.  The title owner and his or her agents and assignees.



   PAINTED WALL SIGN.  A sign painted directly on the exterior wall of a
building.



   PARAPET or PARAPET WALL.  The portion of a building wall that rises
above the roof level.



   PENNANT.  A tapering flag.



   PENTHOUSE.  A structure on top of a building roof.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, association, firm, or
partnership.



   POLE SIGN.  A free-standing sign.



   PORNOGRAPHIC.  The quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse, when it:



      (1)   Considered as a whole appeals to the prurient interest
in sex of minors; and



      (2)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the
adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and



      (3)   Considered as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political and scientific value to a minor.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a
building.



   PREMISES.  An area of land, with its appurtenances and buildings,
which because of its unity of use is 1 unit of real estate.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to
and projects from a structure or building face.  The area of double-faced
PROJECTING SIGNS is calculated on 1 face of the sign only.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH.  The distance across a public street,
measured from property line to property line.



   PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN.  Any sign intended primarily to
promote items of general interest to the community, such as time,
temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news, or traffic control, and the
like.



   REAL ESTATE OR PROPERTY FOR SALE, RENT, OR LEASE SIGN.  Any sign to
sell, lease, or rent land or buildings; but not a sign identifying or
advertising a real estate broker’s office or other office devoted to the
sale of real estate.



   ROOF LINE.  The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet,
whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.



   ROOF SIGN.  Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof
or on top of or above the parapet of a building.



   ROTATING SIGN.  Any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a
revolving or similar manner, but not including multi-prism indexing signs.



   SEASONAL OR SIMILAR HOLIDAYS.  Signs such as Christmas decorations or
those used for a historic holiday and installed for a limited period of time.



   SIGN.  Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue,
or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public
place, designed to advertise, identify, or convey information, including any
landscaping where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing
the public’s attention to a product or location, with the exception of
window displays and state or national flags.  For the purpose of removal,
SIGN shall also include all sign structures.  SIGN shall also include
balloons used for advertising, but shall not include toy balloons designed to
be held by 1 person.



   SIGN FACE.  The entire area of sign on which copy could be placed.



   SIGN LEGEND.  Copy.



   SIGN STICKER.  A sticker affixed either to the face or the channel of
a sign visible from the street, denoting the name of the manufacturer or
designated servicing company for purpose of identification by city officials
or others.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  Any structure which supports, has supported, or is
designed to support a sign.  A decorative cover is part of a SIGN STRUCTURE.



   SLOPING ROOF.  A roof that slopes up to 60 degrees from the
horizontal.  For greater slopes, see MANSARD ROOF.



   SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN.  Any sign other than a business, nonaccessory,
identification sign, including but not limited to traffic signs.



   STREET.  A public highway, road, or thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to adjacent lots, measured from property line to
property line.



   SWINGING SIGN.  A hinged sign installed on an arm or spar, which sign
is not, in addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A sign which is not permanently affixed.  All
devices such as banners, pennants, flags (not intended to include flags of
any nation), searchlights, twirling, or sandwich type signs, sidewalk or curb
signs, and balloons or other air- or gas-filled figures.



   TEMPORARY WINDOW OR BUILDING SIGN.  A sign painted on the interior of
a window or constructed of paper, cloth, or other like material and attached
to the interior side of a window, or displayed on the exterior of a building
wall, in order to direct attention of persons outside the building to a sale
of merchandise or a change in the status of the business.



   UNDER-CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN.  A sign suspended below the ceiling or
roof of a canopy of the business.



   UNDERWRITERS’ LABORATORIES.  A nonprofit organization which
establishes standards for electrical and mechanical equipment and materials,
and which is commonly referred to as “UL.”  The electrical section
dealing with signs is known as “Underwriters’ Laboratories (48).”



   UNLAWFUL SIGN.  A sign which contravenes this code or which the
administrator may declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to public
safety by reason of dilapidation or abandonment, or a nonconforming sign for
which a permit required under a previous code was not obtained.



   USE.  The purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or other structure
is arranged, intended, designed, occupied, or maintained.



   WALL SIGN.  See FACIA SIGN.



   WINDOW SIGN.  A sign installed inside a window for purposes of viewing
from outside the premises.  This term does not include merchandise located
in window.



(1969 Code, § 15-110)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)



§ 158.02  ZONING REGULATIONS APPLY.



   No sign shall be placed or erected in violation of the zoning ordinance
of the city as set forth in Appendix A of this title.



(1969 Code, § 15-130.1)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



PERMITS



§ 158.15  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any
sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a
sign permit for each such sign from the administrator as required by this
code.  These directives shall not be construed to require a permit for a
change of copy on any sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning, and other
normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit
has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not
modified in any way.  No new permit is required for signs which have permits
and which conform with the requirements of this code on the date of its
adoption unless and until those signs are altered or relocated.



   (B)   Any sign permit issued by the administrator shall become null
and void if manufacture is not commenced within 90 days from the date of the
permit.  If work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for 90
days any time after the work is commenced, a new permit shall be first
obtained to do so, and the fee will be 1/2 the amount required for a new
permit for that work, provided that no changes have been made in the original
plans.  This permit may not be unreasonably withheld, providing that proper
application and payment of permit fees are complied with.



(1969 Code, § 15-111)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.16  INSTALLER; LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall install or attempt to install any sign except a
licensed building contractor or a licensed or certified sign contractor,
master sign erector, or certified sign erector.



(1969 Code, § 15-112)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.17  PROPERTY OWNER’S CONSENT REQUIRED.



   No person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign upon any
property or building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to
possession of the property or building if any, or their authorized
representatives.



(1969 Code, § 15-113)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.18  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a permit shall be made to the administrator
upon a form provided by the administrator, and shall be accompanied by that
information as may be required to assure compliance with all appropriate laws
and regulations of the city.



   (B)   This information includes:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner of the sign;



      (2)   The name and address of the owner or the person in
possession of the premises where the sign is located or to be located;



      (3)   Clear and legible drawings with description definitely
showing the location of the sign which is the subject of the permit and all
other existing signs whose construction requires permits, when those signs
are on the same premises; and



      (4)   Drawings showing the dimensions, construction supports,
sizes, foundation, electrical wiring and components, materials of the sign,
and method of attachment and character of structure members to which
attachment is to be made.  The design, quality, materials, and loading shall
conform to the requirements of the building code.  If required by the
administrator, engineering data shall be supplied on plans submitted
certified by a duly licensed structural engineer.



(1969 Code, § 15-114)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.19  FEE.



   (A)   Application for permits shall be filed with the administrator,
together with a permit fee for each sign; provided, however, that the minimum
fee for a permit shall be $10.



   (B)   The fee for each sign permit shall be calculated on the basis
of $.30 per square foot.



      (1)   The calculation on a free-standing pole, ground,
monument, or any similar or roof sign shall be based only on 1 face of the
sign.  That calculation shall be based on the largest face of the sign.



      (2)   For facia or wall signs, only the copy area as
calculated in this code shall be included in the above-mentioned fee.



(1969 Code, § 15-117)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.20  ISSUANCE; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR DENIAL.



   (A)   The city shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration, or
relocation of a sign within the city when an application therefor has been
properly made and the sign complies with all appropriate laws, ordinances,
and code provisions.



   (B)   The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued
under provisions of this section whenever the permit is issued on the basis
of a misstatement of material fact or fraud.  When a sign permit is denied
by the administrator, he or she shall give written notice of the denial to
the applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the
denial.



(1969 Code, § 15-115)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)



§ 158.21  APPEAL.



   Appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals from the administrator’s
denial of a sign permit.



(1969 Code, § 15-118)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)



Cross-reference:



   Board of Appeals, see Title XV, App. A, Art. XVIII



§ 158.22  LIMITATIONS ON EFFECT.



   No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign; nor shall any
permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an
unlawful sign.



(1969 Code, § 15-116)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.23  OWNER OR USER CHANGE; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Whenever there is a change in the sign user (excluding outdoor
advertising signs), sign owner, or owner of the property on which the sign is
located, the new sign user, owner, or new property owner shall forthwith
notify the administrator of the change.  No new sign permit is required,
unless the sign is altered or relocated.



(1969 Code, § 15-119)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.24  INSPECTIONS; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Construction and completion; required notice.  The person
erecting, altering, or relocating a sign shall notify the administrator upon
start of construction and upon completion of the work for which permits are
required.



   (B)   Inspections.  All free-standing signs may be subject to a
footing inspection.  All electrical signs may be subjected to a final
electrical inspection by the administrator.



   (C)   Sign permit renewal and certification.



      (1)   All electric signs and all signs on sign structures over
5 feet high from grade to top of sign shall be inspected every 5 years by a
sign company licensed by the city to determine that the sign has been
maintained in such a manner as to ensure that the sign is in a safely
maintained condition as to the electrical, structural, and material
specifications of this code, and shall be tagged to so signify.



      (2)   Any sign which has not been inspected and tagged within
5 years shall be removed at the owner’s expense unless the permit is
obtained and the sign duly tagged within 30 days after written notification
by the administrator.



      (3)   Fees for the 5-year inspection permit shall be
negotiated between sign owner and sign company leased by the city.



      (4)   All signs shall bear a label 2 inches by 4 inches,
provided by the administrator, which identifies the permit number under which
the sign was constructed.  These labels shall be a different color for each
year and shall indicate year of issue in 1-inch letters.



      (5)   The 5-year tag for the certification that the sign is in
a safe condition as to its material, electrical, and structural application
shall be issued when a sign company licensed by the city has duly certified
and filed with the city that the sign meets the structural, electrical, and
material specifications set out in this code and all applicable laws and
ordinances.



   (D)   Maintenance.  Every sign in the city shall be maintained in
good structural condition at all times, and shall be kept neatly painted,
including all parts and supports.  The administrator shall have the
authority to order the painting, repair, alteration, or removal of signs
which have become dilapidated or are abandoned, or which constitute physical
hazard to the public safety.



   (E)   Signs declared unlawful.  The administrator may declare any
sign unlawful if it endangers public safety by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment.  Any such declaration shall state
the reasons of the administrator for stating that any sign owned, kept,
displayed, or maintained by any person within the city, the ownership keeping
a display which is unlawful pursuant to the provisions of this code.  The
administrator may declare any such sign to be unlawful, and this declaration
shall state in writing the reason or reasons why the sign and the keeping,
owning, maintenance, construction, and display or operation thereof, are
unlawful.



(1969 Code, § 15-120)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS



§ 158.35  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES.



   All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of the
city building code relating to design, structural members, and connections. 
Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code
and the additional construction standards hereinafter set forth.



(1969 Code, § 15-121)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.36  ADDITIONAL SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Identification and marking.  Each sign hereafter erected or
remodeled shall bear, in a permanent position thereon, a clearly legible
identification plate stating the name and address of the owner of the sign,
and the person, firm, or corporation responsible for its construction or
erection, and the date of erection.  Electrical signs shall be marked with
input amperages at the full load input.



   (B)   Sign identification tag.  Each sign shall have a sticker 2
inches by 4 inches placed on the sign that identifies the permit number that
was originally issued by the administrator.  This sticker shall be renewed
on a 5-year basis as provided for in this code.



   (C)   Obstruction to exits.  No sign shall be erected, constructed,
or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or
door opening used as a means of egress.



   (D)   Obstruction to ventilation.  No sign shall be attached in any
form, shape, or manner which will interfere with any opening required for
ventilation, except that signs may be erected in front of and may cover
transom windows when not in violation of the provision of the building or
fire prevention code.



   (E)   Clearance from high voltage power lines.  Signs shall be
located not less than 8 feet horizontally or 13 feet vertically from overhead
electrical conductors which are energized in excess of 750 volts.  Signs
located in the vicinity of electrical conductors energized with less than 750
volts shall maintain horizontal or vertical clearances from all overhead
electrical conductors in accordance with the specifications of the National
Electric Safety Code, published by American National Standards Institute,
1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018.  Three copies of that code are on file
with the City Clerk.  However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer
than 36 inches horizontally or vertically from any electrical conductor or
public utility guy wire.



(1969 Code, § 15-122)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.37  FREE-STANDING SIGNS.



   All free-standing sign structures or poles shall be self-supporting
structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. 
Foundations shall be designed to carry weight and wind load of the sign, in
soil in which it is placed.  These structures or poles shall be fabricated
only from painted or galvanized steel, or other materials as may provide
equal strength.



(1969 Code, § 15-123)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.38  ELECTRIC SIGNS.



   All electric signs shall conform to the standards of the city
electrical code.  The full number of illuminating elements thereof shall be
kept in safe and working condition, or immediately repaired or replaced if
faulty.  Signs that are only partially illuminated shall meet all electrical
requirements for that portion directly illuminated.  All electric signs
shall have a disconnect switch located in accordance with the provisions of
the city building code.



(1969 Code, § 15-124)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.39  GLASS.



   When glass is used for sign letters or transparent or translucent
panels, it shall be at least double strength thickness for sign areas up to
and including 300 square inches.  When glass is used for sign letters or
transparent or translucent panels for sign areas in excess of 300 square
inches, at least 0.25-inch wire glass shall be used and the maximum span
between supports shall be 4 feet.



(1969 Code, § 15-125)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.40  PLASTIC.



   Plastic shall be of thickness and shape necessary to withstand wind
loadings specified in § 158.43 of this code.  Proper allowance or provision
shall be made in connections to provide for thermal contraction and expansion.



(1969 Code, § 15-126)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.41  STRENGTH OF PARAPET, WALL, OR ROOF.



   A parapet, wall, or roof must be designed for and have sufficient
strength to support any sign which is attached thereto.



(1969 Code, § 15-127)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.42  SUPPORTS AND BRACES.



   Metal supports or braces shall be adequate for wind loadings, specified
in § 158.43 below.  Wire or cable supports shall have a safety factor of
4.  All metal wire cable support and braces, and all bolts used to attach
the sign to bracket or brackets and signs to the supporting building or
structure shall be of galvanized steel or of an equivalent material.  All
sign supports shall be an integral part of the sign design.



(1969 Code, § 15-128)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.43  WIND LOADS.



   All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building,
shall be constructed to withstand wind loads as follows:



   (A)   For solid signs, 30 pounds per square foot on 1 face of the
sign; and



   (B)   For signs that are not solid, 36 pounds per square foot of the
total face area of the letters and other sign surfaces, or 10 pounds per
square foot of the gross area of the sign as determined by the overall
dimensions of the sign, whichever is greater.



(1969 Code, § 15-129)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.44  ANCHORING.



   Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that would
cause wear on supporting members or connections.  No sign shall be suspended
by chain or other device that will allow the sign to swing due to wind
action, unless specifically designed, by means of bearings or other methods
approved, to allow for movement.



(1969 Code, § 15-130)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



PROHIBITED, PERMITTED, AND EXEMPT SIGNS



§ 158.55  PERMIT-EXEMPT ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   The following operations shall not be considered as creating a
sign insofar as requiring the issuance of a sign permit, but the signs must
be in conformance with all other building, structural, and electrical laws
and regulations of the city.



   (B)   The above-mentioned exempt operations are:



      (1)   Changing of the advertising copy or message on an
existing approved painted or printed sign, marquee, changeable copy sign, or
a similar approved sign whether electrical, illuminated, electronic changing
message center, or nonilluminated painted message, which are all specifically
designed for the use of replaceable copy;



      (2)   Painting, repainting, cleaning, or other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign not involving structural changes. 
Replacement of the plastic face will be included as an exempt operation
provided that it is due to a change caused by breakage or deterioration of
the face, but not for the substitution of a new or different advertiser; and



      (3)   Changes in the content of show window displays and
permitted temporary signs.



(1969 Code, § 15-131)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.56  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   (A)   Construction signs.  One construction sign per construction
project not exceeding the size permitted by the zoning ordinance as set forth
in Appendix A of this title, provided that this type of sign shall be erected
no more than 5 days prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid
building permit has been issued, shall be confined to the site of
construction, and shall be removed 5 days after completion and prior to
occupancy.



   (B)   Directional or instructional signs.  Signs which provide
directions and do not exceed 4 square feet in area, signs identifying rest
rooms, public telephones, or walkways, or signs providing direction such as
parking lot entrance and exit signs and those of similar nature. 
Directional signs for garage sales, auctions, or other temporary activities
shall not be placed for more than a 48-hour period.



   (C)   Flags.  The flags, emblems, or insignia of any nation or
political subdivision, or corporate flags.



   (D)   Governmental signs.  Governmental signs for control of
traffic and other regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs, railroad
crossing signs, and signs of public service companies indicating danger, and
aids to service or safety which are erected by or on the order of a public
officer in the performance of his or her public duty.



   (E)   Holiday signs.  Signs of a primarily decorative nature,
clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national,
local, or religious holiday; provided that these signs shall be displayed for
a period of not more than 30 consecutive days nor more than 60 days in any 1
year.  These signs may be of any type, number, area, height, illumination,
or animation, and shall be set back not less than 10 feet from all boundary
lines of the lot; provided that a clear area be maintained to a height of 72
inches within 55 feet of the centerline of the intersection of 2 streets, a
railroad and a street, and a street and driveway.  Subject to the foregoing,
any type of holiday decorations that partially camouflage or divert attention
from traffic signals or directional signals are specifically prohibited.



   (F)   House number and name plates.  House numbers and name plates
not exceeding 2 square feet in area for each residential building.



   (G)   Incidental signs.  Up to 2 incidental signs, as defined in
this code, may be attached to a free- standing sign structure or to a
building wall.  The area of each sign may not exceed 5 square feet; the
total area of all such signs may not exceed 10 square feet.



   (H)   Interior signs.  Signs located within the interior of any
building or stadium, shopping center, or within an enclosed lobby or court of
any building, and signs for and located within the inner or outer lobby,
court, or entrance of any theater, that are not visible from the public
right-of-way.  This does not, however, exempt these signs from the
structural, electrical, or material specifications as set out in this code.



   (I)   Memorial signs.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of
buildings, and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid
so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material.



   (J)   Notice bulletin boards.  Notice bulletin boards not over 24
square feet in area for medical, public, charitable, or religious
institutions.



   (K)   No trespassing or no dumping signs.  No trespassing or no
dumping signs not to exceed 1½ square feet in area per sign and not to
exceed 4 in number per lot, except that special permission may be obtained
from the administrator for additional signs under proven special
circumstances.



   (L)   Occupant signs.  One sign for each dwelling unit, not to
exceed 2 square feet in area, indicating the name of the occupant, or
identification of a home professional office.



   (M)   Plaques.  Plaques or name plate signs not more than 2½
square feet in area which are fastened directly to the building.



   (N)   Political and campaign signs.  Political or campaign signs on
behalf of candidates for public office or measures on election ballots,
provided that these signs are subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   These signs may be erected not earlier than 45 days
prior to the election and shall be removed within 15 days following the
election; and



      (2)   No sign shall be located within or over the public
right-of-way.



   (O)   Public notices.  Official notices posted by public officers
or employees in the performance of their duties.



   (P)   Public signs.  Signs required or specifically authorized for
a public purpose by any law, statute, or ordinance; which may be of any type,
number, area, height above grade, location, illumination, or animation,
required by law, statute, or ordinance under which the signs are erected.



   (Q)   Real estate signs.  One real estate for sale sign (single- or
double-face) on any lot or parcel, provided the sign is located entirely
within the property to which the sign applies, is not illuminated, does not
exceed the area permitted by the zoning ordinance set forth in Appendix A of
this title, and is removed within 7 days after the sale, rental, or lease has
been consummated.  One additional sign, as described above, is permitted
where a parcel has in excess of 300 feet of frontage or fronts on 2 streets.



   (R)   Permanent window signs.  Except where prohibited by the
zoning ordinance, for each ground floor occupancy of a building not more than
2 permanent signs may be painted on or otherwise displayed from the inside
surface of any window, showcase, or other similar facility.  These signs
shall be in addition to those signs permitted under the other provisions of
this code.  The total copy area of these signs, however, shall not exceed a
maximum of 25% of the total window area, or 1 square foot per lineal foot of
the premises occupied, whichever is the lesser.



   (S)   Signs in the display window.  Signs in the display window of
a business use which are incorporated with a display relating to services
offered.



   (T)   Symbols or insignia.  Religious symbols, commemorative
plaques of historical agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders
or historical agencies; provided that no such symbol, plaque, or
identification emblem shall exceed 4 square feet in area, and provided
further that all such symbols, plaques, and identification emblems shall be
placed flat against a building.



   (U)   Temporary signs.  Temporary signs not exceeding 4 square feet
in area pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational,
or religious organizations, provided that these signs are posted only during
the drive or no more than 30 days before the event and are removed no more
than 7 days after the event.  The City Council may grant a temporary permit
for signs or banners over a street or public way.  A temporary banner may
exceed 4 square feet in area.



   (V)   Warning signs.  Signs warning the public of the existence of
danger, but containing no advertising material, of a size as may be
necessary, to be removed upon subsidence of the danger.



(1969 Code, § 15-132)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.57  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following types of signs are expressly prohibited in all districts,
except as otherwise provided by this code.



   (A)   Outdoor advertising and off-site signs.  No outdoor
advertising or off-site sign shall be permitted which has a face larger than
25 square feet of surface space.



   (B)   Moving signs.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted which moves or assumes any
motion constituting a nonstationary or nonfixed condition except for the
rotation of barber poles, changing signs, or multi-prism units.  Indexing
multi-prism units must not exceed a speed of 2 complete revolutions every 20
seconds.  This section is not meant to prohibit any form of vehicular sign
such as a sign attached to a bus or lettered on a motor vehicle.



   (C)   Abandoned signs.  No person, firm, or corporation shall
abandon any sign anywhere in the city.



   (D)   Signs on moving vehicles.  No person shall drive, on the
public streets, any vehicle with a sign that interferes with the vision of
the driver of that vehicle or of any other vehicle.  No person shall drive,
on the public streets, any vehicle with a moving sign.



   (E)   Public areas.  No sign shall be placed on any curb, sidewalk,
post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on public
property, or over or across any street or public thoroughfare, except
expressly be authorized by this code.



   (F)   Banners.



      (1)   Banners, flags, pennants, search lights, twirling signs,
sandwich board signs, sidewalk or curb signs, balloons, or other gas-filled
figures shall not be used except as described in division (F)(2) of this
section.



      (2)   Signs described in division (F)(1) above will be
permitted in a commercial or industrial district for a total period not to
exceed 15 days in any 6-month period at any business location.  Banners,
flags, and pennants will be allowed in residential districts in conjunction
with a demonstration of model homes in a new subdivision for 2 days after and
not to exceed a total period of 15 days in any calendar year.



   (G)   A-frame signs.  A-frame or sandwich board, sidewalk, or curb
signs are prohibited.



   (H)   Other signs.  The following signs are also prohibited:



      (1)   Signs which bear or contain statements, words, or
pictures of an obscene or pornographic character;



      (2)   Signs which are painted on or attached to any fence
(except temporary fences around construction sites), or on any wall or
structure (other than structures for permitted signs) which is not
structurally a part of a building, except to identify a residence or
residence structure by means of posting the name of the occupant or
structure, and the street address;



      (3)   Signs which operate or employ any stereopticon or motion
picture projection or media or have visible moving parts or give the illusion
of motion, except as expressly permitted in this code;



      (4)   Signs which emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter;



      (5)   Signs which purport to be, or are an imitation of, or
resemble an official traffic sign or signal; and



      (6)   Signs which, by reason of their size, location,
movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination, may be confused with
or constructed as a traffic-control sign, signal, or device, or the light of
an emergency or road equipment vehicle, or which hide from view any traffic
or street sign or signal or device.



(1969 Code, § 15-133)  (Ord. 1994-20, passed 7-11-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 159:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   159.001   Definitions



   159.002   Application of provisions; exceptions



   159.003   Variances



   159.004   Amendments



   159.005   Chapter incorporated into comprehensive plan



General Platting Procedures



   159.020   Subdivision; plat required



   159.021   Preliminary plat required



   159.022   Improvements; final plat required



   159.023   Filing final plat for record



Preliminary Plat



   159.035   Submission; fee



   159.036   Required data



   159.037   Plan Commission recommendation



   159.038   Submission to Council; copies



   159.039   Approved plat; construction of improvements



Final Plat



   159.050   Drafting specifications



   159.051   Required data



   159.052   Submission; conformance; Plan Commission recommendation



   159.053   Recording approved final plat; time limit



Design Standards



   159.065   Design standards; conformance required



   159.066   Street layout and names



   159.067   Street and alley widths



   159.068   Easements



   159.069   Blocks; layout



   159.070   Lot requirements



   159.071   Improvements outside corporate limits; maintenance



   159.072   Dedication of public use land



   159.073   Dedication of easements along drainage ways



Improvements



   159.085   Improvements required prior to final approval; bond



   159.086   Partial improvement of tract; requirements



   159.087   Survey monuments



   159.088   Streets



   159.089   Sidewalks



   159.090   Water system



   159.091   Sewers inside or adjacent to city



   159.092   Sewers outside city



   159.093   Drainage



Cross-reference:



   Plan Commission, see §§ 150.01et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate subdivision, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§
11-12-4et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MAJOR STREET.  A delineated street shown on the major street plan, a
part of the official plan.



   PLANS.  All drawings, including general plans, cross-sections,
profiles, working details, and specifications which the subdivider prepares
or has prepared to show the character, extent, and details of the
improvements required in § 159.039 of this code.



   PLAT.  A map or drawing showing the lot and street arrangement or
other features or details of the area being subdivided as required in this
chapter for preliminary and final approval and recording.



(1969 Code, § 23-1)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 1968-22,
passed 6-3-1968)



§ 159.002  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
whenever the owner of land subdivides it into 2 or more parts, any of which
is less than 5 acres, he or she must have it surveyed and a plat thereof made
by a registered land surveyor, which plat must particularly describe and set
forth all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, or other public grounds, and all the tracts,
parcels, lots, or blocks, and numbering of all the lots, blocks, or parcels
by progressive numbers, giving their precise dimensions.  The plat must
provide further and include therein all additional information required of
plats by the laws of the state.



   (B)   The requirements contained in division (A) do not apply and no
plat is required in any of the following instances:



      (1)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or
tracts of 5 acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or
easements of access;



      (2)   The division of lots or blocks of less than 1 acre in
any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements
of access;



      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners
of adjoining or contiguous land;



      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein
for use as a right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities
and other pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;



      (5)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other
public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;



      (6)   The conveyance of land for highways or other public
purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for
public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed for
public use;



      (7)   Conveyance made to correct descriptions in prior
conveyances; or



      (8)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land
following the division into no more than 2 parts of a particular parcel or
tract of land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or
easements of access.



(1969 Code, § 23-2)  (Ord. 1968-22, passed 6-3-1968)



Statutory reference:



   Plat requirements, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-8, 11-12-12



   Plat Act, see ILCS Chapter 765, Act 201, §§ 0.01 et seq.



§ 159.003  VARIANCES.



   Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such an unusual size or shape
or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in this chapter would result in
real difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice, the City Council,
after report by the Plan Commission, may vary or modify the requirements so
that the subdivider may develop his or her property in a reasonable manner,
but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the city
and surrounding area are protected and the general intent and spirit of this
chapter are preserved.



(1969 Code, § 23-3)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



§ 159.004  AMENDMENTS.



   Any regulations or provisions of this chapter may be changed and
amended from time to time by the City Council; however, the changes or
amendments shall not become effective until after study and report by the
City Plan Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public
notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation
at least 15 days prior to the hearing.



(1969 Code, § 23-4)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



§ 159.005  CHAPTER INCORPORATED INTO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   This entire chapter shall be included and made a part of the
comprehensive plan for the city.



(1969 Code, § 23-5)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



GENERAL PLATTING PROCEDURES



§ 159.020  SUBDIVISION; PLAT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or person having control of
any land within the corporate limits of the city or within 1½ miles of its
corporate limits and not included within or closer to the corporate limits of
any other incorporated community, to subdivide or lay out that land into
lots, blocks, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways, and grounds, unless by a
plat in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of this
chapter.  Each subdivider of land shall confer with local officials before
preparing the preliminary plat, in order to become thoroughly familiar with
all the regulations and the official plan proposals affecting the territory
in which the subdivision lies.



(1969 Code, § 23-16)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.021  PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person proposing to subdivide land shall submit to the
City Plan Commission for its consideration a preliminary plat prepared in
accordance with the specifications of §§ 159.035 et seq. of this code. 
The design and layout of the subdivision shall conform to the requirements of
§§ 159.065 et seq.  The applicant, not less than 7 days prior to the
scheduled Plan Commission meeting, shall submit for review, 4 copies of the
preliminary plat, along with all supporting documents, plans, and the like in
accordance with the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Following consideration of the plat, the Commission shall
report its findings and recommendations in writing to the City Council for
its consideration and approval or disapproval.



   (C)   In the event that a developer proposes a complex subdivision
(i.e. a subdivision requiring installment of city owned, operated and/or
maintained streets, utilities, and the like), then at the developer's option,
the developer may request a preliminary meeting with the Planning
Commission.  The preliminary meeting is for the purpose of receiving
recommendations from the Planning Commission prior to developing a
preliminary plat to be submitted to the Planning Commission. If a developer
requests the preliminary meeting, then the developer shall furnish to the
Planning Commission not less than 7 days prior to said meeting, 4 copies of a
conceptual plan of the proposed development, containing at a minimum, the
following information:



      (1)   A general lot layout.



      (2)   Approximate locations and general details of all
proposed developer provided city owned, operated and/or maintained
infrastructure.



      (3)   A general location map.



      (4)   Location and width of existing adjacent streets.



      (5)   Approximate location and size of existing adjacent water
mains, along with location, depth and size of existing adjacent storm and
sanitary sewers.



      (6)   General drainage pattern for the site and adjacent
properties.



      (7)   Current zoning information, as well as anticipated
changes in zoning.



      (8)   Indication of intent to dedicate streets to the city.



      (9)   Other pertinent information the developer desires to
present.



   (D)   The Planning Commission, at the preliminary meeting, shall
meet with the developer and hear his or her comments and present its
recommendations to the developer. A written report of the meeting will be
furnished to the developer to facilitate the preparation of the preliminary
plat.



(1969 Code, § 23-17)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 2005-1,
passed 1-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for filing preliminary plats, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 11-12-8



§ 159.022  IMPROVEMENTS; FINAL PLAT REQUIRED.



   Following approval of the preliminary plat by the Plan Commission and
the City Council, the subdivider shall install the required improvements or
furnish a bond for the installation, all in accordance with the requirements
of §§ 159.085et seq. of this code.  Upon approval of the improvements or
arrangements therefor, the final plat shall be submitted in accordance with
the provisions and requirements of §§ 159.050et seq.



(1969 Code, § 23-18)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.023  FILING FINAL PLAT FOR RECORD.



   No plat or replat shall be filed for record or recorded in the office
of the County Recorder of Deeds unless and until the approval of the City
Council is endorsed thereon by the City Clerk, and no lot shall be sold from
the plat or replat unless and until approved by the City Council and filed
for record in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.



(1969 Code, § 23-19)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



PRELIMINARY PLAT



§ 159.035  SUBMISSION; FEE.



   Four copies of the preliminary plat, drawn to a scale of not more than
100 feet to the inch, shall be submitted to the City Plan Commission.  The
plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.



(1969 Code, § 23-30)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 2005-1,
passed 1-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Plat Act, see ILCS Chapter 765, Act 201, §§ 0.01 et seq.



§ 159.036  REQUIRED DATA.



   The preliminary plat shall show:



   (A)   The location of the present property lines and section lines
and streets, buildings, watercourses, and other existing features within the
area to be subdivided, and similar information regarding land immediately
adjacent thereto;



   (B)   The proposed location and width of streets, alleys, lots,
building lines, and easements;



   (C)   Existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and
other underground structures within the tract immediately abutting thereto;
the location and size of the nearest water main and sewer outlet;



   (D)   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be
recorded and the name of the engineer, the registered land surveyor, and the
subdivider platting the tract;



   (E)   Contours referred to the city datum with intervals of 5 feet
or less;



   (F)   The north point, scale, and date; and



   (G)   Plans or written statements describing the grades or profiles
of the streets, the proposed grades and facilities for all required
improvements, and the subdivider’s proposal to the city for accomplishing
their installation in accordance with § 159.039 of this code.



(1969 Code, § 23-31)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



§ 159.037  PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION.



   (A)   If the Plan Commission finds that the preliminary plat
satisfies the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the plat and
recommend approval by the City Council.



   (B)   If the Plan Commission finds otherwise, it shall specify in
writing the objections found to the plat and may either recommend disapproval
or recommend approval conditioned upon specific changes in the plat.



(1969 Code, § 23-32)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



§ 159.038  SUBMISSION TO COUNCIL; COPIES.



   One copy of the preliminary plat, together with a copy of the findings
of the Plan Commission, shall be filed by the Plan Commission with the City
Clerk for submission to the City Council.  One copy of the preliminary plat
and findings shall be retained by the Plan Commission; and 1 copy and
findings shall be given the person offering the proposed plat, together with
certificate of approval or disapproval of the Plan Commission and City
Council.



(1969 Code, § 23-33)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



§ 159.039  APPROVED PLAT; CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   Receipt by the subdivider of the copy of the preliminary plat together
with the approval of the Plan Commission and City Council shall constitute
authority for the subdivider to proceed with final plans and specifications
for the installation of the required improvements and preparation of the
final plat.  Prior to the construction of any of the required improvements,
the subdivider shall submit final plans and specifications to the city
official having jurisdiction over his or her construction.  If the city
official shall find the plans and specifications to be in accordance with
applicable policies and standards of the city, he or she shall authorize
construction and determine the amount of bond, if required.  Following the
approval of the plans and specifications, construction may be started or the
bond may be filed.



(1969 Code, § 23-34)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



FINAL PLAT



§ 159.050  DRAFTING SPECIFICATIONS.



   The final plat shall be drawn on tracing cloth to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on 1 or more sheets
whose maximum dimensions shall not exceed 17 inches by 22 inches.  If more
than 2 sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be
filed showing the entire subdivision on 1 sheet and the component areas shown
on other sheets.



(1969 Code, § 23-45)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.051  REQUIRED DATA.



   The final plat and accompanying documents shall show:



   (A)   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided, with accurate
distances and angles.  The correct legal description of the property being
subdivided shall be shown on the plat or on an accompanying certificate;



   (B)   The lines of all proposed streets and alleys, with their
widths and the names of all streets;



   (C)   The accurate outline of any portions of the property intended
to be dedicated or granted for public use;



   (D)   The lines of all adjoining property and the lines of adjoining
streets and alleys with their widths and the names of all streets;



   (E)   All lot lines, together with an identification of all lots and
blocks;



   (F)   The location of all easements provided for public use,
services, or utilities;



   (G)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for
locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements,
and other areas for public or private use.  Linear dimensions are to be
given to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot;



   (H)   The radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, and central
angles for all curvilinear streets, and radii for rounded corners;



   (I)   The location of all survey monuments and their descriptions;



   (J)   The name of the subdivision and the scale of the plat, points
of the compass, and the name of the owner or owners or subdividers;



   (K)   The certificate of a registered land surveyor of this state
attesting the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all
monuments shown;



   (L)   Private restrictions and trusteeships and their periods of
existence.  Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such a length as
to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the
preparation of a separate instrument, reference to the instrument shall be
made on the plat;



   (M)   Calculations showing the error of linear closure shall be
indicated on the preliminary plat;



   (N)   Acknowledgment of the owner or owners to the plat, and
restrictions including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys,
parks, or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of easements
required;



   (O)   A receipt or certificate showing that there are no unpaid
taxes or assessments upon any part of the area within the subdivision; and



   (P)   The certificate of approval by the City Council for
endorsement by the Mayor and City Clerk.



(1969 Code, § 23-46)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.052  SUBMISSION; CONFORMANCE; PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION.



   The original and 5 prints of the final plat shall be submitted to the
City Plan Commission at least 1 week before the meeting thereon.  When the
final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, and the requirements of
this chapter have been accomplished, certification to this effect shall be
endorsed on the final plat by the chairperson of the Plan Commission, and the
plat thereupon submitted to the City Council for its approval or
disapproval.  Where the final plat does not conform to the approved
preliminary plat, the Plan Commission shall submit its recommendations to the
City Council for approval or disapproval of the final plat.



(1969 Code, § 23-47)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-12-8



§ 159.053  RECORDING APPROVED FINAL PLAT; TIME LIMIT.



   After the approval of the final plat by the City Council, the plat
shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office within 30 days; and if
not so filed, the plat shall have no validity and shall not be recorded
without reapproval.



(1969 Code, § 23-48)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12



   Plat Act, see ILCS Chapter 765, Act 201, §§ 0.01 et seq.



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 159.065  DESIGN STANDARDS; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.



   The arrangement of streets and lots shall give due regard to the
topography and other physical features of the property and shall meet the
requirements and standards established in this subchapter.



(1969 Code, § 23-59)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.066  STREET LAYOUT AND NAMES.



   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas, or their proper
projection where adjoining land is not subdivided, insofar as they may be
deemed necessary for public requirements.  The street and alley arrangements
shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.  Offset
streets shall be avoided.  The angle of intersection between minor streets
and major streets shall not vary by more than 10 degrees from a right
angle.  Streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the
names of the existing streets.  Proposed street names that are in conflict
with existing street names shall not be approved.



(1969 Code, § 23-60)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.067  STREET AND ALLEY WIDTHS.



   (A)   The widths and locations of major streets shall conform to the
widths and locations of the streets designated on the major street plan.



   (B)   The minimum width for minor streets shall be 60 feet, except
that in cases where the topography or special conditions make a street of
less width more suitable, the Plan Commission may waive the width
requirements.  When a street adjoins unsubdivided property, a half street at
least 30 feet in width shall be dedicated; and whenever the property being
subdivided adjoins a half street, the remainder of the street shall be
dedicated.



   (C)   Alleys shall not be provided in a residential block.  Alleys
are required in the rear of all business lots unless other adequate
provisions are made for service and deliveries, and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.



(1969 Code, § 23-61)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.068  EASEMENTS.



   Easements of at least 5 feet in width shall be dedicated on each side
of all rear lot lines and along side lot lines, where necessary, for poles,
wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, or other utilities. 
Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots where
necessary for the extension of main sewers or other utilities, or where both
water and sewer lines are located in the same easement.  All easements must
have prior approval of utility companies before submission of the preliminary
plat.



(1969 Code, § 23-62)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.069  BLOCKS; LAYOUT.



   (A)   No block shall be longer than 1,200 feet.  Where blocks are
over 750 feet in length, a crosswalk with a right-of-way of at least 10 feet
in width may be required near the center of the block.



   (B)   Courts, dead-end streets, or other street space may be
provided if proper access is given to all lots from a dedicated street or
court.  All dead-end streets shall terminate in a dedicated street space
having a minimum radius of 50 feet, or other satisfactory arrangement for
turning of vehicles.  Dead-end streets shall not exceed 750 feet in length.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to erect a
street identification sign at each corner.



(1969 Code, § 23-63)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.070  LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots
will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and to the character of surrounding developments.



   (B)   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight
street lines and radial to curved street lines, except where a variation of
this rule will provide a better street and lot layout.  Lots with double
frontage shall be avoided.



   (C)   No lot shall have a depth of less than 100 feet or a depth in
excess of 3 times its width.  No lot shall have an area or width less than
that required by any zoning ordinance or resolution in effect within the area.



   (D)   Corner lots shall have a width sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both the adjoining streets.



   (E)   Lots at major street intersections and at acute angle
intersections of less than 85 degrees shall have a radius of 20 feet at the
street corner.  On business lots, a chord may be substituted for the
circular arc.



(1969 Code, § 23-64)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.071  IMPROVEMENTS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS; MAINTENANCE.



   Where a subdivision outside the corporate limits contains sewers,
sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, or other physical
facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area and of common
use or benefit, which the city or county does not desire to or cannot
maintain, provision shall be made by trust agreements made a part of the deed
restrictions, acceptable to the city, for the proper and continuous
maintenance and supervision of those facilities by the lot owners in the
subdivision.



(1969 Code, § 23-65)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.072  DEDICATION OF PUBLIC USE LAND.



   Where an area being subdivided includes land proposed for parks or
schools under the duly adopted official comprehensive plan of the city and
its environs, the subdivider shall either dedicate those lands to the
appropriate public agency as a part of the plat or shall reserve the lands
for a specified period to permit their acquisition by purchase or by other
means by the public agency, the period to be determined by an agreement
entered into between the subdivider and the appropriate public agency
regarding the time and method of acquisition and the cost of the land.



(1969 Code, § 23-66)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.073  DEDICATION OF EASEMENTS ALONG DRAINAGE WAYS.



   Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in
an area being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement
along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening,
sloping, improving, or protecting the stream, and the easement shall be
dedicated to the city or other appropriate public agency.



(1969 Code, § 23-67)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



IMPROVEMENTS



§ 159.085  IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED PRIOR TO FINAL APPROVAL; BOND.



   No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless:



   (A)   The improvements required by this subchapter have been
installed prior to that approval; or



   (B)   In the alternative, the subdivider shall have filed with the
City Council a surety bond, or cashier’s or certified check, to ensure the
construction of the improvements required by this subchapter in a
satisfactory manner and within the period specified by the City Council, that
period not to exceed 2 years.  No surety bond shall be accepted unless it be
enforceable by or payable to the city in a sum at least equal to the cost of
constructing the improvements as estimated by the city official having
jurisdiction and in form with surety and conditions approved by the City
Attorney.



(1969 Code, § 23-78)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.086  PARTIAL IMPROVEMENT OF TRACT; REQUIREMENTS.



   The owner of a tract may prepare and secure approval of a preliminary
plat for the entire tract and may install the required improvements only in a
portion of that tract, but the improvements must be installed or provision
made for their installation in any portion of the area for which a final plat
is approved for recording; however, any water mains, storm sewers, trunk
sewers, and any sewage treatment plants shall be designed and built to serve
all the area owned by the subdivider or designed and built in such a manner
that they can easily be expanded or extended to serve the entire area; and
provided further that the requirements of § 159.072 of this code have been
met.



(1969 Code, § 23-79)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.087  SURVEY MONUMENTS.



   All subdivision boundary corners shall be marked with permanent survey
monuments.  All points of tangency and points of curvature of all curves
shall be marked with permanent markers.  A permanent monument shall be
deemed to be concrete with rod center at least 30 inches long, with a minimum
dimension of 4 inches extending below the frost line.  Should conditions
prohibit the placing of monuments on the line, offset marking will be
permitted; provided, however, that exact offset courses and distances are
shown on the subdivision plat.  Iron pipes or steel rods shall be set at all
lot corners.  If survey monuments are removed during construction, they
shall be replaced before the final plat is approved.



(1969 Code, § 23-80)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.088  STREETS.



   (A)   All streets and public ways shall be graded to their full
width, including side slopes, and to the appropriate grade, and shall be
surfaced to a width of 30 feet between face of curbs with 6 inches of
compacted crushed stone or gravel and with 2 inches of hot bituminous mix, or
6 inches of concrete may be used for the surfacing.  Concrete curbs and
gutters shall be installed.  The surfacing and curbs shall be in accordance
with applicable standard specifications of the city and shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the proper city official.



   (B)   Where lots are 20,000 square feet or more in area, pavements
of 20 feet in width and without curbs and gutters may be used, but usable
shoulders with a slope of 1/2 inch per foot shall be provided along any
20-foot pavement.



(1969 Code, § 23-81)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.089  SIDEWALKS.



   Concrete sidewalks not less than 4 feet in width shall be constructed
along both sides of every street shown on the plat in accordance with
applicable standard specifications of the city; and concrete sidewalks shall
also be constructed along both sides of all major streets; however, where the
property is platted in lots having an area of at least 20,000 square feet and
a width of at least 100 feet, the Plan Commission and City Council may waive
those requirements.  Location of all sidewalks shall be shown on final
plans.  All sidewalks must have a depth of not less than 4 inches Portland
cement or its equivalent.



(1969 Code, § 23-82)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 159.090  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Where a subdivision is located within the city limits, each
lot therein shall be provided with a connection to the city water system, the
water service to terminate not less than 2 feet inside of the curb line or
easement line.



   (B)   Where a subdivision is located contiguous to the city limits
and the subdivider requests that all lots be provided with city water, then
the subdivision must be annexed to the city before the lots can be connected
to the city water system.



   (C)   Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions within
the corporate limits, and the location of the hydrants shall be approved by
the superintendent of water distribution.



   (D)   The water supply system shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer of this state, approved by the State Environmental
Protection Agency, and be constructed under the direction and control of the
engineer, and all construction shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer and of the city superintendent of water distribution.  No water
supply system piping shall be covered until such time as the city, through
its designated agent, approves of the installation of the same.



   (E)   Water lines shall not be less than 6 inches in diameter.



   (F)   In subdivisions outside the city limits, pending availability
of a public water supply, the subdivider shall construct wells or a private
water supply system in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water
will be available to every lot in the subdivision at the time improvements
are erected thereon.  The installation shall be designed by a state
registered professional engineer and approved by the State Sanitary Water
Board and appropriate county authorities.



(1969 Code, § 23-83)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 1992-12,
passed 4-27-1992; Am. Ord. 1994-32, passed 10-10-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.091  SEWERS INSIDE OR ADJACENT TO CITY.



   (A)   Within city.  Where the subdivision is located within the
city limits, each lot therein shall be provided with a connection to a
sanitary sewer, the sewer connection to terminate not less than 2 feet inside
the curb line or easement line.



   (B)   Adjacent to city.  Where the subdivision is located outside
the city limits, but is contiguous to the city, and if city sanitary sewers
are available to serve the subdivision, then the subdivision shall be annexed
to the city and each lot therein shall be provided with a connection to the
city’s sewer.



   (C)   Construction and connections.  All connections to the city
sewer system and the subdivision sewer system shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer of this state, approved by the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and comply with the ordinances and code
provisions of the city pertaining to sewers; and all construction of the
system shall be subject to the direction and an approval of the city official
having jurisdiction.  No sewers shall be covered after installation without
the prior approval of the designated city official.



(1969 Code, § 23-84)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 1992-12,
passed 4-27-1992; Am. Ord. 1994-33, passed 10-10-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.092  SEWERS OUTSIDE CITY.



   (A)   Small subdivisions; planned city sewers.  In subdivisions
beyond the city limits in which the lots are less than 20,000 square feet and
where plans for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the
subdivision have been prepared by the city, the subdivider may be required to
install sewers in conformity with the plans; and if city sanitary sewers are
to be used by the subdivision, then it must be annexed to the city.



   (B)   Large subdivisions.  In subdivisions beyond the city limits
that cannot be annexed to the city and where the lots are 20,000 square feet
or more and have a minimum width of 100 feet, the subdivider may install
individual disposal devices for each lot at the time improvements are erected
thereon.  If individual sewage disposal systems are necessary, the soil of
the subdivision shall be properly tested, including percolation tests, and
the type of these systems be delineated and designated within the preliminary
plot.  All such individual sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in
accordance with regulations and requirements of the State Department of
Health and under the direction and control of the appropriate city and county
authorities.



(1969 Code, § 23-85)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961; Am. Ord. 1992-12,
passed 4-27-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.093  DRAINAGE.



   The plat shall be laid out so as to provide proper drainage of the area
being subdivided.  Drainage improvements shall maintain any natural
watercourse and shall prevent the collection of water in any low areas.  The
means for disposing of storm water shall be subject to the approval and
supervision of the appropriate city official.



(1969 Code, § 23-86)  (Ord. 1961-12, passed 4-24-1961)  Penalty, see §
10.99



APPENDIX A:  ZONING



Article



   I   In General, §§ 1-6



   II   Definitions



   III   Districts and Boundaries Thereof, §§ 1-6



   IV   Compliance with the Regulations, § 1



   V   R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residence Districts, §§ 1-4



   VA   Reserved



   VI   Two-Family Residence District, §§ 1-4



   VII   R-4 Multiple Dwelling District, §§ 1-4



   VIII   C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District, §§ 1-4



   IX   C-2 Commercial District, §§ 1-4



   X   C-3 Central Business District, §§ 1-4



   XI   Light Industrial District, §§ 1-4



   XII   M-2 Heavy Industrial District, §§ 1-4



   XIIA   Planned Unit Development (PUD) District, §§ 1-11



   XIII   Table of Height and Area Requirements



   XIV   Height and Area Exceptions and Modifications, §§ 1-5



   XV   Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, §§ 1-4



   XVI   Special Use Regulations, §§ 1, 2



   XVII   Nonconforming Uses, §§ 1, 2



   XVIII   Board of Appeals, §§ 1-3



   XIX   Certificates of Occupancy, §§ 1-6



   XX   Plans and Staking, §§ 1, 2



   XXI   Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict



   XXII   Amendments and Changes, §§ 1-3



   XXIII   Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties



   XXIV   Validity



   XXV   When Effective



   XXVI   Adult Oriented Business, §§ 1-6



Cross-reference:



   Junkyards, see §§ 115.01et seq.



   Mobile Homes, see Chapter 157



   Plan Commission, see §§ 150.01et seq.



Editor’s note:



   This appendix contains the basic zoning ordinance, being Ord. 1968-29,
enacted July 8, 1968, as amended except that amendments which merely
reclassify specific parcels of property or areas are not included. 
Amendatory ordinances are cited in parentheses following the section
amended.  The arrangement and format of the ordinance have been retained
except that the editors have corrected obvious typographical errors and added
clarifying words and phrases in brackets where desirable.



ARTICLE I:  IN GENERAL



§ 1.  PURPOSE.



   This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of dividing the city into
zones or districts, restricting and regulating therein the location,
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings,
structures, and land for trade, industry, residence and other specified uses;
to regulate the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and
determine the area of open spaces surrounding such buildings; to establish
building lines and the location of buildings designed for specified
industrial, business, residential and other uses within such areas; to fix
standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein; to prohibit
uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of such
districts, respectively; to prevent additions to and alterations or
remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the
restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to limit congestion
in the public streets by providing for the off-street parking and loading and
unloading of vehicles; providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming
uses of land, buildings and structures; prescribing penalties for the
violation of the ordinance; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and
air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to conserve the taxable value of
land and buildings throughout the city; and to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



§ 2.  SHORT TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Paris
Zoning Ordinance,” and shall include the official map of the zoned areas
created by and referred to therein.



Editor’s note:



   The map referred to in this section is not in this appendix, but is
available in the office of the City Clerk.



§ 3.  TENSE, GENDER, NUMBER OF WORDS; “SHALL” MADE MANDATORY.



   For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined; words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.



§ 4.  ZONING ORDINANCE INCORPORATED.



   Attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference are the provisions
of The City of Paris Zoning Ordinance.



§ 5.  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCE, MAP.



   The City Clerk is hereby directed to have this zoning ordinance
published, along with the official map of the zoned areas, as required by law.



§ 6.  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed.



ARTICLE II:  DEFINITIONS



   (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.   A subordinate building, not to
exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, or use which is located
on the same lot or adjacent lot with common ownership where the main building
or use is situated, and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the
conduct of the primary use of such building or main use. Semi-trailers, box
trailers, cargo containers, recreational trailers or vehicles shall not be
considered accessory buildings.



   (2)   ALLEY.  A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.



   (3)   APARTMENT.  A room or suite of rooms intended, designed, or
used as a residence by a single family.



   (4)   APARTMENT HOTEL.  A building designed for containing both
apartments and individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and apartments,
including services ordinarily furnished by hotels, such as drugstore,
barbershop, cigar and newsstands when such uses are located entirely within
the building with no entrance from the street, and having no sign or display
visible from the outside of the building indicating the existence of such use.



   (5)   APARTMENT HOUSE.  See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.



   (6)   BASEMENT.  A story in part or wholly underground.  A
BASEMENT shall be counted as a story if subdivided and used for dwelling or
business purposes other than for the quarters of a watchman or janitor.



   (7)   BOARDING HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE.  A building
other than a hotel or motel where for compensation and by arrangement,
lodging or lodging and meals are provided for nonfamily member persons.



   (8)   BUILDINGS.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.



   (9)   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance from the grade
(elevation of the sidewalk or the average level of the finished surface of
the ground adjacent to the structure) to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.



   (10)   CAR WASHES.  Any tract on which the principal or separate
use is the washing or waxing of motor vehicles for a fee, excluding filling
stations or public garages.



   (11)   CELLAR.  That portion of the building between floor and
ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade.



   (12)   CEMETERY.  Land used or intended to be used for the burial
or interment of the human or animal dead and utilized for cemetery purposes.



   (13)   CLINIC.  An establishment where patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment.



   (14)   CLUB.  A building or portion thereof or premises owned or
operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for social,
educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or
primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.



   (15)   COMMERCIAL FEED LOT.  Any tract on which the principal use
is the concentrated or forced feeding of livestock, fowl, or edible animals
for the sale of such animals or the sale of products derived from such
animals.



   (16)   DISTRICT.  A territory delineated on the zoning map for
which the regulations and restrictions of the ordinance governing the use of
land and buildings, the height of buildings, the bulk of buildings, the size
and location of yards, and the off- street parking facilities are uniform.



   (17)   DRIVE-IN.  An establishment which is designed to provide
either wholly or in part, service, entertainment or sales to customers while
in their automobiles parked upon the premises.



   (18)   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof which is designed
for or used for residential purposes, excluding house trailers as hereinafter
defined.



   (19)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.



   (20)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY or DUPLEX.  A building designed for or
occupied exclusively by two (2) families.



   (21)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE.  A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by three (3) or more families.



   (22)   FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption, occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit and
doing their own cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel, as herein defined.



   (23)   FARM.  A tract of land used for the growing and storage of
the usual agricultural products such as grain, vegetables, and fruit, as well
as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as
horses, cattle, sheep, and swine.  The term FARM includes the utilization of
such land for one or more of the above uses including dairy farms with the
necessary operations for treatment or storing the produce; provided, however,
that the operations of any accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal farming activities.



      (a)   Any tract on which the principal use is the raising of
fur-bearing animals, such as mink, muskrats, rabbits, and the like shall not
be considered a FARM.



      (b)   A commercial feed lot shall not be considered a FARM.



      (c)   Residential structures occupied by persons primarily
engaged in farming are included in the term FARMING.  However, there shall
not be more than three (3) dwellings on any one farm.



   (24)   FILLING STATION or AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION.  Any
building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories, including
lubrication or washing of automobiles and replacement or installation of
minor parts and accessories but not including major repair work such as motor
replacement, body and fender repair or spray painting.



   (25)   FLOOR AREA.  The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the center line of walls, separating buildings, but not including
garages, unenclosed porches, and cellar or basement space not used for
business or commerce.



   (26)   FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot abutting a street or alley.



   (27)   GARAGE, PRIVATE.   An accessory building not to exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet designed for storage of passenger
motor vehicles belonging to the occupants of a specified dwelling or
apartment, without provision for repairing or servicing such vehicles for
profit.  This term shall also include carport.



   (28)   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  A building or portion thereof, other than a
private garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling or storing motor-driven vehicles.



   (29)   HOME OCCUPATIONS.  Any use, customarily conducted entirely
within the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes, and does not change the character thereof; and in which no person
other than a member or members of the immediate family residing on the
premises is employed.  The general practice of his profession by a
physician, psychiatrist, psychologist, chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist,
lawyer, or clergy person, among others, shall not be deemed to be a HOME
OCCUPATION.  A home occupation may display a sign not more than ten (10)
square feet in area.  Home occupations may not be carried out in an
accessory building, but may only be operated within the confines of the main
residence.



   (30)   HOTEL or MOTEL.  Any building or portion thereof containing
six (6) or more guest rooms or suites in which no provision for cooking is
made.



   (31)   INDUSTRIAL PARK.  A tract of land containing not less than
the area specified for this purpose in this ordinance, which is designed to
accommodate two (2) or more industrial uses in accordance with a plan of
development which presents a unified and organized arrangement of building
areas, service facilities and related improvements, such as open spaces and
planting areas, all of which have a functional relationship to the proposed
use and will be in harmony with the use of land immediately adjacent to the
tract.



   (32)   HOSPITAL.  A building or portion thereof used for the
treatment of sick, injured or infirm persons, and licensed as a hospital, and
licensed by the State of Illinois.



   (33)   INSTITUTION.  A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation
or a nonprofit establishment for public use.



   (34)   JUNKYARD.  A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded materials; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale
of parts thereof.  A JUNKYARD includes auto wrecking yards.



   (35)   KENNEL.  Any structure or premises on which five (5) or more
dogs or cats over four (4) months of age are boarded or kept for compensation
or offered for sale.



   (36)   LAUNDROMAT.  An establishment providing dry cleaning,
washing, drying, ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the
premises.



   (37)   LOADING SPACE.  A space within the main building or on the
same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of
trucks, and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) by thirty- five (35)
feet and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.



   (38)   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by
a use permitted in this ordinance, including one main building together with
its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this
ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an
officially approved place.



   (39)   LOT, CORNER.  A lot having two (2) or more sides abutting
upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of
the same street.



   (40)   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot having a frontage on two (2)
nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.



   (41)   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the
map of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Edgar County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Edgar County.



   (42)   MANUFACTURING.  The assembling, altering, converting,
fabricating, finishing, processing, or treatment of a product.



   (43)   NONCONFORMING USE.  The use of land or a building, or
portion thereof, which use does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which it is situated.



   (44)   NURSING HOME, REST HOME or CONVALESCENT HOME.  A place,
residence or home used for the boarding and care, for a consideration, of
three (3) nor more than fifty (50) persons, not members of the immediate
family operating such facilities, who by reason of age or physical infirmity,
are dependent upon the services of others.  Such uses shall not include
hospitals or other similar uses specified and regulated by the zoning
ordinance.



   (45)   SHELTER-CARE HOME.  A place, residence or home used for the
boarding or care, for a consideration, of a person or persons, not members of
the immediate family operating such facility, who by reason of mental disease
or defect is in need of such care.  Such use shall not include hospitals
regulated by the zoning ordinance.



   (46)   Reserved.



   (47)   PARKING AREA.  An open, unoccupied space used or required
for use for parking of automobiles exclusively and in which no gasoline or
automobile accessories are sold or no other business is conducted.



   (48)   PARKING SPACE.  A surfaced area, enclosed in the main
building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed having an area of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet exclusive of driveways,
permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and
connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords
satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.



   (49)   RESTAURANT.  An establishment in which foods, refreshments
or beverages are offered for sale for consumption in the building in which
the establishment is located or at tables situated on the lot upon which the
establishment is located.  If any portion of the foods, refreshments, or
beverage are sold for consumption in automobiles parked on the lot upon which
the establishment is located or on an adjoining lot, the establishment shall
be considered to be a DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT.



   (50)   STORY.  That portion of a building, other than a cellar or
basement (except one used for business or a residence), included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there
be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it.



   (51)   STORY, HALF.  A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls
are not more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story, except that
any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or
caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below
it, shall be deemed a full story.



   (52)   STREET.  A public or private thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property.



   (53)   STREET LINE.  The STREET LINE is the dividing line between
the street and the lot, otherwise designated as the PROPERTY LINE.



   (54)   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of
which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to
something having a permanent location on the ground, including but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards,
backstops for tennis courts, and pergolas.



   (55)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting
members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders,
other than a change in doors or windows or a minor alteration which affects
primarily the appearance and not the life of the structure.



   (56)   TRAILER, HOUSE.  A vehicle designed or intended for use for,
or used for, living or sleeping purposes and having no foundation other than
wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirtings.  When a house trailer is
attached to the ground by a permanent foundation, it shall be deemed to be a
TRAILER BUILDING; said trailer building shall not qualify as a dwelling as
hereinbefore defined.



   (57)   WAREHOUSE.  A building used for the storage of goods for
compensation or the storage of goods which will be subsequently transported
to another location for sale or consumption.



   (58)   YARD.  An open space between a building and the adjoining
lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein, and measured as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building.



   (59)   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending across the front of a lot
between the side yard lines and measured between the street or place line and
the main building or any projection thereof other than the projections of the
usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porches.  On corner
lots the FRONT YARD shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which
the lot has its least dimension.



   (60)   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the rear of a lot
between the side lot lines and measured between the rear lot line and the
rear of the main building or any projections thereof, other than the
projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 
On all lots the REAR YARD shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.



   (61)   YARD, SIDE.  A yard between the main building and the side
line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the required rear
yard.



   (62)   TRUCK GARDENING.  The cultivation, harvesting and sale of
perishable, edible produce for commercial enterprise.



   (63)   TRAILER PARK OR CAMP.  Any area containing five (5) or more
mobile homes where families, transients or tourists are accommodated in
trailers or mobile homes.



(Am. Ord. 1990-10, passed 7-19-1990; Am. Ord. 1991-22, passed 12-9-1991; Am.
Ord. 1995-29, passed 10-23-1995; Am. Ord. 1998-21, passed 9-9-1998; Am. Ord.
2013-8, passed 8-12-2013)



ARTICLE III:  DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIE THEREOF



§ 1.  DISTRICTS.



   For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Paris is hereby divided
into the following districts:



      R-1  Single-family Residence District.



      R-2  Single-family Residence District.



      R-3  Two-family Residence District.



      R-4  Multiple Dwelling District.



      C-1  Neighborhood Shopping District.



      C-2  Commercial District.



      C-3  Central Business District.



      M-1  Light Industrial District.



      M-2  Heavy Industrial District.



§ 2.  MAPS.



   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance which map is
designated as the “District Map.”  The District Map and all the
notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this
ordinance and shall have the same force and effect as if such map and all the
notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set
forth or described herein, which District Map is properly attested and on
file with the City Clerk of the City of Paris.



Editor’s note:



   The District Map is not shown in this appendix, but is on file with the
City Clerk.



§ 3.  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The district boundary lines on the District Map are intended
to follow either streets or alleys or lot lines, and where the districts
designated on the map are bounded approximately by such street, alley, or lot
lines, the street or alley or lot line shall be construed to be the boundary
of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map.  In
the case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing on the District Map or by
dimensions.



   (B)   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said
railroad line.



§ 4.  CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY.



   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Paris
should be automatically classified in R-2 Single Family (Residence) District
until otherwise changed by ordinance, after public hearing. The above
requirement shall not apply to property which has a different classification
and is already proceeded, after a public hearing, to have the classification
changed by ordinance pursuant to this City Zoning Code.



(Am. Ord. 2008-11, passed 5-24-2008)



§ 5.  VACATING STREETS.



   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such
street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of
such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and
henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts.



§ 6.  SUBMERGED LANDS.



   Any area within the corporate limits of the City of Paris which is
under water and not shown as included within any district, shall be subject
to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water
area.  Where said water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the
boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend to the center of the
water area.



ARTICLE IV:  COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS



§ 1.  CONFORMITY REQUIRED.



   Except as hereinafter specifically provided:



   (A)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land
be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or
land is located.



   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein
established for the district in which such building is located.



   (C)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area
regulations of the district in which such building is located.



   (D)   No building shall be erected, or structurally altered to the
extent specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the
off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such
building is located.



   (E)   The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including
lot area per family, required by this ordinance for each and every building
existing at the time of passage of this ordinance or for any building
hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the
yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor
shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance for
the district in which such lot is located.



   (F)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than
one main building on one lot except as specifically provided hereinafter.



ARTICLE V:  R-1 AND R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
R-1 and R-2 Single-family Residence Districts.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   One-family dwelling.



   (2)   Truck gardening and farming outside the corporate limits.



   (3)   Park, playground, recreation center, community building,
museum, library or art gallery owned or operated by the public or by a
not-for-profit organization.



   (4)   Church or other place of worship or Sunday School.



   (5)   Public school, elementary and high, or a private school having
a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public school.



   (6)   Country club or golf course, except miniature course or
practice driving tee operated for commercial purposes.



   (7)   Home occupation.



   (8)   Existing railway right-of-way, not including switching,
storage, freight yards or sidings.



   (9)   Accessory building or use, including a private garage
customarily incident to the above uses, but not involving the conduct of a
business.



   (10)   A church or public bulletin board or temporary sign
appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which sign
or bulletin board shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area.



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed.



§ 4.  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE VA:  RESERVED



Editor’s note:



   Ord. 1994-14, § 1, adopted Apr. 25, 1994, repealed Art. VA, §§ 1-5,
which pertained to an R-2A trailer district, derived from Ord. 1972-12, §§
1-5, adopted Oct. 23, 1972.  For provisions pertaining to mobile home
regulations, see Chapter 157 of the code.



ARTICLE VI:  TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
R-3 Two-family Residence District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Single-family Residence
Districts.



   (2)   Two-family dwellings except trailer camps.



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area requirements set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed.



§ 4.  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE VII:  R-4 MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the R-3 Two-family Residence District.



   (2)   Multiple dwelling except trailer camp.



   (3)   Row house, condominium or townhouse buildings with no more
than 16 dwelling units per building, provided that each attached dwelling
unit shall be separated from any other by a sound proof fire separation wall
having the fire resisted ratings specified by the BOCA National Building Code
and shall have independent heating, electrical, water and waste water systems
with separate meters for each.



   (4)   Boarding or lodging house.



   (5)   Institution of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or
philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution.



   (6)   Hospital, sanitarium, or clinic, except a criminal, mental, or
animal hospital.



   (7)   Nursing or convalescent home.



   (8)   Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, excepting one the
chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business.



   (9)   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of the
above uses, including a storage garage on a lot occupied by a multiple
dwelling, hospital or institution.



   (10)   Private school or nursery school.



(Ord. 2004-43, passed 9-27-2004)



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area requirements set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed.



§ 4.  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE VIII:  C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



   (2)   Retail store or shop such as grocery, drugstore, meat market,
florist, delicatessen, notion or stationery store, and the like.



   (3)   Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe repairing, repair of household
appliances and bicycles, catering, dry cleaning and pressing, and bakery with
sale of bakery products on the premises, and other uses of a similar
character, provided that no use permitted in this paragraph shall employ more
than five (5) persons in a single shift on the premises, not including
employees whose principal duties are off the premises or temporary seasonal
employees.



   (4)   Filling station.



   (5)   Laundromat.



   (6)   Offices and office buildings.



   (7)   Personal service uses including barber shops, banks, beauty
parlors, photographic or artist studios, messengers, taxicabs, newspaper or
telegraphic service stations, dry cleaning receiving stations, restaurants,
and other personal service uses of a similar character.



   (8)   Off-street parking lots.



   (9)   Accessory building or use, including signs pertaining to the
name of the establishment or to products or services sold or offered on the
premises.  Such signs shall not extend more than ten (10) feet from a wall
of the structure, shall not exceed a gross area of fifty (50) square feet,
and must be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk level.



(Am. Ord. 1996-8, passed 4-8-1996)



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed, and in addition, every building or portion thereof used
for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area
per family requirements of the R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



§ 4.  PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE IX:  C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
C-2 Commercial District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Shopping District.



   (2)   Advertising sign or billboard, when located at least fifty
(50) feet from any “R” District.



   (3)   Automobile or trailer display and sales rooms.



   (4)   Business or commercial school.



   (5)   When located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any
“R” District:



      Bowling alley,



      Drive-in theater (when approved by the Board of Appeals),



      Other similar place of entertainment or amusement.



   (6)   Dancing or music academy.



   (7)   Display room for merchandise to be sold at wholesale where
merchandise sold is stored elsewhere.



   (8)   Farm implement display and sales room.



   (9)   Frozen food locker.



   (10)   Hotel.



   (11)   Milk distributing station.



   (12)   Motel or tourist home.



   (13)   Parking or public garage.



   (14)   Plant nursery or greenhouse.



   (15)   Radio or television broadcasting station or studio.



   (16)   Theater.



   (17)   Undertaking establishment.



   (18)   Veterinarian or animal hospital or riding academy, provided
that no such building, kennel, or exercise runway shall be closer than three
hundred (300) feet to any “R” District.



   (19)   Used car sales or storage lot when located at least one
hundred fifty (150) feet from any “R” District.



   (20)   When not employing more than ten (10) persons on the premises:



      Dyeing and cleaning establishment or laundry,



      Painting, plumbing, or tinsmithing shop,



      Printing shop,



      Tire sales and service, including vulcanizing,



      Upholstering shop, not involving furniture manufacturing,



      Any other general service or repair establishment of similar
character.



   (21)   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of
the above uses.



   (22)   Farming, provided that any structure or enclosure for the
shelter of livestock or poultry shall be located not less than one hundred
(100) feet from any street or lot line.



   (23)   Tourist or trailer park or camp.



(Am. Ord. 1991-23, passed 12-9-1991; Am. Ord. 1996-8, passed 4-8-1996)



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed, and in addition, every building or portion thereof used
for dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area
per family requirements of the R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



§ 4.  PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for the specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE X:  C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
C-3 Central Business District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the C-2 Commercial District and without
restriction as to the number of employees on the premises.



   (2)   Laboratory - experimental, film or testing.



   (3)   Truck or transfer terminal or freight house or bus garage and
repair shop.



   (4)   Wholesale or distributing establishment or warehouse or
wholesale market.



   (5)   Printing, publishing or engraving.



   (6)   Service industry such as a laundry, cleaning or dyeing
establishment or similar use.



   (7)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of such goods, materials and products as the following:



      Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food
products - except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the
rendering of fats and oils.



      Articles made from previously prepared materials such as:  bone,
canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones,
shell, textiles, wax, wire, yarns, and the like.



      Musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, and
other small molded rubber products.  Fabrication and repair of electric or
neon signs or other commercial advertising structures, light sheet metal
products, and the like.



   (8)   Any other use of similar character which is not objectionable
by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes, noise or
vibration or which is not specifically prohibited or regulated in Article XII.



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed and in addition every building or portion thereof used for
dwelling purposes shall comply with the side and rear yard requirements of
the R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



§ 4.  LOADING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XV.



Editor’s note:



   Art. X, §§ 3, 4 do not appear in the original Ord. 1968-29.  They
appear in the 1968 Code with no source given.



ARTICLE XI:  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
M-1 Light Industrial District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:



   (1)   Any use permitted in the C-3 Central Business District.



   (2)   Bottling works.



   (3)   Carting, express, hauling or storage yard.



   (4)   Contractor’s yard.



   (5)   Coal, coke, wood, or lumber yard.



   (6)   Assembly and manufacture from prefabricated parts of household
appliances, electronic products and similar products or the processing or
assembling of parts for production of finished equipment.



   (7)   Petroleum storage, but only after the location and treatment
of the premises have been approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.



   (8)   Drive-in theaters.



   (9)   Sporting and athletic equipment manu- facture.



   (10)   Other industrial and manufacturing plants where the process
of manufacturing or the treatment of materials is such that only a nominal
amount of dust, odor, gas, smoke, or noise is emitted.



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed, and in addition, any building used for dwelling purposes
shall comply with the side and rear yard and lot area per family regulations
in the R-4 Multiple Dwelling District.



§ 4.  PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE XII:  M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 1.  “REGULATIONS” DEFINED.



   The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
M-2 Heavy Industrial District.



§ 2.  USE REGULATIONS.



   A building or premises may be used for any purpose not in conflict with
any ordinance of the City of Paris regulating nuisances; provided, however,
that no building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered for
residential purposes, except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on
the premises; and provided further that no building or occupancy permit shall
be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such
use shall have been approved by the City Council after report by the Board of
Appeals and the Chief of the Fire Department:



   (1)   Acid manufacture.



   (2)   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture.



   (3)   Distillation of bones and glue manufacture.



   (4)   Explosives manufacture or storage.



   (5)   Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacture.



   (6)   Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping.



   (7)   Petroleum or its products, refining of.



   (8)   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.



   (9)   Stockyards or slaughter of animals.



§ 3.  HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS.



   The height and area regulations set forth in Articles XIII and XIV
shall be observed.



§ 4.  PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XV.



ARTICLE XIIA:  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT



§ 1.  PURPOSE.



   Planned unit development recognizes the need to vary the specific
regulations of the city’s zoning ordinance to provide residential,
commercial and industrial areas which match the creative approaches of the
building industry with the unique land and housing demands of the city. 
This district is designed to allow more flexible regulations while preserving
the purposes of this zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 2.  USES IN PUD DISTRICT.



   A building or land may be used, and a building may be erected or
altered for any residential, commercial or industrial use which is part of a
Planned Unit Development plan approved as provided in this chapter [article].



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 3.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A Planned Unit Development may be established for any parcel
or tract of land that has a minimum size of ten (10) acres and dimensions
susceptible to being planned and developed or redeveloped as a unit in a
manner consistent with the intent and purpose for which planned unit
development is permitted.



   (B)   In residential developments the non- residential uses must be
planned and established primarily to serve the residents of the
development.  The developer shall follow the proposed time and order of
completion approved by the Commission.



   (C)   A preliminary plan may be filed as provided in § 4 of this
Article XIIA by at least fifty (50) percent of the residents of the proposed
PUD District, at least fifty (50) percent of the owners of record of the land
in the proposed PUD District, a nonresident developer, or by the Plan
Commission itself.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 4.  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL BY PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   Procedure.  A Planned Unit Development District shall be
established by amending the Zoning District Map.  The Plan Commission may,
by resolution to the City Council, recommend approval of a Planned Unit
Development District on any parcel or tract of land which is ten (10) acres
or more in size and suitable to be planned and developed or redeveloped as a
unit and in a manner consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter
[article] and with the comprehensive plan of the city.



   Rezoning and development under the planned unit development procedure
will be permitted only in accordance with a detailed development plan and
after approval of the plan by the Plan Commission in accordance with the
standards of this district.



   (B)   Preliminary proposal.  An application for approval of a
Planned Unit Development shall first be presented in the form of a
preliminary proposal and shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall, after
receipt of the same, transmit the same, including all documents relating
thereto, to the Plan Commission, and shall notify the president of the Plan
Commission and the City Council, in writing, of such receipt and
transmittal.  A filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in the form of a
certified check, made payable to the City of Paris, shall accompany said
application.



   The preliminary proposal for a Planned Unit [Development] District
shall be submitted in triplicate copies and shall comprise but not
necessarily be limited to the following:



      (1)   A written explanation of the general character of the
project and the manner in which it is planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of the regulations.



      (2)   A legal description of the property proposed to be
developed.



      (3)   A site plan prepared by a registered engineer, land
surveyor or architect showing a generalized plan of the proposed Planned Unit
Development sufficient to confirm the proposed development.  The Plan
Commission, when approving a preliminary proposal, shall not be bound by the
location of anything shown on a map if, when placed on a plat or survey,
there is any conflict or difference.  The map or plat or survey shall
indicate:



         (a)   The approximate residential density proposed for
the entire project and, if the project is to be comprised of well-defined
areas of varying types of residential development, the approximate density
for each such area.



         (b)   The proposed height and bulk of buildings.



         (c)   The approximate percentage of the project land
area to be covered by building and streets.



         (d)   The approximate number of institutional building
units, dwelling units or combination of units proposed for the project.



         (e)   Proposed plan for handling traffic flow, parking,
sewage disposal, drainage, water supply and other pertinent development
features.



         (f)   Areas designated for common open space, whether to
be dedicated to the public or to be privately maintained.



         (g)   Amenities to be provided within the proposed
project.



         (h)   Existing zoning of the project site and adjacent
properties.



         (i)   Generalized plan for utilities which will serve
the project.



         (j)   Proposed time and order of completion.



         (k)   Outline of proposed covenants.



         (l)   Indication of conflicts with other parts of the
Paris Code of Ordinances.



   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the Plan Commission of a
preliminary proposal, the Plan Commission shall conduct in conformance with
the procedures prescribed in Article XXII a public hearing on the proposal to
rezone the subject property to the Planned Unit Development District.



   (C)   Plan Commission action.  Within twenty-five (25) days after
the public hearing the Plan Commission shall act to recommend to the City
Council that it take action indicating a recommendation to the City Council
that it:



      (a)   Take action indicating a favorable disposition toward
rezoning of the subject property to the Planned Unit Development District for
a development project of the nature being proposed, subject to approval of
the preliminary plat for the project, or



      (b)   Reject the proposal.



   In either case, the Plan Commission shall set forth the reasons for its
recommendation, and may, in the event of a favorable recommendation, specify
particular items and conditions which should be incorporated in subsequent
plat submittals.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 5.  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PROPOSAL BY CITY COUNCIL.



   Upon receipt of the Plan Commission’s recommendation, the City
Council shall act by resolution to either:



      (a)   Reject the proposal, or



      (b)   Accept the proposal.



   The acceptance may be conditional and if so, shall specifically state
what additions or deletions from the proposed development as submitted shall
be made in the preliminary plat.  Any such conditions may include but are
not limited to allowable density, height, bulk and location of buildings,
provisions for open space and ratios of dwelling unit types to be included in
the project.  The City Council may require performance bonds to ensure the
completion of streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and sewers.  The City
Council after recommendation from the Plan Commission shall approve a
preliminary plat which complies with the proposal as accepted and conforms
otherwise to the requirements for a preliminary plat as hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 6.  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   Within six (6) months after the adoption by the City Council of a
favorable resolution relative to a preliminary proposal, a preliminary plat
of the Planned Unit Development project shall be submitted as required by the
subdivision regulations.  If that portion of the preliminary plat dealing
with any particular stage of the development is approved unamended by the
City Plan Commission, that portion of the preliminary plat may also serve as
the final plat for that stage.



   Additional supporting material beyond that required by the subdivision
regulation for a preliminary plat shall include a development schedule
indicating:



      (1)   Stages in which project is intended to be built.



      (2)   Area.



      (3)   Number and sizes of dwelling units, including a
breakdown of the number of one, two (2) and three (3) or more bedroom units.



      (4)   Land use.



      (5)   The use, approximate height, bulk, and location of
buildings and other structures, floor area ratio.



      (6)   Public facilities such as open space to be developed
with each stage.



      (7)   Off-street parking facilities.



      (8)   All utilities including storm drainage, sanitary sewers
and water service.



      (9)   The overall design of each stage shall be shown on the
plat and through supporting graphic material.



      (10)   Approximate date for beginning and completion of the
Planned Unit Development project or each stage thereof.



      (11)   A draft of agreements, provisions, or covenants which
will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the Planned Unit
Development and any of its common open space.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 7.  ZONING AMENDMENT.



   Upon approval of the preliminary plat, in accordance with this section,
the Plan Commission shall proceed to amend the zoning map by rezoning the
subject property to a Planned Unit Development District classification.  The
public hearing held at the time of the preliminary proposal shall satisfy all
hearing requirements for the rezoning action.  The newly created Planned
Unit Development District shall be valid only for the preliminary plat and
support material upon which the amendment was based, copies of which shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 8.  FINAL PLAT.



   If the zoning amendment is approved, final plats shall be prepared for
each stage according to the development schedule.  A reasonable time period
for submittal of the final plat for each stage shall be agreed upon by the
developer and the Plan Commission.  In addition to information required by
the subdivision regulations, the final plat and supporting material for each
stage shall show in detail for that stage the design and use of all buildings
and overall land development plans as well as such information the Plan
Commission may require.  Such supporting material shall include a statement
from a bank or other lending institution indicating that development
financing for that stage of the project is available.



   The final plats shall conform to the preliminary plat and supporting
material, except that the Plan Commission may permit minor variations from
the approved site development plan, at this time or during construction,
which do not change the concept or intent of the approved preliminary plat. 
Major changes in number or sizes of dwelling units or height of buildings,
reduction of proposed open space, changes in the development schedule, or
final governing agreement, provisions, or covenants, or resubdivision may be
approved only by submission of a new preliminary plat or applicable
supporting material to the Plan Commission followed by the amendment
procedure.  The determination of what is a major change shall be made by the
Plan Commission.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 9.  CONTINUING CONTROL.



   (A)   Recording of final plat and supporting material.  The Planned
Unit Development project shall be developed only according to approved final
plats and supporting materials.  Upon approval of a final plat and
supporting material by the Plan Commission, the City Clerk shall record said
final plat; no filing fee will be charged other than that prescribed in the
applicable subdivision control ordinance.  The recorded plat and material
shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, and assigns, and shall
limit and control the uses of premises and location of structures in the
Planned Unit Development project.  Major changes in a recorded final plat
and supporting material approved by the Plan Commission during construction
shall be recorded upon completion of the Planned Unit Development project. 
The City Council and Plan Commission shall consider the approval of a final
plat for a Planned Unit Development to be approved subject to revocation if
construction falls more than one year behind the approved development
schedule submitted as supporting material with the preliminary plat.  The
developer, its successors or assigns, may, however, be granted an extension
of time at the discretion of the City Plan Commission.



   (B)   Abandonment, revocation or repeal prior to final plan.  In
the event that a development plan is given preliminary approval and
thereafter, but prior to approval of a final development plan, the developer,
its successors or assigns shall:  (1) choose to abandon said plan and shall
so notify the City Council in writing; or (2) shall fail to file a final plat
within the required time period; then the preliminary plan shall be deemed to
be revoked.  When a preliminary plan is revoked, all that portion of the
preliminary plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject
to those provisions of the zoning ordinance that were applicable thereto
immediately prior to the approval of the preliminary plan, as they may be
amended.  The Plan Commission may recommend an ordinance repealing the
Planned [Unit] Development District for that portion of the development that
has not received final approval and reestablished the zoning ordinance
provisions of the zoning ordinance that were applicable thereto immediately
prior to the approval of the preliminary plan, as they may be amended.  The
Plan Commission may recommend an ordinance repealing the planned development
district for that portion of the development that has not received final
approval and reestablished the zoning ordinance provisions that would
otherwise be applicable.



   (C)   Abandonment or failure to complete after final plan
approved.  In the event that a final development plan or part thereof is
approved and thereafter the developer, its successors or assigns shall:  (1)
abandon part or all of said development plan and shall so notify the City
Council in writing; or (2) shall fail to complete the planned development or
part thereof, within the period of time agreed upon; then no development or
further development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after the said property has been reclassified by
enactment of an amendment to the Zoning District Map.



   (D)   Development not meeting approved development plan.  If the
development of the Planned Unit Development fails to meet the approved
development plan at any stage, the Plan Commission or City Council shall
initiate proceedings to repeal the Planned Unit Development District, and to
rezone the property to the district classification it held immediately prior
to being zoned Planned Unit Development.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 10.  STANDARDS FOR USE OF LAND.



   (A)   The following standards shall be followed in a Planned Unit
Development:



      (1)   The plan may provide for a variety of housing types.



      (2)   Height of particular buildings shall not be a basis for
denial or approval of a plan, provided any structures in excess of sixty-five
(65) feet shall be designed and platted to be consistent with the reasonable
enjoyment of neighboring property and the efficiency of existing public
services.



      (3)   Architectural style of buildings shall not be a basis
for denying approval of a plan.



      (4)   A plan may provide for a greater number of dwelling
units per acre than would be permitted by the regulations otherwise
applicable to the site.  The developer has the burden to show that such
excess will not have an undue and adverse impact on existing public
facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property.



      (5)   The size and configuration of the proposed site shall
not be a basis for denying approval of a Planned Unit Development.  The
approval of a Planned Unit Development will be based on the site plan of
design.



      (6)   The Plan Commission may approve the Planned Unit
Development only if they find that the development plan contains areas to be
allocated for common open space which satisfy the following standards
governing the usability and quality of common open space:



         (a)   The location, shape, size, and character of the
common open space must be suitable for the Planned Unit Development.



         (b)   Common open space must be used for amenity or
recreational purposes and may not be used for parking areas and service or
maintenance facilities.  The uses authorized for the common open space must
be appropriate to the scale and character of the Planned Unit Development,
considering its size, density, expected population, topography, and the
number and type of dwellings to be provided.



         (c)   Common open space must be suitably improved for
its intended use, but common open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved.  The buildings, structures and
improvements which are permitted in the common open space must be appropriate
to the uses which are authorized on the common open space and must conserve
and enhance the amenities of the common open space with regard to its
topography and unimproved condition.  The development schedule which is a
part of the development plan must coordinate the improvement of the common
open space, the construction of buildings, structures, and improvements in
the common open space, and the construction of residential dwellings in the
Planned Unit Development.



         (d)   The construction and provision of all of the
common open space and recreational facilities which are shown on the final
plat must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



§ 11.  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS.



   (A)   Coordination requirements and modifications of
specifications.  It is the intent of the planned unit development ordinance
that subdivision review under the subdivision regulations of the Paris Code
of Ordinances be carried out simultaneously with the review of the Planned
Unit Development as set forth under this ordinance.  The plans and plats
required under this planned unit development ordinance must be submitted in a
form which will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision control ordinance
of the preliminary and final plans and plats required under those
regulations.  However, the uniqueness of each proposal for a Planned Unit
Development may require that the specifications for the width and surfacing
of streets and highways, ways for public utilities, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street lights, public parks, storm water drainage, water supply
and distribution, and sanitary sewers established in the subdivision
ordinance adopted and amended from time to time, shall be subject to
modifications or waived.  The Plan Commission may therefore waive or modify
the specifications otherwise applicable for a particular facility where the
Plan Commission finds that such specifications are not required in the
interests of the residents of the Planned Unit Development and that the
modifications of such specifications are not inconsistent with the interests
of the entire community.



(Ord. 1978-14, passed 5-22-1978)



ARTICLE XIII:  TABLE OF HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS



   The required height and area regulations are established and shown on
the accompanying table which is Article XIII.



 


ARTICLE XIII:  HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS




District

 

Maximum Height of Buildings

 

Minimum Depth of Front Yard in Feet

 

Minimum Width of Side Yards in Feet

 

Minimum Depth of Rear Yard in Feet

 

Minimum Lot Area Per Family in Square Feet

 

Minimum Lot Width in Feet




In Stories

 

In Feet

 

Either Side Yard

 

Aggregate Side Yards





R-1 Single-family Residence
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
30
 
8
 
16
 
35
 
12,000
 
80


R-2 Single-family Residence
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
25
 
6
 
14
 
25
 
7,000
 
60


R-3 Two-family Residence
 
2-1/2
 
35
 
25
 
6
 
14
 
25
 
5,000 1-family

3,000 2-family
 
60


R-4 Multiple Dwelling
 
3
 
45
 
25
 
6
 
14 (1)
 
25
 
5,000 1-family

3,000 2-family

1,500 multiple dwelling
 
60


C-1 Neighborhood Shopping
 
2
 
35
 
25
 
None (2)
 
-
 
None (3)
 
Same as R-4 District
 
-


C-2 Commercial
 
3
 
45
 
15
 
None (2)
 
-
 
None (3)
 
Same as R-4 District
 
-


C-3 Central Business
 
10
 
125 (4)
 
None
 
None
 
-
 
None
 
1,000
 
-


M-1 Light Industrial
 
6
 
75 (5)
 
25
 
None (2)
 
-
 
None (3)
 
Same as R-4 District
 
-


M-2 Heavy Industrial
 
None
 
None (5)
 
25
 
None (2)
 
-
 
None (3)
 
Residences not permitted
 
-


Notes:

(1)  For buildings of less than 3 stories in height.  For 3-story buildings
side yards of 8 feet each shall be required.

(2)  No side yard required except on the side of a lot adjoining a Residence
District, in which case a side yard of not less than 5 feet shall be provided
in any “C” District and of not less than 10 feet in any “M” District.

(3)  No rear yard required except on the rear of a lot adjoining a Residence
District, in which case a rear yard of not less than 25 feet shall be
provided.

(4)  A building may exceed 10 stories or 125 feet if set back 1 foot for
each 2 feet of height above 125 feet but no building shall exceed the cubical
contents of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot and a height
of 2 times the width of the street upon which said building fronts.

(5)  Whenever a building in an “M” District adjoins or abuts an “R”
District, within 100 feet therefrom, such building shall not exceed 3 stories
or 45 feet in height unless it is set back 1 foot from the required side and
rear yard lines for each foot of additional height above 45 feet.




 



ARTICLE XIV:  HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS



§ 1.  HEIGHT.



   (A)   The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to
television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water
and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental
towers and spires, chimneys, elevator penthouses, smokestacks, conveyors, and
flagpoles.



   (B)   Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty (60) feet and churches and temples may be erected to a height
not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when the required front, side and rear
yards are each increased by one foot for each foot of additional building
height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is
located.



   (C)   The limitation on number of stories shall not apply to
buildings used exclusively for storage purposes, provided such buildings do
not exceed the height in feet permitted in the district in which they are
located.



§ 2.  FRONT YARDS.



   (A)   When forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side
of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is improved with buildings
that have a front yard which is greater or less than the required front yard
in the district, no building shall project beyond the average front yard so
established; provided, however, that a front yard depth shall not be required
to exceed fifty percent (50%) in excess of the front yard otherwise required
in the district in which the lot is located.



   (B)   On lots having double frontage the required front yard shall
be provided on both streets.



   (C)   In a Residential District no fence, structure, or planting
higher than three and one-half (3-1/2) feet above the established street
grades shall be maintained within twenty (20) feet of any street intersection.



   (D)   An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a
required front yard for a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, but this
shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies.



   (E)   Filling station pumps and pump islands and signs may be
located within a required yard provided they are not less than fifteen (15)
feet from any street line and not less than fifty (50) feet from the boundary
of any Residential District.



   (F)   Off-street parking facilities may be located within the
required front yard of any “C” or “M” District but shall not be
nearer than fifty (50) feet to any “R” District, and no off-street
parking shall be permitted in the required front yard of any “R” District.



§ 3.  SIDE YARDS.



   (A)   On a corner lot in “R” Districts the width of the yard
along the side street shall be not less than any required front yard on such
street; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record shall
not be reduced to less than thirty-two (32) feet.



   (B)   No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard
line along any street.



   (C)   Where dwelling units are erected above a commercial
establishment, no side yard is required except when required for the
commercial building on the side of a lot adjoining a Residence District.



   (D)   A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required side
yard provided every part of such porte-cochere or canopy in unenclosed and
not less than five (5) feet from any side lot line.



   (E)   Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of
this ordinance is less than fifty (50) feet in width, each of the required
side yards may be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot;
provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than three (3) feet.



§ 4.  REAR YARDS.



   (A)   Where a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half (1/2) the alley
width may be considered as part of the required rear yard.



   (B)   An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height
and not located any closer than three (3) feet to side or rear lot line.  No
accessory building shall encroach upon the front yard.



   (C)   The ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices and
ornamental features may extend to a distance not to exceed eighteen (18)
inches into a required yard.  Roofs and eaves may extend not more than
thirty (30) inches into a required yard.



   (D)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and
balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys
and flues into a rear yard may be permitted by the Building Official for a
distance not to exceed five (5) feet when these are so placed as not to
obstruct light and ventilation.



(Am. Ord. 1995-29, passed 10-23-1995; Am. Ord. 1998-23, passed 9-9-1998)



§ 5.  LOT AREA PER FAMILY.



   (A)   Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of
this ordinance has less area or width than herein required in the district in
which it is located, and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel
or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may nonetheless be used for a one-family
dwelling or for any nondwelling use permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (B)   Where a lot is not served by either a public water supply or a
public or community sewer, it shall have an area of not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and a width of not less than one hundred (100)
feet; where a lot is served by a public water supply but not by a public or
community sewer, it shall have an area of not less than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet and a width of eighty (80) feet.



ARTICLE XV:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



§ 1.  OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES REQUIRED.



   In all districts except the C-3 Central Business District there shall
be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally
altered (except as specified in § 2 of this article), off-street parking
spaces in accordance with the following requirements:



   (1)   Dwellings, including single- and two-family and multiple: 
one parking space for each dwelling unit.



   (2)   Boarding or lodging house:  one parking space for each two
(2) sleeping rooms.



   (3)   Private club or lodge:  one parking space for every ten (10)
members.



   (4)   Church or temple:  one parking space for each eight (8) seats
in the main auditorium.



   (5)   School (except high school or college):  one parking space
for each ten (10) seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one space
for each classroom, whichever is greater.



   (6)   College or high school:  one parking space for each eight (8)
seats in the main auditorium or three (3) spaces for each classroom,
whichever is greater.



   (7)   Country club or golf club:  one parking space for each five
(5) members.



   (8)   Community center, library, museum or art gallery:  ten (10)
parking spaces plus one additional space for each three hundred (300) square
feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet.



   (9)   Hospital:  one parking space for each two (2) beds.



   (10)   Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar
institution:  one parking space for each six (6) beds.



   (11)   Theater or auditorium (except school):  one parking space
for each five (5) seats or bench seating spaces.



   (12)   Sports arena, stadium, or gymnasium:  one parking space for
each five (5) seats or seating spaces.



   (13)   Hotel:  one parking space for each three (3) sleeping rooms
or suites plus one space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial
floor area contained therein.



   (14)   Tourist home, cabin or motel:  one parking space for each
sleeping room or suite.



   (15)   Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed
seats:  one parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area used therefor.



   (16)   Business or professional office, studio, bank, medical or
dental clinic:  three (3) parking spaces plus one additional parking space
for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area over one thousand
(1,000).



   (17)   Bowling alley:  five (5) parking spaces for each alley.



   (18)   Mortuary or funeral home:  one parking space for each fifty
(50) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual
funeral service rooms.



   (19)   Restaurant, nightclub, café, or similar recreation or
amusement establishment:  one parking space for each one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area.



   (20)   Retail store or personal service establishment, except as
otherwise specified herein:  one parking space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area.



   (21)   Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale
establishment, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe
repair or service shop:  two (2) parking spaces plus one additional parking
space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area over one
thousand (1,000).



   (22)   Printing or plumbing shop or similar service establishment: 
one parking space for each three (3) persons employed therein.



   (23)   Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or
testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse or similar
establishment:  one parking space for each two (2) employees on the maximum
working shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in
connection therewith.



§ 2.  COMPUTATION OF SPACES; CHANGING CONDITIONS.



   (A)   In computing the number of such parking spaces required, this
shall be construed to be the nearest whole number, and in the case of mixed
uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of
the various uses computed separately.



   (B)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after
the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area,
number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise,
to create a need for an increase of ten percent (10%) or more in the number
of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change.  Whenever a building or use existing prior to the
effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall
then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.



§ 3.  LOCATION OF SPACES.



   (A)   All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the
same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in
the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where
such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more
buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed
three hundred (300) feet from an institutional building served and not to
exceed five hundred (500) feet from any other nonresidential building served.



   (B)   In any case where the required parking spaces are not located
on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are
collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement to assure
their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the
parties concerned, approved as to form and executed by the Corporation
Council and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.



§ 4.  LOADING SPACE.



   Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business,
service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other
use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials
or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space
in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   In the C-1 and C-2 Shopping and Commercial Districts and in
the M-1 and M-2 Industrial Districts:  one loading space for each ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the
building.



   (B)   In the C-3 Central Business District:  one loading space for
the first five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of
floor area in the building and one additional loading space for each fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess
of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.



ARTICLE XVI:  SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS



§ 1.  USES FOR WHICH PERMIT MAY BE GRANTED.



   (A)   The City Council by an affirmative two- thirds (2/3) vote may
by resolution grant a special permit for the following special uses in any
district, except as herein qualified, for which they are otherwise prohibited
by this ordinance, and may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards,
including a specified period of time for the permit, to protect the
comprehensive plan and to conserve and protect property and property values
in the neighborhood:



      (1)   Airport, landing field, or landing strip for aircraft.



      (2)   Amusement park, but not within three hundred (300) feet
of any “R” District.



      (3)   Cemetery or mausoleum.



      (4)   Circus or carnival grounds, but not within three hundred
(300) feet of any “R” District.



      (5)   Commercial, recreational or amusement development for
temporary or seasonal periods.



      (6)   Hospital or institution, provided that any hospital or
institution building permitted in any “R” District shall be located on a
site of not less than five (5) acres, shall not occupy more than ten percent
(10%) of the total lot area and shall be set back at least one hundred (100)
feet from all lot lines.



      (7)   Privately operated community building or recreation
field.



      (8)   Any public or government building.



      (9)   Radio or television broadcasting tower or station.



      (10)   Tourist or trailer camp in the C-2 Commercial District
or the M-1 Light Industrial District and its extension into an abutting
Residential District, provided such tourist or trailer camp shall comply with
the following and such additional requirements as may be deemed necessary for
proper development and the protection of the surrounding area:



         (a)   All appropriate state, county and city sanitation
regulations shall be strictly observed.



         (b)   At least two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot
area per trailer shall be provided; no trailer shall be parked closer to the
street or highway than the required front yard setback or closer than
twenty-five (25) feet to any property line; and a clearance of not less than
twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between trailer coaches on all sides.



         (c)   Trailer coach spaces shall abut upon a
hard-surfaced driveway or access way of not less than twenty-five (25) feet
in width.



         (d)   Service building or other facilities for bathing,
laundry and sanitation, as required by the state and local health
regulations, shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the side and
rear lot lines, and shall be accessible to all trailer coaches by means of
the access drives or hard-surfaced walks.



         (e)   Wherever practicable, space shall be reserved for
recreation and a playground.



      (11)   Warehouse in any R-1 Residential District.



      (12)   Personal services uses including barber shops, beauty
parlors, photographic or artist studios, messengers, and other personal
service uses of a similar character, wherein there are three (3) employees or
less, provided that the owner of the business shall also be counted as an
employee.



   (B)   Before authorization of any of the above special uses, the
request therefor shall be referred to the City Plan Commission for study and
report concerning the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan
and on the character and development of the neighborhood and a public hearing
shall be held in relation thereto before the Plan Commission, notice and
publication of the time and place for which shall conform to the procedure
prescribed in Article XXII for hearings on amendments.  If no report is
transmitted by the Plan Commission within sixty (60) days of notification,
the City Council may take action without further awaiting such report.



   (C)   Any proposed special use shall otherwise comply with all the
regulations set forth in this ordinance for the district in which such use is
located, except that the City Council may permit hospitals and institutions
to exceed the height limitations of such district.



(Am. Ord. 1968-37, passed 9-9-1968; Am. Ord. 1987-16, passed 8-24-1987; Am.
Ord. 1993-31, passed 12-13-1993; Am. Ord. 1995-34, passed 12-11-1995)



§ 2.  RESIDENCE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   An authorized agency of the municipal, county, state or federal
government or the owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of
not less than ten (10) acres may submit to the City Council a plan for the
use and development of all of the tract of land for residential and allied
purposes.  The development plan shall be referred to the City Plan
Commission for study and report and for public hearings.  Notice and
publication of such public hearings shall conform to the procedures
prescribed in Article XXII for hearings on changes and amendments.  If the
Commission approves the plans, these shall then be submitted to the City
Council for consideration and action.  The approval and recommendations of
the Commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for
approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the
proposed community unit plan meets the following conditions:



   (A)   The property adjacent to the area included in the plan will
not be adversely affected, and to this end the Commission may require, in the
absence of an appropriate physical barrier, that uses of least intensity or a
buffer of open space or screening be arranged along the borders of the
project.



   (B)   The plan is consistent with the intent and purposes of this
ordinance to promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare.



   (C)   The buildings shall be used only for single- family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, or multiple dwellings, and the usual accessory uses
such as private or storage garages, storage space, and for community
activities, including churches.



   (D)   The average lot area per family contained in the site,
exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will not be less than the lot area
per family required in the district in which the development is located.



   If the City Council approves the plans, building permits and
certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of land and the
location and height of buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and
open space contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the
district regulations of the district in which it is located.



ARTICLE XVII:  NONCONFORMING USES



§ 1.  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Any lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of
this ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform to the
provisions hereof.  If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or
of a more restricted classification.  Whenever a nonconforming use has been
changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restricted use.  The nonconforming use of a
building may be extended throughout those parts thereof which were manifestly
arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this ordinance.



   (B)   Whenever the use of a building shall become nonconforming
through a change in the zoning ordinance or in the district boundaries, such
use may be continued, and if no structural alterations are made, may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted
classification.



   (C)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof
is discontinued for a continuous period of two (2) years, any future use of
such building or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which such building is located.



   (D)   A nonconforming building which has been damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more than
seventy-five percent (75%) of its reproduction value at the time of damage
shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.  When damaged by less than seventy-five
percent (75%) of its reproduction value, a nonconforming building may be
repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided
such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of the date of
such damage.



§ 2.  NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   A nonconforming use of land existing at the effective date of this
ordinance may be continued; provided, however, that no such nonconforming use
of land shall, in any way, be expanded or extended, either on the same or
adjoining property.  If such nonconforming use of land or any portion
thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, or changed, any
future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.



ARTICLE XVIII:  BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 1.  ORGANIZATION.



   A Board of Appeals is hereby established.  The word “Board” when
used in this section shall be construed to mean the Board of Appeals.  Said
Board shall consist of the members of the City Plan Commission.



   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at
such other times as the Board may determine.  The chairman or, in his
absence, the acting chairman, appointed by the chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses.  All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public.  The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a
public record.



   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Board being
present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members.  Any absent
member who certifies that he has read the transcript of the proceedings
before the Board may vote upon any question before the Board.  The
concurring vote of six (6) members of the Board is necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official charged with enforcement of this ordinance or to decide in favor of
the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance or to effect any variation in the ordinance or to recommend any
variation or modification in the ordinance to the corporate authorities.



(Am. Ord. 1968-39, passed 10-7-1968; Am. Ord. 1984-15, passed 7-9-1984)



§ 2.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Building Official in the enforcement of this ordinance.



   (B)   To hold public hearings on and, when in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this ordinance, to authorize the following
exceptions to the terms thereof:



      (1)   The extension of a district where the boundary line
thereof divides a lot in a single ownership at the time of the passage of
this ordinance.



      (2)   Interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon
the District Map, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from
the street layout as shown on the map.



      (3)   The use of a temporary building in conjunction with
construction work only, which temporary building shall be removed promptly
upon completion of the construction work.



      (4)   The reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the
extent of more than seventy-five percent (75%) of its fair market value,
where the Board finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of
the nonconforming use and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming
use is not to continue a monopoly.



      (5)   Variation of the parking and loading regulations where
it is conclusively shown that the specific use of a building would make
unnecessary the parking and loading spaces otherwise required by this
ordinance.



      (6)   The classification of commercial or industrial uses not
specifically listed in the ordinance as to the appropriate district therefor
based on the general character of the use and its comparability with other
uses specifically permitted in the district.



   (C)   To authorize, after public hearing as required by law, a
variation in the strict application of the regulations with respect to the
specific lot where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
thereof or by reason of exceptional topography or other extraordinary or
exceptional situation or condition, strict application of any provision of
this ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties and clearly demonstrable hardship upon the owner of such
property, amounting to practical confiscation thereof, and not a mere
inconvenience to the owner; provided that any such variation shall be
authorized only to the extent that justice may be done and provided, further,
that the variation can be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without substantial impairment of the general purpose and intent of
the comprehensive plan as established by the regulations.



§ 3.  PROCEDURE.



   Petition to the Board for exceptions or variations or appeals, as
authorized in § 2 hereof, may be made by any person or by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the
Building Official.  The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be
prescribed by the Board by general rule, by filing with the Building Official
a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.  The Building Official
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record from
which the action appealed from is taken.  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall accompany all notices of appeals to be refunded if petition is granted.



   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Building Official certifies to the Board, after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that, by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property.  In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by
a court of record.



   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the petition
or appeal and give due notice of the time, place, and purpose thereof; such
notice shall include five (5) day written notice to the last known address of
the petitioner; and [the Board] shall decide the appeal within a reasonable
time.



ARTICLE XIX:  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY



§ 1.  WHEN REQUIRED.



   Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:



   (1)   Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or
structurally altered.



   (2)   Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different
classification.



   (3)   Occupancy and use of vacant land.



   (4)   Change in the use of land to a use of a different
classification.



   (5)   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.  No such
occupancy, use or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of
occupancy therefor shall have been issued by the Building Official.



§ 2.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR A BUILDING.



   Certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an
existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit and said certificate shall be issued within three (3) days
after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof shall have
been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Building Official for a period not exceeding
six (6) months, during the completion of alterations or during partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion.  Such temporary certificates
shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties,
or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy
of the premises or any other matter covered by this ordinance, and such
temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such restrictions and
provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants.



§ 3.  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY FOR LAND.



   Certificates of occupancy for the use of vacant land or the change in
the character of the use of land, as herein provided, shall be applied for
before any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued within three (3) days after the application has
been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations.



§ 4.  CONTENTS OF CERTIFICATE; CERTIFICATE PREREQUISITE TO EXCAVATION
PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed
use of a building or land complies with all the building and health laws and
ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations.  A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official and
copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building affected.



   No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before
application has been made for certificate of occupancy.



§ 5.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR NONCONFORMING USES.



   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful
nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this
ordinance.  Application of such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming
use shall be filed with the Building Official by the owner or lessee of the
building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one year after the
effective date of this ordinance.



§ 6.  FARM EXEMPTION.



   The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any farm
located outside of the corporate limits of the City of Paris.



ARTICLE XX:  PLANS AND STAKING



§ 1.  PLANS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS.



   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate
plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape
and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on
the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing and the lines
within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered,
the existing and intended use of each building or part of building, the
number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to
accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot and
neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this ordinance.  A careful record of the original copy of
such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the Building
Official and the duplicate copy shall be kept at the building at all times
during construction.



§ 2.  LOT TO BE STAKED OUT; PLAN DIMENSIONS TO BE BASED ON SURVEY.



   All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size
of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey and the lot
shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started.



ARTICLE XXI:  INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance they
shall be held to [be] the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general
welfare.  It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings or requires
larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules,
regulations or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this
ordinance shall govern.



ARTICLE XXII:  AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES



§ 1.  POWER OF CITY COUNCIL TO CHANGE ZONING ORDINANCES.



   The Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition,
amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the regulations and districts
herein or subsequently established, but no such amendments shall be made
without a public hearing before the City Plan Commission and its report to
the Council.  Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be
given as required by law.  In the case of written protest against any
proposed amendment, under the conditions specified in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§§ 11-11-1 et seq., the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council.



§ 2.  CONTENTS OF PETITION TO CHANGE ZONING ORDINANCE.



   All petitions praying for a change, amendment, or supplement of the
established zoning districts of the city and regulations connected therewith
shall be filed by the person requesting such action and such petition shall
contain the street address of the petitioner, the lot number of any real
estate owned by him adjacent to the area proposed to be changed and shall
also contain an accurate legal description of the district or parts of
districts proposed to be so altered.  Such petition shall also recite facts
indicating that the proposed change will not be detrimental to the general
public interest and the purposes of this ordinance and shall further disclose
the purpose for which such property is sought to be used.



§ 3.  FILING OF PETITION; COSTS.



   A petition for a change in the regulations or districts herein or
subsequently established shall be filed with the City Clerk in duplicate.  A
fee of one hundred dollars ($100) shall be paid at the time of filing to
cover the cost of publication of notice of hearing on said petition and other
costs incidental to such hearing.



(Am. Ord. 2004-73, passed 12-13-2004)



ARTICLE XXIII:  ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES



   It shall be the duty of the Building Official to enforce this
ordinance.  Said Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council in the same manner as other city employees are
appointed and subject to any general provisions affecting such employees.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than twenty- five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not to exceed one month, or both,
for each offense.  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the city, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, or use, to
restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about such premises.



ARTICLE XXIV:  VALIDITY



   Should any section, clause, or provision of this ordinance be declared
by a court to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or in part, other than the part so declared to be
invalid.



ARTICLE XXV:  WHEN EFFECTIVE



   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.



Editor’s note:



   This ordinance, Ord. 1968-29, was enacted July 8, 1968.



ARTICLE XXVI:  ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS



§ 1.  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   For the purpose of this article certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted or defined as follows:



   -   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



   -   The singular number includes the plural.



   -   The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual.



   -   The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel".



   -   The term "shall" is always mandatory.



   -   The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended", arranged or designed to
be used or occupied.



   (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate building, the use of which
is incidental to that of the main building, and which is located on the same
lot as the main building. A carport is considered an accessory building.



   (2)   ACCESSORY USE.  A subordinate use which is clearly and
customarily incident to the principal use of a building or premises and which
is located on the same lot as the principal building or use except for such
accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized to locate
elsewhere.



   (3)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its sales or stock in trade adult material; or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a
purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays,
actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, or exclusion
of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the
establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.



   (4)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET.  A public or private
establishment which (i) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers,
male or female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; or (ii)
features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or (iii)
features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in
a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of
the patron; or (iv) features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in
explicit simulation of, "specified sexual activities".



   (5)   ADULT MATERIAL.  Any of the following, whether new or used,
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" being, (i)
human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) acts of
human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; (iii) fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts:



      (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matters,
or digitally stored materials; or



      (b)   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes,
slides, computer displays or other visual representations or recordings of
any kind, for sale or viewing on the premises by use of motion picture
devices or by coin operated means; or



      (c)   Toys, devices, novelties, lotions, instruments, items or
paraphernalia; or



      (d)   Items that use the term "adult" or use the designation
of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX".



   (6)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or area used for
presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for viewing by patrons therein.



   (7)   ADULT NOVELTY STORE.  An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade adult
material, with 20% or more of its sales or stock in trade.



   (8)   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES INCLUDE.  Adult bookstores, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, adult novelty stores
and stores which sell a substantial or significant portion of it's sales or
stock in trade as adult material.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



§ 2.  STANDARDS FOR LOCATION OF ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   (1)   Any adult oriented business shall be designated as a special
use within M1 and M2 zoning areas.



   (2)   Such businesses may not be located within:



      (a)   2,000 feet of any property zoned for residential use.



      (b)   2,000 feet of any religious institution, public or
private school containing any grade K-12.



      (c)   2,000 feet of any city park.



      (d)   2,000 feet of any child care/daycare facility.



      (e)   2,000 feet of any other adult oriented business as
defined herein.



      (f)   2,000 feet from any other area where minor child may
congregate.



   (3)   The distances shall be measured by following a straight line
without regard to intervening buildings, structures or other obstacles from
the nearest point of the property upon which this proposed special use is to
be located to the nearest point of the property or land use boundary line
from which the proposed land use is to be separated.  The applicant shall
provide with his or her petition for special use a certified copy of
measurements by a land surveyor registered by the State of Illinois showing
the proposed land use is properly separated.



   (4)   All business except for off-street parking and off-street
loading shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



   (5)   Such adult oriented business must comply with all other zoning
requirements.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



§ 3.  NO LIQUOR LICENSE TO BE ISSUED.



   No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or
consumed on the premises of any adult use as established herein.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



§ 4.  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   Parking requirements for the aforementioned adult oriented businesses
are as follows:



   (1)   All parking must be sufficiently lighted to reveal the
interior of vehicles and must be located to the front and/or sides of the
establishment.



   (2)   Off-street parking must be provided with a minimum of five
spaces for customer parking and one parking space for each employee of the
largest working shift.



   (3)   No fencing or visual screening shall be installed to prevent
full use of the parking areas from the primary street of business.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



§ 5.  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (1)   Prior to doing business, all such adult oriented businesses
shall submit a site plan to the Planning Commission for their review under
the procedures established under the Paris Zoning Ordinance.



   (2)   In addition to the procedures already established under the
Paris Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Commission recommend and the City
Commissioners may place conditions on the development and operation of the
adult use related to a site plan, floor plan, construction materials,
lighting, additional parking, ingress and egress and signage, in order to
ensure that the design is compatible with surrounding uses and the operation
of the adult uses in conformation with all city ordinances.



   (3)   The application for a special use shall be developed by the
Planning Commission, but shall include the following information:



      (a)   The full name and address of the business.



      (b)   The full name, business address and home address of all
business owners and business managers.



      (c)   A telephone number at which the city can reach the
manager and/or owners during business hours of operation.



      (d)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to
seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of statements
set forth in the application.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



§ 6.  ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.



   (1)   It shall be a violation of this article for any business to
open without obtaining a special use permit for an M1 or M2 zoned district.



   (2)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, Public Health
Officer and Building Code Enforcement Department to enforce this article.



   (3)   The city or any designated enforcement official may institute
a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court to restrain an individual business
from violating this article.



   (4)   If the city is successful in its suit, the respondent shall
bear the cost of the action. A change of venue may not be granted in such
suit.



   (5)   Each day of non-compliance with the provisions of this article
shall constitute a separate and distinct ordinance violation.  Judgment up
to $2,500 per day may be entered for violation of any provision of this
article.



(Ord. 2006-29, passed 8-28-2006)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   EASEMENTS



   II.   STREET ADOPTIONS, IMPROVEMENTS, AND NAMING



   III.   VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS



   IV.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



   V.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



   VI.   ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS



   VII.   SUBDIVISIONS; PLAT APPROVAL



   VIII.   ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS, VARIANCES, AND SPECIAL USES



   IX.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



TABLE I:  EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1965-10
 
6-14-1965
 
Form of right-of-way grant to acquire water and sewer improvement easements


-
 
3-28-1966
 
Grants easement to Central Illinois Public Service Company for gas line


1967-5
 
2-27-1967
 
Grants easements to Central Illinois Public Service Company for electric
transmission line and gas pipeline leading to Clinton Road sewage disposal
plant


1969-25
 
6-9-1969
 
Grants easement to Paris Bible Church for installation of sanitary and storm
sewers


1978-40
 
12-11-1978
 
Acceptance, after 1 year or after James and Deborah Morecraft have no
interest in Clinton Corners Subdivision, of the sanitary sewer easements and
the improvements therein


1980-2
 
1-28-1980
 
Accepts dedication of Highland Court and permanent easement for storm sewers


1980-3
 
1-28-1980
 
Accepts dedication of right-of-way and sewer easements as filed in documents
9794, 4795, and 555 with the County Recorder


1980-20
 
4-28-1980
 
Annexation of part of Lot 1 of the Lilly Subdivision of part of Lot 2 in the
County Clerk’s Subdivision of the west half of the southeast quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.; also a
sewage easement over part of Lots 1 and 2 of the above Lilly Subdivision


1980-43
 
10-14-1980
 
Grants easement to Don and Katie’s Restaurant to encroach upon Boydston
Street as currently exists


1981-4
 
5-11-1981
 
Accepts dedication of Highland Drive and improvements and easements


1983-1
 
1-24-1983
 
Approves final plat of Wildwood Estates Subdivision and accepts improvements
with easement access


1983-23
 
7-25-1983
 
Vacation of construction easement on part of Lot 2 of the County Clerk’s
Subdivision of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 18, Township
13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1984-4A
 
3-12-1984
 
Acquisition of easements on part of Lot 1 of John C. Palmer’s plat of part
of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 35 and part of
the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14
North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., for sewer project


1988-16
 
6-13-1988
 
Authorizes right-of-way grant to Central Illinois Public Service Company


2011-13
 
8-22-2011
 
Authorizes the execution of a right-of-way grant to Ameren Illinois


2011-14
 
11-28-2011
 
Authorizes the execution of a right-of-way grant to Ameren Illinois


2012-3
 
2-13-2012
 
Authorizes the execution of an easement to Ameren Illinois


 
 




 



TABLE II:  STREET ADOPTIONS, IMPROVEMENTS, AND NAMING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1963-4
 
3-11-1963
 
Dedicates South Shore Drive


1963-6
 
4-29-1963
 
Approves improvement of Central Avenue


1968-6
 
3-25-1968
 
Provides for installation of sanitary sewer from property of Hospital and
Medical Foundation of Paris, Inc., to Wood Street


1968-43
 
11-11-1968
 
Conditional approval of sanitary sewer installation to Allen Payne Subdivision


1969-13
 
3-24-1969
 
Designates name of East Lake Drive


1969-38
 
8-11-1969
 
Agreement with Penn Central Company to reopen Elm Street railroad crossing


1970-4
 
1-26-1970
 
Approves city-state agreement to improve portions of Main Street, Central
Avenue, Elliott Street, and Monroe Street


1970-18
 
6-22-1970
 
Agreement to construct East Court Street from Eads Avenue to U.S. Route 150


1980-2
 
1-28-1980
 
Accepts dedication of Highland Court and permanent easement for storm sewers


1980-7A
 
3-24-1980
 
Agreement with State Department of Transportation for improvement of West
Jasper Street


1980-44
 
10-14-1980
 
Agreement with State Department of Transportation to assume cost of sidewalks
along West Jasper Street


1981-4
 
5-11-1981
 
Accepts dedication of Highland Drive and improvements and easements


1985-3
 
2-25-1985
 
Accepts dedication of street improvements and land for Magnolia Manor Drive


1985-7
 
5-13-1985
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 12 and 13 of Samuel Vance’s Addition;
dedication of replacement alley within Lot 12


1985-12
 
5-28-1985
 
Accepts jurisdiction over S.B.I. Route 1 (Marshall Street) from 0.02 miles
south of Cleveland Street south to Illinois Route 1, and Illinois Route 1
(Monroe Street) from Central Avenue east to Main Street


1999-6
 
2-22-1999
 
Adds Marshall Place to the municipal street system


2000-28
 
6-26-2000
 
Renames Marshall Place as South Marshall Street


2000-33
 
7-24-2000
 
Renames East 1100th Road between Cherry Point Road and 1350th Street, to
Prairies Edge Road


2010-1
 
2-22-2010
 
Maple Avenue/Prairie Street/Andrew Street from 264 feet west of West End
Avenue easterly to Prairie Street then southeast to Andrew Street then
easterly to Main Street in its entirety is added to the municipal street
system


2010-2
 
2-22-2010
 
Madison Street form Grandview Street easterly to Main Street in its entirely
is added to the municipal street system


2010-17
 
9-13-2010
 
The thoroughfare beginning on the east side of Route 1 and extending along
the north shore of East Lake is designated as Lakeside Terrace Drive


2017-10
 
9-25-2017
 
Renames South Marshall Street, between Main Street and Marshall, as Phipps
Lane


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1964-6
 
7-27-1964
 
Vacation of alley along east boundary lines of Lots 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,
44, and 45 of Kenwood Addition


1964-7
 
7-27-1964
 
Vacation of alley in Minear’s Addition, from High Street to east boundary
of the Addition, along Lots 7 and 8


1965-15
 
9-27-1965
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 40 - 43 and Lots 60 - 64 in the Lamon, Jones,
and Ross Addition


1967-4
 
3-6-1967
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 9 - 14 and Lots 1 - 6 of John A. Dill’s
Addition


1971-3
 
2-22-1971
 
Vacation of alley between Court Street and Washington Street, from the east
line of Lot 44 to the west line of Lot 43, Original Town


1971-35
 
11-22-1971
 
Vacation of remaining portion of Newton Street


1972-10
 
10-10-1972
 
Vacation of alley from Austin Street to Boydston Street, between Lots 57 - 62
and Lots 63 - 68 in Jacob H. Taflinger’s First Addition


1973-5
 
4-9-1973
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 19 and 20 and Lots 1 and 2 in O.S. Jones’
Third Addition


1976-1
 
1-26-1976
 
Vacation of southernmost portion of Wabash Street, south of Lincoln Street,
and adjacent property


1977-5
 
4-11-1977
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 74 and 79 and Lots 80 and 79 in Lamon, Jones,
and Ross’ Addition


1977-38
 
11-28-1977
 
Vacation of alley between Lot 123 in Kenwood Addition and part of Outlot 175


1977-40
 
12-27-1977
 
Vacation of alley in Lot 31 in Austin and Boydston’s Addition


1978-30
 
10-10-1978
 
Vacation of the east-west alley east of Marshall Street, between Lots 10 and
11 in W.S. O’Hair’s First Addition


1979-13
 
6-25-1979
 
Vacation of east-west alley along Lots 1, 20, 21, 74, and 75 in the Kenwood
Addition


1983-3
 
3-14-1983
 
Vacation of alley between Jasper and Augustus Streets from Alexander Street
to Penndel Company railroad track, and of Augustus Street east from the east
line of Alexander Street and west of the Penndel Company railroad track


1984-16
 
7-9-1984
 
Vacation of north-south alley adjacent to the east line of Kenwood Addition,
extending from the north line of Newton Street to the north line of the
Addition


1985-7
 
5-13-1985
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 12 and 13 of Samuel Vance’s Addition;
dedication of replacement alley within Lot 12


1985-18
 
7-22-1985
 
Vacation of alley along Lot 682 and Lots 674 - 681 of the Commercial Club
Addition, retaining easement rights


1987-13
 
7-27-1987
 
Vacation of alley between the west half of Outlot 249 and Lots 4 and 5 in the
Westview Addition


1987-17
 
9-28-1987
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 51 and 52, Original Town, Outlots 131, 132,
and part of 133, on the north, and on the south, Lots 54 and 53, Original
Town and Lot 31 and part of Lot 30 of W.A. Alexander’s Addition; reserving
existing easements and easement for access


1988-32
 
11-14-1988
 
Vacation of north-south alley between Lots 22 - 24 and Lots 43 - 45 in the
Commercial Club Addition, from Arthur Street to Hayes Street


1989-20
 
9-11-1989
 
Vacation of north-south alley between Lots 10 and 11 and Lots 9 and 12,
Jonathon C. Mayo First Addition, from Wood Street to Court Street


1990-2
 
1-22-1990
 
Vacation of alley west of Lots 13 - 15 and east of Lot 12 in Owen S. Jones’
Third Addition, north from Parrish Street to the alley on the north


1992-1
 
1-13-1992
 
Vacation of part of Ten Broeck Street north of the old Consolidated Rail
Corporation property, south of Outlot 255, west of Outlots 47 and 48, and
east of Outlot 49, in O.S. Jones’ Sixth Addition


1992-7
 
4-14-1992
 
Vacation of east-west alley from Lots 23 and 26 to Lots 13 and 14, between
Lots 13, 20, 21, 22, and 23, and Lots 14, 26, 27, 28, and 29, all of O.S.
Jones’ Fourth Addition


1992-16
 
6-8-1992
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 16 and 17 of Connelly’s Addition, bordered
by Connelly Street and Outlot 60


1992-18
 
7-13-1992
 
Vacation of a 10-foot alley south from Broom Street and a 12-foot east-west
alley


1995-15
 
6-12-1995
 
Vacation of north-south alley from Parrish Street to Lot 1 in A.B.
Brunsman’s Subdivision of Lots 1 - 7 of William Mays’ Addition, subject
to existing easements


1995-16
 
6-12-1995
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 77 - 82 and Lots 96 - 101 of Jacob H.
Taflinger’s First Addition


1995-20
 
8-28-1995
 
Vacation of north-south alley between Hayes and Cleveland Streets, between
Lots 28 - 33 and Lots 34 - 39, Commercial Club Addition, subject to utility
easements


1996-35
 
9-24-1996
 
Vacation of alley on the north side of Lot 76 in William B. Vance’s Fourth
Addition, subject to existing utility easements


1997-8
 
3-10-1997
 
Vacation of alley between 111 and 113 West Wood Street, subject to existing
utility easements


1997-13
 
5-12-1997
 
Vacation of alley between Driskell Avenue and Kenton Street between Lots 9
and 16 in the H.L O’Betz Addition and Lot 1 in the Robert G. Adams
Subdivision and Lot 13 in Outlot 163, subject to existing utility easements


1999-44
 
11-29-1999
 
Vacation of alley in Lot 12 of Samuel Vance’s Addition, subject to utility
easements


2000-30
 
8-14-2000
 
Vacation of alley between Lots 227 and 240 in the Commercial Club Addition,
from Hunter Street to the east lines of the named lots


2001-7
 
4-9-2001
 
Vacation of portion of Tobias Street west of the east line of Lot 70 and Lot
29 of the Tobias Subdivision


2003-17
 
8-11-2003
 
Vacation of alley between Jasper Street and Newton Street, between Lots 112 -
118 and Lots 129 - 135 of the Kenwood Addition, subject to existing utility
easements


2003-18
 
8-11-2003
 
Vacation of alley between 116 and 124 East Madison Street, subject to
existing utility easements


2005-41
 
10-11-2005
 
Vacation of a portion of Mayes Street west of West End Avenue


2008-23
 
8-11-2008
 
Vacation of an alley 13 feet in width along the east side of Lot 78 and Lot
79 of Lamon, Jones and Ross’ Addition


2009-10
 
6-22-2009
 
Vacation of and alley beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 47 of Samuel
Utter’s Addition and the north right-of-way of Jasper Street, also known as
U.S. Route 150, also being the west right-of-way of said alley


2015-16
 
10-26-2015
 
Vacation of alley between 216 Chestnut Street and 218 Chestnut Street


2017-18
 
11-27-2017
 
Vacation of alley east of Main Street and north of 210 North Main Street, and
south of 218 North Main Street, from Main Street to the east line of said
property


2018-2
 
1-8-2018
 
Vacation of alley east of Main Street and north of 210 North Main Street, and
south of 218 North Main Street, from Main Street to the east line of said
property


2018-13
 
8-13-2018
 
Vacation of alley running south from Mayes Street to Kimble Street on the
block east of West End Avenue and west of Austin Street


 
 
 
 
Vacation of alley running east and west between Hockett Street on the east
and Buena Vista Street on the west, located on the block south of Blackburn
Street and north of Ann Street


 
 
 
 
Vacation of alley running east and west between Buena Vista Street on the
east and Water Street on the west, located on the block south of Blackburn
Street and north of Ann Street


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1965-14
 
8-9-1965
 
Grants television and FM radio franchise to Adlai C. Ferguson, Jr. for 20
years, renewable for 10 years


1967-11
 
6-12-1967
 
Grants telephone franchise to General Telephone Company of Illinois for 50
years, extendable


1972-5
 
6-26-1972
 
Grants electric franchise to Edgar Electric Cooperative Association for 35
years


1982-18
 
6-16-1982
 
Extends cable television franchise of Cardinal Telecable Corporation for 30
days


1982-20
 
7-12-1982
 
Cable Television Franchise Ordinance


1992-32
 
9-28-1992
 
Cable Communications Enabling Ordinance


1997-21
 
6-9-1997
 
Amendment to Ord. 1992-32, Cable Communications Enabling Ordinance


2010-15
 
8-23-2010
 
Renewing franchise to operate a gas utility system with AmerenCIPS


2010-16
 
8-23-2010
 
Renewing franchise to operate an electric utility system with AmerenCIPS


2017-9
 
8-14-2017
 
Granting franchise to operate an electric utility system to Enerstar Power
Corp. for 50 years


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1964-8-A
 
9-28-1964
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electricity for municipal pumping


1965-1
 
1-25-1965
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electric street lighting


1965-18
 
12-27-1965
 
Authorizes contract with Universal Tank and Iron Works, Inc., for elevated
water storage tank construction


1965-19
 
1-3-1966
 
Awards construction contracts for sewage interceptors and treatment plant
improvements


1966-1
 
2-14-1966
 
Animal shelter expense-sharing agreement with county


1966-7
 
7-25-1966
 
Form of contract for refuse collection and disposal


1966-10
 
8-29-1966
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electricity for municipal pumping


1966-10A
 
8-29-1966
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electricity for municipal pumping


1966-13
 
10-24-1966
 
Authorizes acquisition and construction of parking facilities


1967-3
 
1-23-1967
 
Purchase of Sublots 1 and 3 of Lots 5 and 6 of the Original Town, for
off-street parking


1967-8
 
5-22-1967
 
Garbage collection contract with Robert L. Callaway, through 4-30-1971


1967-10
 
5-22-1967
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electric street lighting


1967-17
 
8-21-1967
 
Approves lease of animal shelter site to county


1968-7
 
4-1-1968
 
Contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1968-30
 
7-8-1968
 
Purchase of Lot 37 of the Original Town


1968-31
 
7-29-1968
 
Awards contract to improve Lot 38 of Original Town for parking purposes


1968-36
 
9-9-1968
 
Form of lease for lots in the Waterworks Plat


1969-16
 
5-5-1969
 
Authorizes agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for
electric street lighting


1969-34
 
8-11-1969
 
Accepts proposal of D & J Construction to assume liability as a result of its
contract with the city


1969-36
 
8-11-1969
 
Sale of old fire station to John M. Jewell


1969-45
 
10-6-1969
 
Purchase of part of Lots 28 and 27 in the Original Town, for parking lot space


1969-48
 
10-13-1969
 
Agreement to pay 1/2 the 1969 real estate taxes on the Coady Lot on East
Court Street


1969-53
 
11-5-1969
 
Awards contract to improve parts of Lots 27 and 28, Original Town, for parking


1969-54
 
11-10-1969
 
Agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for electrical energy
for water pumping


1969-59
 
12-16-1969
 
Purchase of land for garbage disposal


1970-2
 
1-26-1970
 
Awards modified contract to the Stephens Construction Company to remodel city
building


1970-4
 
1-26-1970
 
Approves city-state agreement to improve portions of Main Street, Central
Avenue, Elliott Street, and Monroe Street


1970-9
 
4-13-1970
 
Approves contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1970-18
 
6-22-1970
 
Agreement to construct East Court Street from Eads Avenue to U.S. Route 150


1970-30
 
12-14-1970
 
Ambulance service contract with Hospital and Medical Foundation


1970-31
 
12-14-1970
 
County-city ambulance service contract


1971-5
 
2-25-1971
 
Awards contract to Frank Wallace to repair city building


1971-6
 
3-29-1971
 
Garbage collection contract with Robert L. Callaway, through 4-30-1975


1971-18
 
6-28-1971
 
Approves contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1972-2
 
2-28-1972
 
Authorizes lease of parking lot from Citizens National Bank


1972-13
 
11-13-1972
 
Lease agreement with the State Department of Public Health, for 2-way radio
for ambulance


1975-7
 
5-12-1975
 
Garbage collection contract with Robert L. Callaway, through 4-30-1979


1979-20
 
8-27-1979
 
Approves contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1979-28
 
9-24-1979
 
Agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for street lighting
service


1979-29
 
9-24-1979
 
Contract with International Systems, Inc., to obtain federal grant monies


1979-36
 
11-26-1979
 
Agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for electricity for
municipal pumping


1979-37
 
12-26-1979
 
Approves membership in Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association


1980-1
 
1-28-1980
 
Approves garbage collection contract with Paris Waste Disposal, Inc.


1980-4
 
2-11-1980
 
Lease of real estate to Francis Black, for 3 years


1980-7A
 
3-24-1980
 
Agreement with State Department of Transportation for improvement of West
Jasper Street


1980-11
 
4-14-1980
 
Rescinds a lease with County Fair Association


1980-14
 
4-14-1980
 
Clarifies lease with James and Marie Pope, concerning Twin Lakes Park


1980-15
 
4-28-1980
 
Lease of pasture to William L. Milbourn


1980-27
 
5-27-1980
 
Rescinds approval of membership in Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
Association


1980-29
 
7-14-1980
 
Contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1980-28
 
6-23-1980
 
Agreement with State Department of Transportation for maintenance of traffic
signals


1980-32
 
7-14-1980
 
Mutual aid pact between Police Department and County Sheriff’s Department


1980-44
 
10-14-1980
 
Agreement with State Department of Transportation to assume cost of sidewalks
along West Jasper Street


1981-7A
 
6-22-1981
 
Contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1981-15
 
8-27-1981
 
Contract with Dale Francis & Assoc. for design of city’s EPA sewer project,
step 2


1982-14
 
6-14-1982
 
Contract with Paris Community Fire Protection District


1982-24
 
7-12-1982
 
Approves membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
Association


1983-7
 
5-24-1983
 
Approves agreement with Central Illinois Public Service Company for street
and traffic lighting service


1983-32
 
11-28-1983
 
Garbage collection contract with Frank Felgenhauer


1984-3
 
2-14-1984
 
Authorizes Central Illinois Public Service Company Customer Pole Use Agreement


1985-31
 
12-20-1985
 
Authorizes Central Illinois Public Service Company Customer Pole Use Agreement


1987-1
 
1-12-1987
 
Contract with Paris Waste Disposal for wet garbage disposal


2004-5
 
2-23-2004
 
Authorizes the Mutual Aid Box Alarm System agreement


2004-61
 
12-13-2004
 
City owned real estate for sale at 911 Vance and 101 Rozelle


2013-10
 
8-12-2013
 
Approving local agency agreement for jurisdictional transfer


2013-11
 
8-12-2013
 
Approving local agency agreement for jurisdictional transfer


2013-12
 
8-12-2013
 
Approving local agency agreement for jurisdictional transfer


2013-18
 
11-12-2013
 
Approving local agency agreement for jurisdictional transfer


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  ANNEXATIONS AND DETACHMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1964-1
 
1-27-1964
 
Annexation of part of the south half of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 25 in Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M., and the west 2.5 acres of the south 10 acres of the east half of
the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M.


1965-13
 
8-9-1965
 
Annexation of part of Lot 682 in the Commercial Club Addition


1966-15
 
- -
 
Annexation of Lots 12, 13, and 14 in the Ernest A. Mann Subdivision


1967-1
 
1-23-1967
 
Annexation of Lots 1, 2, and 3 of a survey made 12-21-1915 by C.P. Lyan and
recorded in Plat Book 2, p. 467, of the county


1968-1
 
1-22-1968
 
Annexation of Fairway Acres Subdivision


1969-43
 
9-9-1969
 
Annexation of Lot 2 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the east half of
Lot 2 of the northeast quarter of Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West
of the second P.M., and Lot 4 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the
southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 31, Township 14 North,
Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1971-11
 
5-3-1971
 
Annexation of Hospital and Medical Foundation of Paris, Inc., land in the
east half of the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11
West of the second P.M.


1971-12
 
5-10-1971
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the northeast quarter and part of the
east half of the northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12
West of the second P.M.


1971-22
 
7-26-1971
 
Annexation of 3 tracts in the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1971-25
 
8-23-1971
 
Annexation of part of Lots 1 - 4 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 31 and a part of the
northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 13 North,
Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1973-10
 
5-14-1973
 
Annexation of part of the west half, east half, northeast quarter, of Section
12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1974-1
 
4-8-1974
 
Annexation of the south half of Lots 47 and 48 in Edgewood Subdivision


1974-3
 
8-12-1974
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the northwest quarter, and part of the
southeast quarter of the northeast quarter, of Section 31, Township 14 North,
Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1974-6
 
9-23-1974
 
Annexation of part of the east half, east half, Northeast quarter, of Section
12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1974-15
 
11-12-1974
 
Annexation of tracts in Sections 24 and 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West,
and in Sections 19, 30, and 31, Township 14 North, Range 11 West, of the
second P.M.


1975-28
 
11-24-1975
 
Detachment of part of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of Section 26, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.,
north and east of Cherry Point Road


1976-28
 
10-25-1976
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 25,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1977-30
 
9-26-1977
 
Annexation of Lot 17 and part of Lot 18 of Lakeview Estates Subdivision as
recorded in Plat Book 4, pp. 182 and 183, of the county


1977-32
 
10-10-1977
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 7, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1977-33
 
10-24-1977
 
Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 13 North,
Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1977-41
 
1-9-1978
 
Annexation of Lots 5, 8, 9, and part of Lot 4, of the County Clerk’s
Subdivision of the southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 14 North, Range
12 West of the second P.M.


1978-8
 
5-8-1978
 
Annexation of part of Lot 12 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the west
half, northeast quarter, and the east half, northwest quarter, Section 6,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1978-17
 
7-10-1978
 
Annexation of Sycamore Hills Subdivision


1978-19
 
7-10-1978
 
Annexation of Clifton Corners Subdivision


1978-22
 
7-24-1978
 
Annexation of 715 East Blackburn Street, to be zoned R-2


1979-8
 
4-23-1979
 
Annexation of 600 block of West Jasper Street


1979-15
 
7-9-1979
 
Annexation of Lot 1 of the Richard Eads Subdivision 3


1979-26
 
8-27-1979
 
Annexation of a tract in Lot 7 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the
east half of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12
West of the second P.M.


1980-20
 
4-28-1980
 
Annexation of part of Lot 1 of the Lilly Subdivision of part of Lot 2 in the
County Clerk’s Subdivision of the west half of the southeast quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.; also a
sewage easement over part of Lots 1 and 2 of the above Lilly Subdivision


1980-31
 
7-28-1980
 
Detachment of Lot 17 and part of Lot 18 of Lakeview Estates Subdivision


1981-10
 
9-14-1981
 
Annexation of part of Lot 204 in W.S. O’Hair’s Addition, to continue to
be zoned M-2


1981-14
 
8-24-1981
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter, northwest quarter, Section 7,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1982-3
 
4-12-1982
 
Annexation of part of Lot 682 in the Commercial Club Addition, to remain
zoned M-2


1983-17
 
6-27-1983
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the northeast quarter  of Section 36,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., to remain zoned C-2


1984-7
 
4-9-1984
 
Annexation of Lots 10 - 14 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the
southwest quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M., and adjacent part of Steidl Road and of public road east thereof


1984-8
 
4-23-1984
 
Annexation of Liggett’s Subdivision of part of the west half of the
southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M., and additional tracts


1984-9
 
4-23-1984
 
Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1984-20
 
8-13-1984
 
Annexation of Lot 16 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the southwest
quarter of Section 25, and part of the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of Section 25, all in Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second
P.M.


1984-22
 
9-10-1984
 
Annexation of part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M., and adjacent part of Steidl Road


1984-23
 
9-24-1984
 
Annexation of the south half of the south half, and the south half of the
north half, and the north half of the south half, all of the southwest
quarter of the southeast quarter, Section 2, Township 13 North, Range 12 West
of the second P.M.


1984-24
 
10-9-1984
 
Annexation of a tract in the northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14
North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1985-5
 
4-8-1985
 
Annexation of Lots 17 and 18 in Block 7 of A.B. Henry’s Addition


1985-29
 
10-29-1985
 
Annexation of tracts in the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1987-5
 
3-23-1987
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 12,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., and adjacent part of
Illinois Route 1


1987-11
 
7-14-1987
 
Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 12 and part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 13, all in Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., to
remain zoned C-2 and M-2


1988-1
 
2-8-1988
 
Annexation of 108 South Eads Avenue


1988-5
 
3-14-1988
 
Annexation of R.R. 1, Box 192


1988-6
 
3-14-1988
 
Annexation of part of the south half of Section 6, and the north half of the
northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 13 North,
Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1988-7
 
3-14-1988
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1988-11
 
4-25-1988
 
Annexation of R.R. 6, Box 94


1988-17
 
6-13-1988
 
Annexation of 707 West End Avenue


1988-18
 
6-13-1988
 
Annexation of 705 West End Avenue, 801 Maple Avenue, and 803 Maple Avenue


1988-33
 
11-14-1988
 
Annexation of 1014 North Main Street


1989-3
 
2-13-1989
 
Annexation of R.R. 1, Box 225 - North High Street


1989-13
 
5-22-1989
 
Annexation of R.R. 6, Box 321, subject to easements


1992-2
 
1-27-1992
 
Annexation of part of Lot 18 in the Tobias Subdivision, and parts of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North,
Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1992-15
 
5-26-1992
 
Annexation of tract to be known as Hill Crest Subdivision


1992-19
 
7-13-1992
 
Annexation of part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M.


1992-20
 
7-13-1992
 
Annexation of part of Lot 7 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the east
half of the southeast quarter of Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West
of the second P.M.


1992-21
 
7-13-1992
 
Lot 15 and part of Lot 11 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the east
half of the northwest quarter and the west half of the northeast quarter of
Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1992-22
 
7-13-1992
 
Annexation of Sublot 1 of surveyed Lot 10, part of Lots 12 and 13, and Lot 14
of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the east half, northwest quarter and
the west half, northeast quarter, Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West
of the second P.M.


1992-23
 
7-13-1992
 
Annexation of Lots 1 - 6 in Block 11 of A.B. Henry’s Addition


1992-24
 
7-13-1992
 
Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1992-26
 
7-27-1992
 
Annexation of part of the north half of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section  25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M.


1992-34
 
11-9-1992
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the west half of the northeast
quarter, and part of the northwest quarter, of Section 13, Township 13 North,
Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-16
 
7-12-1993
 
Annexation of part of the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 25,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-23
 
10-11-1993
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-24
 
10-11-1993
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 26,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-25
 
10-11-1993
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-29
 
10-25-1993
 
Annexation of part of the south half, northwest quarter, southeast quarter,
and the south half, northeast quarter, southeast quarter of Section 12,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1993-30
 
11-8-1993
 
Annexation of part of Lot 4 of Tucker’s Subdivision of part of Lots 4 and 6
in the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 25,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1994-3
 
1-24-1994
 
Annexation of part of Lot 12 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the west
half of the northeast quarter and the east half of the northwest quarter of
Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1994-4
 
1-24-1994
 
Annexation of Lots 40 - 42 of Edgewood Subdivision


1994-5
 
2-28-1994
 
Annexation of Lots 1 - 6 in Lakeside Terrace Subdivision, and part of the
north half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 25,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1994-6
 
2-28-1994
 
Annexation of Lot 1 and part of Lot 2, Davis Subdivision, subject to a
10-foot easement


1994-8
 
3-28-1994
 
Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of Section 26, Township 14 North,
Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1994-23
 
8-22-1994
 
Annexation of tracts in the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 2,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1994-30
 
9-12-1994
 
Annexation of Lot 4 in Foley’s Second Subdivision


1995-4
 
2-27-1995
 
Annexation of 10 Red Bud Lane


1995-5
 
2-27-1995
 
Annexation of 502 Grandview Street


1995-18
 
7-10-1995
 
Annexation of Lot 4 in Julia and Carl Lund’s Water Edge Subdivision


1995-23
 
9-25-1995
 
Annexation of Lots 1 - 4 in Block 1 in A.B. Henry’s Addition


1995-24
 
10-9-1995
 
Annexation of Lot 3 of Henry and William F. Hamilton’s Subdivision


1995-25
 
10-9-1995
 
Annexation of 1301 South Jefferson Street


1995-31
 
11-27-1995
 
Annexation of certain territory


1996-2
 
1-22-1996
 
Annexation of 715 West End Avenue


1996-3
 
2-26-1996
 
Annexation of 910 Browning Street


1996-4
 
2-26-1996
 
Annexation of 620 Browning Street


1996-5
 
3-11-1996
 
Annexation of 805 North Austin Street


1996-9
 
4-22-1996
 
Annexation of 209 Kauffman


1996-12
 
5-28-1996
 
Annexation of R.R. 6


1996-13
 
5-28-1996
 
Annexation of 207 Roosevelt


1996-14
 
5-28-1996
 
Annexation of 205 Roosevelt


1996-18
 
6-10-1996
 
Annexation of 109 North Shore Drive


1996-19
 
6-10-1996
 
Annexation of 135 North Shore Drive


1996-24
 
7-22-1996
 
Annexation of R.R. 6


1996-26
 
8-12-1996
 
Annexation of 111 North Shore Drive


1996-29
 
9-9-1996
 
Annexation of 117 North Shore Drive


1996-30
 
9-9-1996
 
Annexation of 115 North Shore Drive


1996-31
 
9-9-1996
 
Annexation of 113 North Shore Drive


1996-40
 
11-12-1996
 
Annexation of 129 North Shore Drive


1996-41
 
11-25-1996
 
Annexation of 1212 East Wood Street


1997-3
 
1-27-1997
 
Annexation of 134 North Shore Drive


1997-4
 
1-27-1997
 
Annexation of 136 North Shore Drive


1997-5
 
2-10-1997
 
Annexation of 1230 East Wood Street


1997-11
 
4-14-1997
 
Annexation of 500 West Jasper Street


1997-23
 
8-25-1997
 
Annexation of 1248 Tucker Beach Road


1997-24
 
8-25-1997
 
Annexation of 1234 Tucker Beach Road


1997-25
 
8-25-1997
 
Annexation of 1242 Tucker Beach Road


1997-26
 
8-25-1997
 
Annexation of 1241 Tucker Beach Road


1997-27
 
8-25-1997
 
Annexation of 1230 Tucker Beach Road


1997-29
 
9-8-1997
 
Annexation of 5 Woodmere


1997-30
 
9-8-1997
 
Annexation of 1238 Tucker Beach Road


1997-37
 
9-22-1997
 
Annexation of 1205 and 1210 Tucker Beach Road and 147 and other parcels on
West Steidl Road


1997-38
 
9-22-1997
 
Annexation of 145 West Steidl Road


1997-39
 
10-13-1997
 
Annexation of R.R. 6, Box 87, or 120 Blue Heron Road


1997-43
 
10-27-1997
 
Annexation of 155 West Steidl Road


1997-45
 
11-10-1997
 
Annexation of 1202 Tucker Beach Road


1997-46
 
11-24-1997
 
Annexation of 1206 Tucker Beach Road


1997-47
 
12-16-1997
 
Annexation of 1222 Tucker Beach Road


1998-3
 
4-13-1998
 
Annexation of part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 7, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1998-6
 
5-11-1998
 
Annexation of 1510 - 1604 Marshall Street


1998-13
 
7-27-1998
 
Annexation of 144 West Steidl Road


1998-17
 
9-9-1998
 
Annexation of 11771 1500th Street


1998-28
 
10-26-1998
 
Annexation of 1236 Tucker Beach Road


1998-32
 
12-15-1998
 
Annexation of 624 North Austin Street


1999-5
 
2-8-1999
 
Annexation of 2120 South Main Street


1999-8
 
3-15-1999
 
Annexation of 11420 Redbud Lane


1999-18
 
6-14-1999
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 32,
Township 14 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1999-21
 
6-14-1999
 
Annexation of part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1999-30
 
9-13-1999
 
Annexation of 15197 U.S. Hwy 150


1999-35
 
10-11-1999
 
Annexation of 704 East Court Street


2000-4
 
2-14-2000
 
Annexation of part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 7,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


2000-8
 
3-13-2000
 
Annexation of 702 East Court Street


2000-11
 
4-10-2000
 
Annexation of 809 West End Avenue


2000-18
 
5-8-2000
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 36,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., on North High Street


2000-20
 
5-22-2000
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 36,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., on North High Street


2000-27
 
6-26-2000
 
Annexation of 9462 North 1650th Street


2000-31
 
7-24-2000
 
Annexation of part of 09-13-26-400-027


2000-41
 
9-11-2000
 
Annexation of 809 North Austin Street


2000-46
 
10-20-2000
 
Annexation of 706 and 708 North Austin Street


2000-47
 
11-13-2000
 
Annexation of 16476 East 950th Road


2001-2
 
1-22-2001
 
Annexation of 11597 IL Hwy 1


2001-22
 
10-22-2001
 
Annexation of part of Section 12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M.


2001-27
 
12-17-2001
 
Annexation of parcels in the west half of the northeast quarter and the
northwest of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


2001-28
 
12-17-2001
 
Annexation of Lots 205 and 206 and part of Lot 204 in W.S. O’Hair’s
Addition, and part of the north half of the northwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the
second P.M.


2002-1
 
1-14-2002
 
Annexation of 1103 North Main Street and another parcel on North Main Street


2002-18
 
6-24-2002
 
Annexation of 1115 North Main Street


2002-25
 
8-12-2002
 
Annexation of part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 31, Township 14 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


2002-26
 
8-26-2002
 
Amends annexation by Ord. 2001-27, to annex an erroneously omitted parcel


2002-29
 
10-14-2002
 
Annexation of Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Block 4 of A.B. Henry’s Addition, located
in the 700 block of West End Avenue


2002-30
 
11-12-2002
 
Annexation of Lots 1 - 28 in the Edward Levings Addition, commonly known as
part of Sunset Park


2002-31
 
11-12-2002
 
Annexation of 811 Andrew Street


2002-36A
 
12-16-2002
 
Annexation of 9 Redbud Lane


2003-6
 
4-14-2003
 
Annexation of Lot 3 of Moore’s Subdivision, located on Cherry Point Street


2003-38
 
12-15-2003
 
Annexation of Lot No. 1 of Blackhawk Subdivision of a part of the southeast
quarter of Section 26, Township 14 North, Range 12 West


2004-4
 
2-23-2004
 
Annexation of all that part of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter
of Section 11, Township 13 North, Range 12 West that lies east of the
easterly right of way line of the Penn. Central Railroad and the northerly
right of way line of the railroad spur constructed by the Illinois Department
of Transportation and known as Section 81- R-5-P2 Job Number R 95-032-81


2004-39
 
9-13-2004
 
Annexation of a part of the east half of the east half of Section 6, Township
13 North, Range 11 West of the 2nd P.M., commonly known as 8 Country Club Road


2005-6
 
2-14-2005
 
Annexation of 6 Country Club Road


2005-31
 
8-8-2005
 
Annexation of 4 Country Club Road


2005-33
 
8-8-2005
 
Annexation of 10 Country Club Road


2005-43
 
11-14-2005
 
Annexation of 134 North Side Drive


2006-14
 
3-30-2006
 
Annexation of parcels of land described in exhibits attached to Ord. 2006-14


2006-40
 
12-18-2006
 
Annexation of parcels of land described in exhibits attached to Ord. 2006-40


2007-2
 
3-26-2007
 
Ratify, reaffirm and confirm Ord. 2006-40 annexations


2007-6
 
6-11-2007
 
Annexation of 1119 North Main


2007-15A
 
10-9-2007
 
Annexation of 20 Woodmere Drive


2008-1
 
1-14-2008
 
Annexation of the south 5 acres of the north 9.45 acres of that part of the
northwest quarter of Section 7, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the
second  P.M. that lies west of the middle of the Paris and Terre Haute Wagon
Road


2008-4
 
2-11-2008
 
Annexation of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 31,
Township 14 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


2008-5
 
2-25-2008
 
Annexation of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township
14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


2008-6
 
2-25-2008
 
Annexation of Lot 11 of Wildwood Estates of part of the east half of the west
half of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 14 North and Range 11
West of the second P.M., as shown by plat of said subdivision in Plat Book 6


2008-7
 
2-25-2008
 
Annexation of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 31,
Township 14 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M.


2008-11
 
4-14-2008
 
Annexation of part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 6 and
of the south half of Fractional Section 5, West of the Indian Boundary Line,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., described as beginning
at iron pin in the east line of Laurel Lane in Richard Eads’ Subdivision,
as shown in plat thereof in Plat Book 3.


2008-20
 
7-28-2008
 
Annexation of 11905 North 1500th Street


2009-16
 
8-10-2009
 
Annexation of 805 West End Avenue


2009-17
 
8-10-2009
 
Annexation of 4.45 acre tract that lies west of the Paris and Terre Haute
Wagon Road (Lower Terre Haute Road)


2009-21
 
10-26-2009
 
Annexation of 828 Clinton Road


2009-22
 
11-9-2009
 
Annexation of #4 Laurel Lane


2010-13
 
7-12-2010
 
Annexation of 16865 US Highway 150


2011-1
 
1-10-2011
 
Annexation of 812 West End Avenue


2011-3
 
3-14-2011
 
Annexation of part of 16865 US Highway 150


2011-4
 
3-28-2011
 
Annexation of 802 North Austin; 801 and 803 North Austin; 802 West End
Avenue; 804 West End Avenue; 808 West End Avenue; 800 block of West End
Avenue; 803 West End Avenue; 801 West End Avenue; 807 West End Avenue; 725
West End Avenue; 729 West End Avenue; 700 block of West End Avenue; 815
Kimble Street; 700 block of Austin Street; 711 Austin Street; 709 North
Austin; 707 North Austin; 817 Kimble Street; 728 West End Avenue; 701 Austin
Street; 700 block of West End Avenue; 710 and 712 North Austin


2011-15
 
11-28-2011
 
Annexation of land outside the city limits known as the “Paris Dredge Pit”


2012-7
 
4-23-2012
 
Annexation of a small parcel of land in the “Paris Dredge Pit” that was
not annexed previously


2012-8
 
4-23-2012
 
Annexation of the south 878.90 feet of even width of the West 1024.24 feet of
the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 24, Township 14 North,
Range 12 West of the Second Principal Meridian, Edgar County, Illinois,
subject to a right-of-way over the West 2 rods thereof


2012-10
 
5-29-2012
 
Annexation of the former Ed Jenison Work Camp property


2012-15
 
7-9-2012
 
Annexation of 707 North Austin


2013-17
 
10-28-2013
 
Annexation of 619-625 Browning Avenue


2014-7
 
6-9-2014
 
Annexation of 1235 Hietts Lane


2014-13
 
10-14-2014
 
Annexation of 1235 Hietts Lane


2015-10
 
8-24-2015
 
Annexation of property in 1100 block of East Wood Street


2016-7
 
4-25-2016
 
Annexation of property lying west of the west right-of-way of Hawkeye Drive


2017-11
 
10-23-2017
 
Annexation of 11467 Blackhawk Drive


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VII:  SUBDIVISIONS; PLAT APPROVAL



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1968-52
 
12-30-1968
 
Final plat approval of James Findley’s Subdivision of Outlot 3 and part of
Outlot 4


1969-29
 
6-16-1969
 
Approval of Morecraft’s subdivision


1970-3
 
1-19-1970
 
Approval of plat of survey in the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter
of Section 13, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.


1982-17
 
6-14-1982
 
Approves final plat of Kemper’s Subdivision


1983-1
 
1-24-1983
 
Approves final plat of Wildwood Estates Subdivision and accepts improvements
with easement access


1983-5
 
3-31-1983
 
Reapproval of final plat of First Foley Subdivision


1983-29
 
9-12-1983
 
Amended approval of final plat of Weston Acres Subdivision to reflect changes


2007-13
 
9-24-2007
 
Annexation of 122 E. Steidl Road


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS, VARIANCES, AND SPECIAL USES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1968-32
 
8-12-1968
 
Variation for a single-ownership portion of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the
second P.M., from R-2 to C-2


1968-34
 
8-19-1968
 
Variation for Lots 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, and portions of Lots 674, 675,
676, and 682, all in the Commercial Club Addition, from R-2 to M-2


1968-35
 
8-26-1968
 
Variation for Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Joseph Stephen’s Subdivision of Lot 42 in
Samuel Utter’s Addition, from R-2 to C-2


1968-48
 
12-16-1968
 
Variation for 101 Floyd Street, from R-2 to Two-family Residential


1968-49
 
12-23-1968
 
Variation for 514 North Central Avenue, from R-2 to Two-family Residential


1968-50
 
12-23-1968
 
Variation for 311 West Crawford Street, from R-2 to Multiple Dwelling


1968-51
 
12-23-1968
 
Variation for 309 West Crawford Street, from R-2 to Multiple Dwelling


1968-53
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for real estate owned by James E. Haught and Kaiser Aluminum &
Chemical Sales, from R-1 to C-2


1968-54
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for 216-218 Buena Vista Street, from R-2 to R-3


1968-55
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for 514 Ten Broeck Street, from R-1 to R-4


1968-56
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for 301 West End Avenue, from R-2 to C-2


1968-57
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for 614 West Adams Street, from R-2 to M-1


1968-58
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for 801-805 Harrison Street, from R-2 to C-2


1968-59
 
12-30-1968
 
Variation for Dr. Dart and Taylor Rt. 3, used as a veterinary hospital, from
R-1 to C-2


1969-1
 
1-13-1969
 
Variation for Lots 30 and 31 in the Owen S. Jones Fifth Addition, from R-2 to
C-2


1969-12
 
3-17-1969
 
Variation for 403 West Court Street, from R-2 to C-1


1969-14
 
4-14-1969
 
Variation for the north 89 feet of the east 75 feet of Lot 4 in McGee’s
Addition, from R-2 to R-4


1969-15
 
4-14-1969
 
Authorizes Park Board to establish a travel trailer park at Twin Lakes Park


1969-28
 
6-16-1969
 
Variation for part of the southwest quarter of Section 2 and the northwest
quarter of Section 11, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.,
from R-1 to M-1


1969-57
 
11-24-1969
 
Variation for part of the east half of the southwest quarter and part of the
west half of the southeast quarter of Section 3, Township 13 North, Range 12
West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-1


1970-1
 
1-12-1970
 
Rezones Lot 7 of Tucker’s Subdivision of part of Lots 4 and 6 of the County
Clerk’s Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 25 and part of the
northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 25 in Township 14
North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to C-2


1970-5
 
3-9-1970
 
Rezones the east 24 acres of the east half of the northeast quarter and the
east half of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 3, Township 13
North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-2, for garbage
disposal site


1970-11
 
5-4-1970
 
Rezones the northeast quarter of Outlot 206 from R-1 to C-2


1970-27
 
10-26-1970
 
Rezones Bernice Swain property on East Court Street from R-1 to C-2 and R-4


1971-2
 
1-25-1971
 
Grants special use zoning as electrical substation, for part of the west half
of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of
the second P.M.


1971-4
 
2-22-1971
 
Rezones 411 East Washington Street from R-2 to C-2


1971-14
 
6-14-1971
 
Variation for part of the southwest quarter, southwest quarter, Section 6,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., from Single-family
Residential to R-4


1971-15
 
6-14-1971
 
Variation for part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of
Section 10, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
M-1


1971-16
 
6-14-1971
 
Rezones part of the west half of the east half of the northeast quarter of
Section 12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
C-2


1971-17
 
6-28-1971
 
Rezones Lots 1 - 6 of Block 11 in A.B. Henry’s Addition from R-2 to C-2


1971-26
 
8-23-1971
 
Variation for 706 West End Avenue, from R-1 to C-2


1971-27
 
8-23-1971
 
Variation for Outlots 165 and 166 and part of Outlot 163, from R-1 to R-4


1971-30
 
9-13-1971
 
Rezones Lots 336 - 339 in the Commercial Club Addition from R-1 to M-1


1971-31
 
10-26-1971
 
Variation for part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
M-2, for slaughterhouse


1971-32
 
10-26-1971
 
Rezones the west half of Lot 57 in William B. Vance’s Third Addition from
R-2 to R-4


1971-33
 
10-26-1971
 
Rezones Lot 1 of Adams’ Subdivision and part of Outlot 123 from R-2 to C-1,
for real estate sales office


1971-34
 
10-26-1971
 
Rezones Lot 4 in Jonathan Mayo’s First Addition and the strip of land
therefrom to Court Street, from R-2 to C-1


1971-37
 
12-13-1971
 
Rezones part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 36,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from C-2 to M-1


1971-38
 
12-13-1971
 
Rezones part of Lots 119 and 120, Kenwood Addition, from R-2 to C-2, for
residential trailer


1972-1
 
1-24-1972
 
Variation for Lots 129 - 132 in W.S. O’Hair’s Addition, from R-2 to M-1


1972-7
 
7-24-1972
 
Rezones part of Lot 11 of Tucker’s Subdivision of part of Lots 4 and 6 of
the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the southwest quarter of Section 25 and
part of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 25,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to C-2; and
grants special use permit for a trailer


1972-8
 
8-14-1972
 
Rezones Lots 19 and 20 of Milton F. Collier’s Addition from R-2 to C-2, for
a residential trailer


1972-11
 
10-23-1972
 
Rezones Lot 199 in W.S. O’Hair’s Addition from R-2 to M-1


1973-4
 
3-12-1973
 
Variation for 714 Grandview Street, from R-2 to R-4


1973-15
 
8-27-1973
 
Rezones property north of Blackburn Street, west of and adjacent to 217 East
Blackburn Street, from R-2 to R-4


1973-19
 
9-24-1973
 
Rezones Outlot 52 and part of Outlot 51 from C-2 to special use, for
electrical substation


1973-20
 
9-24-1973
 
Rezones part of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township
13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., from R-2 to R-2A


1973-22
 
11-13-1973
 
Rezones part of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 10
and part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 11,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-1


1974-12
 
9-26-1974
 
Rezones 420 Chestnut Street from R-2 to R-4


1974-16
 
11-25-1974
 
Variation for 702 Michigan Avenue, from R-2 to C-1, for small antique store


1975-23
 
9-22-1975
 
Rezones Lots 17 and 18 in Block 8 in A.B. Henry’s Addition from R-2 to R-2A


1975-24
 
9-22-1975
 
Variation for part of Lots 24 and 25 in Julius Penn’s Addition, from R-2 to
R-4


1976-2
 
1-12-1976
 
Rezones 613 Liberty Street from R-2 to R-2A


1976-7
 
3-22-1976
 
Rezones part of the east half of the east half of the northeast quarter of
Section 12, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
C-2


1976-18
 
- -
 
Rezones a parcel owned by Roscoe C. and Norma Jones from R-2 to R-4


1976-22
 
8-23-1976
 
Rezones Parcel 1 of Lot 5 of N.P. Smith’s Subdivision from R-2 to C-2, for
a greenhouse, office, and workshop


1976-23
 
8-23-1976
 
Rezones part of Lot 2 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the northeast
quarter of Section 35, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M.,
from R-1 to R-2A


1976-24
 
9-13-1976
 
Rezones part of Lot 8 in William B. Vance’s Plat of part of the southwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12
West of the second P.M., from R-2 to R-3


1976-30
 
10-25-1976
 
Rezones Lot 8 in Vance and Others’ Addition from C-2 to R-4, for a
fraternal club


1976-34
 
12-13-1976
 
Rezones 714 Elm Street from R-2 to R-2A


1977-1
 
1-24-1977
 
Rezones part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 24,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-1


1977-2
 
2-14-1977
 
Rezones 610 Browning Avenue from R-1 to R-2A


1977-7
 
5-9-1977
 
Rezones Lot 74 in Jacob H. Taflinger’s First Addition from R-2 to M-1


1977-24
 
8-22-1977
 
Rezones part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 6,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., from R-4 to C-1


1977-25
 
8-22-1977
 
Rezones 913 Harrison Street from R-2 to R-2A


1977-26
 
8-22-1977
 
Rezones certain real estate owned by Roy T. and Diana Rogers from R-2 to C-2


1977-27
 
8-29-1977
 
Rezones most of Lot 16 in Woodlawn Addition from R-2 to R-2A


1977-34
 
10-24-1977
 
Rezones 209 North Austin Street from R-2 to R-2A


1977-35
 
10-24-1977
 
Rezones Lots 109 and 110 in W.S. O’Hair’s Addition from C-2 to M-1


1977-37
 
11-14-1977
 
Rezones part of the southeast quarter of Section 6, Township 13 North, Range
11 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to C-2


1977-42
 
12-27-1977
 
Rezones most of Lot 65 in William B. Vance’s Addition from R-2 to C-1


1978-3
 
2-14-1978
 
Rezones Lot 25 in Washington Alexander’s Second Addition from R-2 to C-1


1978-4
 
2-27-1978
 
Variation for R.R. 4, from R-1 to M-1


1978-9
 
4-24-1978
 
Rezones 325 Union Street from R-2 to R-2A


1978-10
 
4-24-1978
 
Rezones 211 Ann Street from nonconforming use area to R-4


1978-13
 
5-22-1978
 
Rezones 212 East Monroe Street from Single-family Residence to R-3


1978-16
 
6-12-1978
 
Rezones 101 Cherry Street from R-2 to R-2A


1978-18
 
6-26-1978
 
Rezones certain parcels from R-1 to PUD


1978-21
 
7-20-1978
 
Rezones part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 6,
Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., from R-2 to C-2


1978-22
 
7-24-1978
 
Annexation of 715 East Blackburn Street, to be zoned R-2


1978-31
 
10-10-1978
 
Rezones 605 - 617 West Jasper from C-2 to M-1


1978-32
 
10-10-1978
 
Variation for 701 South Main Street, from R-2 to R-4


1978-33
 
10-10-1978
 
Rezones 713-715 East Jasper Street, R.R. 3, from R-2 to C-1


1978-34
 
10-10-1978
 
Variation for 323 West Court Street, from R-2 to C-1


1978-35
 
10-10-1978
 
Rezones part of Outlot 163 from R-2 to R-4


1978-36
 
10-23-1978
 
Rezones 708 Clinton Road from R-2 to R-2A


1978-37
 
11-27-1978
 
Rezones 804 Douglas Street from R-2 to R-4


1978-42
 
12-26-1978
 
Rezones 801 South Central Avenue from R-2 to C-1


1979-14
 
6-25-1979
 
Rezones Lot 4 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of Lots 18 - 20 of Outlots
230 - 233, from R-2 to C-2


1979-32
 
9-24-1979
 
Variance for a 4-story building, not to exceed 45 feet in height, in a C-2
district, on property in the southwest quarter of Section 6, Township 13
North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., to be used for housing for the
elderly


1980-24
 
5-12-1980
 
Rezones part of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-1


1980-35
 
8-25-1980
 
Rezones part of Outlot 163 from R-2 to R-4


1980-36
 
8-25-1980
 
Grants variance of setback requirements to R-2 property at 127 East Madison
Street


1980-41
 
9-22-1980
 
Variation for part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 25, Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
R-2A


1980-43
 
10-14-1980
 
Grants easement to Don and Katie’s Restaurant to encroach upon Boydston
Street as currently exists


1980-47
 
10-14-1980
 
Rezones Lots 10 - 12 in Block 7 of A.B. Henry’s Addition from R-2 to R-2A


1980-52
 
11-24-1980
 
Rezones the south half of Lot 91 and all of Lots 92 - 94 in the Hockett
Addition from R-2 to M-1


1980-53
 
11-24-1980
 
Rezones Lot 7 in Minear’s Addition, and parts of the adjacent vacated
alleys, from R-2 to C-1


1980-57
 
12-22-1980
 
Grants variance of setback requirements to R-2 property at 123 East Madison
Street


1981-1
 
2-23-1981
 
Rezones 722 East Crawford Street and 241 High Street from R-2 to C-2


1981-6
 
5-26-1981
 
Grants variation to 720 West Madison Street, from R-2 to R-2A


1981-8
 
7-13-1981
 
Rezones 115 North Street from R-2 to R-4


1981-9
 
7-13-1981
 
Rezones 705 Hunt Street from R-2 to R-2A


1981-16
 
9-14-1981
 
Rezones 702 and 704 North Austin Street from L-1 to R-2A


1981-17
 
9-14-1981
 
Rezones part of 312 West End Avenue from R-2 to R-2A


1982-1
 
2-22-1982
 
Rezones 611 South Austin Street from R-2 to C-2


1982-2
 
3-22-1982
 
Rezones 202, 206, and 210 East Court Street from R-2 to C-1


1982-9
 
5-24-1982
 
Rezones 701 East Edgar Street from R-2 to M-1


1982-10
 
5-24-1982
 
Rezones part of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 12,
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-2 to C-2


1982-23
 
7-12-1982
 
Rezones 312 - 312-1/2 West Garfield Street from R-2 to C-2


1982-32
 
11-22-1982
 
Rezones Lots 25 and 32 in Rives and Curtis Addition from R-2 to R-2A


1982-33
 
11-22-1982
 
Rezones 705 South Central Avenue from R-2 to C-1


1983-9
 
5-23-1983
 
Rezones 822 Broom Street from M-1 to R-2A


1983-10
 
5-23-1983
 
Rezones 1014 Broom Street from M-1 to R-2A


1983-20
 
6-27-1983
 
Rezones Lots 22 -24 and Lots 40 - 44 in the Commercial Club Addition from M-1
and C-2 to M-2


1983-22
 
7-25-1983
 
Rezones part of Lot 13 in J.W. Blackburn’s Second Addition from M-1 to R-2A


1983-26
 
8-22-1983
 
Rezones 211 West Lincoln Street from R-2 to C-1


1983-30
 
9-26-1983
 
Rezones 807 Springfield Street from M-1 to R-2A


1984-6
 
3-26-1984
 
Rezones 210 North High Street from R-2 to R-4


1985-8
 
4-22-1985
 
Rezones 134 East Washington Street from C-2 to R-4


1985-9
 
5-13-1985
 
Rezones 114 West End Avenue from M-1 to R-2A


1985-16
 
6-24-1985
 
Rezones 500 - 506 East Adams Street from R-2 to R-4


1985-19
 
7-22-1985
 
Rezones parts of Lot 69 in the Commercial Club Addition from R-2 to M-1 and
R-2A


1986-6
 
3-24-1986
 
Rezones 114 North Austin Street from M-1 to R-2A


1986-10
 
4-28-1986
 
Rezones 409 - 411 North High Street from R-2 to R-4


1986-16
 
8-25-1986
 
Rezones 810 West End Avenue from R-2 to R-2A


1986-19
 
12-8-1986
 
Rezones 511 Walden Street from R-2 to R-2A


1986-21
 
12-12-1986
 
Rezones part of Sections 5 and 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the
second P.M., from R-2 to R-4


1987-8
 
6-22-1987
 
Rezones Lot 45 in the Commercial Club Addition from C-2 to M-2


1987-9
 
6-22-1987
 
Grants variation to part of Lot 25 in Austin and Boydston’s Addition, from
R-2 to M-1


1987-12
 
7-14-1987
 
Rezones part of the northwest quarter of Section 11, part of the northeast
quarter of Section 10, and part of the southwest quarter of Section 2, all in
Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to M-1


1987-21
 
11-9-1987
 
Rezones 502 East Adams Street from R-4 to R-2A


1987-22
 
12-21-1987
 
Rezones 810 Liberty Street from R-2 to R-2A


1987-23
 
12-21-1987
 
Rezones 302 Campbell Street from R-2 to R-4


1987-24
 
12-21-1987
 
Rezones 315 Chestnut Street from R-2 to R-4


1988-3
 
2-22-1988
 
Rezones part of Outlot 177, part of Lot 1 of Margaret E. Caldwell and
Others’ Subdivision, and Lot 4 of A. & J. Anderson’s Subdivision, from
R-2 to R-4


1988-8
 
3-14-1988
 
Rezones part of Outlot 252 from R-2 to R-2A


1988-20
 
6-28-1988
 
Rezones part of the west half of the west half of the northeast quarter of
Section 13, Township 13 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to
M-2


1988-21
 
7-25-1988
 
Rezones 203 North Austin Street from R-2 to R-2A


1988-24
 
8-8-1988
 
Rezones 640 East Court from R-2 to R-4


1988-28
 
9-26-1988
 
Rezones East Madison Street Gardens, Outlot 171 and part of Outlot 172, from
R-2 to C-2


1988-31
 
10-24-1988
 
Rezones 606 East Washington Street from M-2 to R-2A


1988-35
 
11-28-1988
 
Rezones part of the northeast quarter of Section 35 and of the northwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 14 North, Range 12
West of the second P.M., from R-1 to R-2A


1989-2
 
1-23-1989
 
Grants variance to 403-1/2 East Van Buren Street, from R-2 to R-2A


1989-10
 
4-17-1989
 
Grants variance to 813 Andrew Street, from R-2 to R-2A


1989-11
 
4-17-1989
 
Rezones Lot 1 in Mrs. John Camerer’s Addition and parts of Lots 10 and 11
in Abner Dill’s Addition, from R-2 to R-2A


1989-12
 
4-17-1989
 
Rezones 722 East Crawford Street from R-2 to C-2


1989-14
 
5-22-1989
 
Grants variation for part of Outlot 243, from R-2 to C-1


1990-1
 
1-8-1990
 
Grants variation for Lot 44 in Samuel Utter’s Addition, from R-2 to C-2


1990-3
 
1-22-1990
 
Rezones Lots 5 and 6 in Block 11 of A.B. Henry’s Addition from C-2 to R-2A


1990-6
 
5-14-1990
 
Rezones Lots 1, 3, and 4 in A.B. Brunsman’s Subdivision of Lots 1 - 7 of
William Mays’ Addition from R-2 to R-2A


1990-13
 
8-13-1990
 
Rezones Lots 1 and 2 of Art Reese Subdivision 5 from R-2 to C-2


1990-18
 
9-24-1990
 
Grants variation for Lots 19 and 20 in Milton F. Collier’s Addition from
C-2 to R-2A


1990-19
 
9-24-1990
 
Rezones the south side of the 1100 block of Harrison Street from R-2 to R-2A


1990-20
 
9-24-1990
 
Rezones 408 West Van Buren Street from R-2 to R-2A


1990-24
 
12-10-1990
 
Grants variance to allow second mobile home on property known as 1012
Harrison Street


1991-4
 
4-22-1991
 
Rezones 1009 Broom Street from R-2 to R-2A


1991-6
 
5-13-1991
 
Rezones 719 Hunt Street from R-2 to R-2A


1991-13
 
7-22-1991
 
Rezones 6610 West Jackson Street from M-1 to R-2A


1991-14
 
8-13-1991
 
Grants variation for 303 East Jackson Street, from R-2 to R-2A


1991-15
 
8-13-1991
 
Grants variation for 1501 South Michigan Street, from R-2 to R-2A


1991-16
 
8-13-1991
 
Rezones 216 North Street from R-2 to R-2A


1991-19
 
8-26-1991
 
Rezones 311 West Arthur Street from R-2 to R-2A


1992-5
 
3-16-1992
 
Rezones 411 West Grant Street from R-2 to R-2A


1992-14
 
5-11-1992
 
Rezones R.R. 6, from R-1 to M-1


1992-17
 
6-8-1992
 
Rezones 402 West Jackson Street from R-2 to R-2A


1992-27
 
7-27-1992
 
Rezones Lot 1 of the Owner’s Subdivision of Outlots 86 - 88, and part of
Outlot 85, with an easement of access, from R-2 to R-4


1992-33
 
10-13-1992
 
Rezones 503 East Garfield Street from R-2 to R-2A


1993-8
 
3-22-1993
 
Grants special use for gymnastics facility at 609 Munsell Street


1993-13
 
5-24-1993
 
Rezones 400-410 West Monroe Street from R-2 to C-3


1993-17
 
7-12-1993
 
Rezones the north half of Lot 27 in Samuel Utter’s Addition from R-2 to C-3


1993-20
 
9-20-1993
 
Rezones 312 East Lincoln Street from R-2 to R-2A


1993-22
 
9-20-1993
 
Rezones 610 and 612 West Grant Street from R-2 to R-2A


1994-7
 
2-28-1994
 
Rezones part of the southwest quarter of Section 7, Township 13 North, Range
11 West of the second P.M., from R-1 to R-2A


1994-11
 
4-11-1994
 
Rezones 110 East Madison Street from R-2 to C-1


1994-19
 
6-27-1994
 
Approves special use for a gymnastics facility at 609 Munsell Street, to new
owner


1994-25
 
8-22-1994
 
Approves special use for radio broadcasting tower in part of the southwest
quarter east of the Indian Boundary Line of Section 5, Township 13 North,
Range 11 West of the second P.M.


1994-28
 
9-12-1994
 
Rezones 443 East Crawford Street, 106, 108, 110, and 311 Campbell Street, and
402 LaSalle Street, from R-2 to R-4


1994-29
 
9-12-1994
 
Rezones 508 Davis Avenue from R-2 to M-1


1994-34
 
9-26-1994
 
Rezones 610 and 614 South Main Street from R-2 to C-2


1994-36
 
11-28-1994
 
Rezones 1814 South Central Street from R-2 to C-3


1994-37
 
12-12-1994
 
Rezones 411 West Grant Street from R-2 to R-4


1995-1
 
1-23-1995
 
Rezones 409 South Jefferson Street from R-2 to C-1


1995-3
 
2-13-1995
 
Rezones Lot 2 of A.B. Brunsman’s Subdivision of Lots 1 - 7 in William M.
Mays’ First Addition, from R-2 to R-4


1995-14
 
5-22-1995
 
Rezones Lot 57 in Levings, Jones, and Hunt’s West End Addition from R-2 to
C-2


1995-27
 
11-13-1995
 
Rezones part of Lot 66, William B. Vance’s Third Addition, from R-2 to C-1


1995-28
 
11-13-1995
 
Rezones 430 Stevens from R-2 to R-4


1995-30
 
11-27-1995
 
Rezones 405 East Van Buren Street from R-2 to C-3


1996-1
 
1-8-1996
 
Grants special use to 405 South Central, for beauty salon in R-2, provided 6
parking spaces are maintained


1996-17
 
5-28-1996
 
Rezones 303, 318, 319, 320, 401, 403, 410, 411, 503, and 505 East Jasper
Street, and 902 Shaw Avenue, and 902 Wabash Avenue, from R-2 to C-3


1996-33
 
9-9-1996
 
Rezones parcel adopted by Ord. 1996-17 from C-3 to C-2


1996-37
 
10-14-1996
 
Rezones 612 West Monroe Street from R-2 to M-1


1997-6
 
2-24-1997
 
Rezones 908 Marshall Street from R-2 to C-2


1997-20
 
5-27-1997
 
Rezones 913 Browning from R-1 to C-2, for a pole barn


1997-34
 
9-8-1997
 
Grants special use to 503 East Newton Street for a private preschool


1997-41
 
10-13-1997
 
Rezones 804 Grandview from C-2 to M-1


1998-4
 
4-13-1998
 
Rezones 515 North Central Avenue from R-2 to R-4


1998-5
 
4-27-1998
 
Rezones 418, 420, 426, 428, 430, 440, and other parcels on West Newton
Street, and 801, 803, and 811 Alexander Street, from R-2 to C-2


1998-11
 
5-26-1998
 
Rezones 707 East Jasper Street from R-2 to C-2


1998-12
 
7-13-1998
 
Rezones Pedco Industrial Park, Route 1 South, from R-2 to M-2


1998-15
 
8-10-1998
 
Rezones 110 West Benton Street and 702, 706, 710, and 712 South Central
Avenue, from R-2 to C-2


1998-20
 
9-9-1998
 
Rezones Lots 1 and 2 in Block 5 of A.B. Henry’s Addition from R-1 to M-1


1998-29
 
11-9-1998
 
Rezones the 400 block of West Lincoln Street from R-2 to R-4


1999-1
 
1-11-1999
 
Rezones 200 East Elliott Street from R-2 to R-4


1999-7
 
3-15-1999
 
Rezones Lot 5 and part of Lot 4 in G. Marr’s First Addition, from R-2 to C-2


1999-24
 
6-28-1999
 
Rezones 2120 South Main Street from R-2 to M-1


1999-36
 
10-25-1999
 
Rezones 8924 North Terre Haute Road from R-1 to C-2


1999-37
 
10-25-1999
 
Rezones 910 South Marshall Street from R-2 to C-2, provided that only 1-story
structures shall be allowed on the property


1999-40
 
11-8-1999
 
Rezones Lots 16 and 17 in Owen S. Jones’ Second Addition, from R-2 to R-4


1999-41
 
11-29-1999
 
Adopts a tax increment financing (TIF) district in a designated redevelopment
project area


2000-1
 
1-10-2000
 
Grants special use in part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
of Section 31, Township 14 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., zoned
R-1, for a beauty parlor


2000-17
 
5-8-2000
 
Rezones 501 West Van Buren Street from R-2 to C-1


2000-19
 
5-8-2000
 
Rezones part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 36,
Township 14 North, Range 12 West of the second P.M., on North High Street,
from R-1 to R-4


2000-29
 
7-10-2000
 
Rezones 410 and 416 West Jasper Street from R-2 to C-2


2000-38
 
8-28-2000
 
Grants special use to a 100 by 100 foot square portion of 15961 North 700th
Road, zoned R-1, for a communications tower


2000-44
 
10-16-2000
 
Rezones Lot 29 in Anna Lycan’s First Addition from R-2 to C-2


2002-2
 
1-28-2002
 
Rezones 1103 North Main Street and another parcel on North Main Street, from
R-1 to C-1


2002-17
 
6-24-2002
 
Rezones part of Lot 12 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of the west half
of the northeast quarter and the east half of the northwest quarter of
Section 6, Township 13 North, Range 11 West of the second P.M., from R-2 to
R-3


2002-19
 
6-10-2002
 
Rezones 815 North Main Street from R-2 to R-4


2002-36
 
11-25-2002
 
Rezones part of Lots 17, 18, and 19 in the H.L. O’Betz enlarged Addition,
from R-4 to C-1


2003-7
 
4-14-2003
 
Rezones 402, 404, and 406 South Austin Street from R-2 to R-3


2004-7
 
3-22-2004
 
Rezones Lot 7 in Vietor’s Subdivision of Lot 6 in N.P. Smith and other’s
subdivision from R-2 single family residential district to C-2 Commercial
District


2004-16
 
5-10-2004
 
Rezones as M-1 Light Industrial District part of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 2 and of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 11, Township 13 North, Range 12 West commonly known as
13116 IL Hwy 133


2004-63
 
11-8-2004
 
Rezones Lot Nos. 29 -32, 67 - 70, and 79 - 82 in the Tobias Subdivision from
R-2 Single-Family Residential District to C-2, Commercial District.


2004-64
 
11-8-2004
 
Rezones certain property from R-2, Single Residence District to R-4 Multiple
Dwelling District.


2005-12
 
2-28-2005
 
Rezones Lot Nos. 9 and 11 from R-2 Single-Family Residence District to R-3
Two Family Residence District.


2006-22
 
6-12-2006
 
Rezones Lot Nos. 51 through 55 in W.F. Gaumer's First Addition, from R-2,
Single Family Residence to C-2, Commercial District.


2006-34
 
10-23-2006
 
Rezones the north half of Lot No. 26 in Samuel Utter's Addition, 61944 except
the east 45 feet of even width thereof, from R-2, Single Family Residence to
C-2, Commercial District.


2007-14
 
10-9-2007
 
Rezones Lot No. 4 of the County Clerk’s Subdivision of Out Lot No. 244 from
R-3, Two Family Residential District to C-2, Commercial District.


2008-9
 
3-10-2008
 
Rezones South half of Lot No. 30 in Samuel Utters addition from R-1, Single
Residence District to C-2, Commercial District.


2008-26
 
10-14-2008
 
Rezones 613 and 615 West Arthur Street from R-2 to R-3


2009-4
 
3-23-2009
 
Rezones 714 Andrew Street from R-2 to C-2


2009-11
 
6-22-2009
 
Rezones 807 Marshall Avenue from R-2 to C-2


2009-18
 
8-24-2009
 
Rezones 514 South Central from R-1 to C-2


2013-13
 
8-12-2013
 
Rezones 812 Maple Avenue from R-2 to R-3


2013-16
 
10-28-2013
 
Rexones 911 North Central Avenue from R-2 to C-1


2014-14
 
11-10-2014
 
Establishes Edgar County Enterprise Zone


2014-24
 
12-8-2014
 
Rezones 501 West Court Street from C-2 to M-1


2016-17
 
9-12-2016
 
Rezones Lots 9 and 10 in the Hagen Subdivision from R-2 to C-2


2017-5
 
5-8-2017
 
Approves amendment to tax increment financing redevelopment plan and project
for the downtown redevelopment project area established in Ord. 1999-41


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IX:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




2005-17
 
4-26-2005
 
Real estate exchange between First Bank and Trust and City Hall


2006-01
 
1-23-2006
 
Real estate exchange between city and Hobert L. Smithson and Benny Lankster


2006-28
 
8-28-2006
 
Real estate exchange between city and Kenneth Zeigler and Mary Zeigler


2010-9
 
5-24-2010
 
Real estate exchange between city and Lynn Holloway


2010-14
 
7-12-2010
 
Acquiring real property from Paris Union School District Number 95


2012-17
 
7-23-2012
 
Transferring property known as “the old dredge pit” to Paris Community
Unit School District No. 4 and Paris Union School District No. 95 for the
Paris Cooperative High School


2017-12
 
11-13-2017
 
Authorizing real estate exchange between city and Prospect Bank


2018-4
 
3-26-2018
 
Creating lease transferring real estate to Laborer’s Home Development, Corp.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to 1969 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Reference
 
2004 Code




Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.01
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.02
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.03
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.04
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.05
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.07
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.08
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.09
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.10
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.11
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.12
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.15
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.16
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.17
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.20
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.24
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.28
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 1.29
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 70, 2
 
10.04


Chapter 5, Act 120, 1 et seq.
 
33.33


Chapter 5, Act 175, 1-101 et seq.
 
10.02


Chapter 5, Act 275, 1 et seq.
 
34.01


Chapter 5, Act 275, 6 et seq.
 
34.14


Chapter 5, Act 430, 1-1 et seq.
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 5-15
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 10-10—10-40
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 50-5
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 70-5
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 705(a)
 
32.015


Chapter 5, Act 430, 705(c)
 
32.015


Chapter 10, Act 5, 1-1 et seq.
 
30.04


Chapter 30, Act 20, 1 et seq.
 
32.007, 32.047


Chapter 30, Act 320, 3
 
11.01


Chapter 35, Act 105, 1 et seq.
 
38.090


Chapter 35, Act 145, 1 et seq.
 
38.077


Chapter 35, Act 220, 1 et seq.
 
38.017


Chapter 40, Act 5, 3-101 et seq.
 
35.25


Chapter 40, Act 5, 3-125
 
35.27


Chapter 40, Act 5, 3-128
 
35.25


Chapter 40, Act 5, 3-131 et seq.
 
35.26


Chapter 40, Act 5, 4-101—4-141
 
36.40


Chapter 40, Act 5, 4-121
 
36.40


Chapter 50, Act 5, .01 et seq.
 
34.03, 34.04


Chapter 50, Act 5, 1
 
34.15


Chapter 50, Act 5, 2
 
34.16


Chapter 50, Act 45, 1 et seq.
 
122.06


Chapter 50, Act 430, 1—3
 
32.050


Chapter 65, Act 5
 
10.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 1-1-2
 
10.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 1-1-2(5)
 
30.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 1-2-1
 
10.99


Chapter 65, Act 5, 1-2-1.1
 
10.99


Chapter 65, Act 5, 1-3-1 et seq.
 
92.037, 93.60


Chapter 65, Act 5, 2-2-12
 
11.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3-7-1
 
96.001


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3-7-2
 
96.002


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3-7-6
 
32.100


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-2-1
 
10.17


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-10-6
 
32.002


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-10-25
 
32.008


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-10-30
 
32.009


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-15-5
 
30.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-15-25
 
32.012, 96.004


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-30-10
 
32.042


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-30-20
 
35.40


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-40—3.1-35-85
 
32.067


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-45
 
32.071


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-50
 
32.068


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-55
 
32.068


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-60
 
32.068


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-65
 
32.069


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-90
 
32.040, 32.043, 32.044, 32.052


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-100—3.1-35-130
 
32.051


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-120
 
32.046


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-35-135
 
32.046, 32.051


Chapter 65, Act 5, 3.1-50-5 et seq.
 
32.011


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-3-1
 
30.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-3-5 et seq.
 
30.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-4-1
 
32.008


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-4-2
 
32.009, 32.041, 32.066


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-2
 
32.005, 32.065


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-4
 
32.065, 32.085, 32.086, 32.100, 93.01, 151.20


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-6
 
32.001


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-7
 
36.15


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-8
 
153.30


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-11
 
31.051


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-13
 
31.005


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-5-22
 
32.067


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-6-1
 
32.011


Chapter 65, Act 5, 4-6-2
 
32.011


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-1-7
 
37.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-1-8
 
32.050, 32.070


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-2-9
 
37.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-2-9.1—8-2-9.10
 
37.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-3-1
 
38.001


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-3-14
 
38.075


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-5-1
 
37.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-8-3
 
37.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-1
 
38.121, 38.141


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-1.3
 
38.045


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-1.4
 
38.045


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-2
 
38.140, 38.146, 117.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-6
 
38.090


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-7
 
38.060


Chapter 65, Act 5, 8-11-8
 
38.105


Chapter 65, Act 5, 9-1-1 et seq.
 
33.15


Chapter 65, Act 5, 10-2.1-1—10-2.1-4
 
33.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 10-2.1-4
 
35.14, 36.15


Chapter 65, Act 5, 10-2.1-5—10-2.1-29
 
33.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 10-2.1-17
 
36.24


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-1-1
 
Chapter 35


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-1-2
 
35.04


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-5-1
 
119.048, 119.066, 119.105


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-5-2
 
98.05, Chapter 119, 119.105, Chapter 133


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-5-3
 
111.32, 131.01, Chapter 133


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-5-6
 
98.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-6-2
 
36.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-7-1
 
92.001


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-7-4
 
152.03


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-8-2
 
Chapter 152


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-8-4
 
92.035, 92.056, 92.075


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-10-1
 
116.02, 116.03


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-11-1 et seq.
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XXII, Section 1


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-12-4
 
150.01, 150.02


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-12-4 et seq.
 
Chapter 159


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-12-8
 
159.002, 159.021, 159.052


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-12-12
 
159.002, 159.053


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-19.1-11
 
54.05, 93.61


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-2
 
111.34, 111.35, Chapter 112


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-5
 
Chapter 93, 111.34, Chapter 153


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-6
 
93.75, 93.77


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-7
 
93.77, 93.78


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-9
 
98.02, 98.06, 98.26


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-15
 
93.90


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-20-15.1
 
93.90


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-30-1
 
96.045


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-30-4
 
92.095, 151.03, Chapter 152, Chapter 158


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-30-8
 
156.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-31-1
 
Chapter 154


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-31-2
 
Chapter 154


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-31.1-1
 
151.20, 151.21


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-37-1
 
152.01


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-37-2
 
152.30


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-1
 
114.035


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-2
 
Chapter 119, 119.045


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-3
 
Chapter 115, 115.08


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-5
 
Chapters 114 and 119


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-6
 
Chapter 118, 151.70


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-42-11.05
 
122.05


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-48.2-1 et seq.
 
Chapter 155


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-54-1
 
119.005


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-54.1-1
 
119.004


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-54.1-2 et seq.
 
119.004


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-55-1
 
Chapter 119


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-59-1
 
34.14


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-60-2
 
Chapter 93, 98.05, 98.08, 98.29, Chapter 154


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-1 et seq.
 
Chapter 96


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-2
 
151.36


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-3
 
96.035, 96.037


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-7
 
96.015, 96.075


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-9
 
119.067


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-10
 
54.02, 96.039


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-13
 
96.060, 151.38


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-14
 
96.042, 96.105


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-15
 
114.071, Chapter 158


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-18
 
96.120


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-80-20
 
96.041


Chapter 65, Act 5, 11-100-1
 
Chapter 97


Chapter 75, Act 5, 1-4
 
33.30


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-1
 
33.30


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-6
 
33.33


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-7
 
33.34


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-7(1)
 
33.35


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-9
 
33.34


Chapter 75, Act 5, 4-10
 
33.34


Chapter 210, Act 115, 1 et seq.
 
157.05


Chapter 210, Act 120, 1 et seq.
 
157.03


Chapter 220, Act 5, 16-101 et seq.
 
38.140


Chapter 220, Act 5, 16-104
 
38.140


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-301(c)
 
122.02


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-401
 
122.01


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-401(b)(6)
 
122.02


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-801
 
122.01


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-801(b)
 
122.01


Chapter 220, Act 5, 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
122.01


Chapter 225, Act 605, 1 et seq.
 
98.46


Chapter 225, Act 605, 2
 
98.45


Chapter 225, Act 605, 18
 
98.47


Chapter 225, Act 650, 1 et seq.
 
Chapter 112


Chapter 230, Act 40, 1 et seq.
 
119.086, 120.20


Chapter 235, Act 5, 1-1 et seq.
 
73.001


Chapter 235, Act 5, 1-2 et seq.
 
111.01


Chapter 235, Act 5, 1-3.06
 
111.56


Chapter 235, Act 5, 4-1
 
Chapter 111, 111.16, 111.18, 111.57


Chapter 235, Act 5, 4-2
 
111.52


Chapter 235, Act 5, 4-3
 
111.52


Chapter 235, Act 5, 4-4
 
111.52


Chapter 235, Act 5, 4-5
 
111.52


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-1
 
111.63


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-2
 
111.53


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-11
 
111.54


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-16
 
111.15, 111.31


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-20
 
111.16, 111.17, 111.99


Chapter 235, Act 5, 6-21
 
111.32


Chapter 235, Act 5, 7-5
 
111.65


Chapter 275, 1 et seq.
 
34.01


Chapter 275, 2
 
34.01


Chapter 325, Act 5, 1-3.05
 
132.06


Chapter 410, Act 130, 10
 
132.05


Chapter 410, Act 620, 10
 
112.17


Chapter 410, Act 650, 1 et seq.
 
112.01


Chapter 410, Act 650, 8
 
112.02


Chapter 410, Act 650, 10
 
112.02


Chapter 415, Act 95, 2
 
115.01


Chapter 415, Act 95, 4
 
115.07


Chapter 425, Act 30, 1 et seq.
 
92.075


Chapter 425, Act 35, 1
 
92.075


Chapter 425, Act 35, 1 et seq.
 
92.075


Chapter 425, Act 35, 2
 
92.077—92.079


Chapter 510, Act 50, 1
 
93.90, 98.07


Chapter 510, Act 50, 4 et seq.
 
98.07


Chapter 510, Act 50, 24
 
98.07


Chapter 510, Act 55, 1
 
98.06


Chapter 510, Act 60, 1
 
98.04


Chapter 510, Act 70, 1
 
93.90


Chapter 520, Act 5, 1 et seq.
 
93.90


Chapter 625
 
73.021, 73.072


Chapter 625, Act 5, 1-123.9
 
76.03


Chapter 625, Act 5, 1-188
 
10.02


Chapter 625, Act 5, 6-101 et seq.
 
71.001


Chapter 625, Act 5, 6-103
 
71.002


Chapter 625, Act 5, 8-101 et seq.
 
118.08


Chapter 625, Act 5, 11-5-3
 
132.01


Chapter 625, Act 5, 11-500 - 11-502
 
76.04


Chapter 625, Act 5, 11-1426.1
 
76.01, 76.04


Chapter 625, Act 5, 12-709
 
76.04


Chapter 625, Act 40, 1-1—11-1
 
73.002


Chapter 625, Act 40, 6-1
 
73.008


Chapter 625, Act 45, 1-1 et seq.
 
97.040


Chapter 720, Act 5, 11-20
 
119.105


Chapter 720, Act 5, 12-1
 
131.01


Chapter 720, Act 5, 12-3
 
131.01


Chapter 720, Act 5, 24-1
 
133.20


Chapter 720, Act 5, 25-1
 
133.02


Chapter 720, Act 5, 26-1
 
111.32


Chapter 720, Act 550, 3(a)
 
132.05


Chapter 740, Act 55, 221
 
54.01, 93.32, 93.64


Chapter 740, Act 55, 221a
 
54.01


Chapter 745, Act 45, 1
 
93.46


Chapter 750, Act 570, 1 et seq.
 
73.001


Chapter 765, Act 201, 0.01 et seq.
 
159.002, 159.035, 159.053


Chapter 820, Act 205, 7
 
Chapter 119


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE



 

1969 Code
 
2004 Code




2-1
 
30.01


2-2
 
30.02


2-3
 
30.03


2-4
 
11.01


2-5
 
34.14


2-6
 
30.04


2-7
 
37.02


2-8
 
31.005


2-9
 
31.051


2-10
 
37.03


2-11
 
37.04


2-12
 
32.014


2-23
 
31.001


2-24
 
31.002


2-25
 
31.003


2-26
 
31.004


2-27
 
31.025


2-28
 
31.026


2-29
 
31.027


2-30
 
31.028


2-31
 
31.029, 31.999


2-32
 
31.005


2-33
 
31.006


2-34
 
31.007


2-35
 
31.008


2-36
 
31.009


2-37
 
31.030


2-38
 
31.031


2-39
 
31.010


2-40
 
31.011


2-42
 
31.045


2-43
 
31.046


2-44
 
31.047


2-45
 
31.048


2-46
 
31.049


2-47
 
31.050


2-61
 
31.065


2-62
 
31.066


2-63
 
31.067


2-64
 
31.068


2-65
 
31.069


2-66
 
31.070


2-67
 
31.071


2-68
 
31.072


2-69
 
31.073


2-70
 
31.074


2-75
 
31.085


2-76
 
31.086


2-77
 
31.087


2-78
 
31.100


2-79
 
31.101


2-80
 
31.102


2-81
 
31.115


2-82
 
31.116


2-83
 
31.117


2-84
 
31.118


2-101
 
32.025, 32.026


2-139
 
32.040


2-140
 
32.041


2-141
 
32.042


2-142
 
32.043


2-143
 
32.044


2-144
 
32.045


2-145
 
32.046


2-146
 
32.047


2-147
 
32.048


2-148
 
32.049


2-149
 
32.050


2-150
 
32.051


2-151
 
32.052


2-152
 
32.053


2-153
 
32.054


2-164
 
32.065


2-165
 
32.066


2-166
 
32.067


2-167
 
32.068


2-168
 
32.069


2-169
 
32.070


2-170
 
32.071


2-181
 
32.085


2-182
 
32.086


2-183
 
32.087


2-194
 
32.100


2-195
 
32.101


2-206
 
32.001


2-207
 
32.002


2-208
 
32.003


2-209
 
32.005


2-210
 
32.006


2-211
 
32.007


2-212
 
32.008


2-213
 
32.009


2-213.1
 
32.010


2-214
 
32.011


2-215
 
32.012


2-216
 
32.013


2-227
 
33.01


2-228
 
33.02


2-239
 
33.15


2-240
 
33.16


2-241
 
33.17


2-242
 
33.18


2-300
 
37.15


2-301
 
37.16


2-302
 
37.17


2-303
 
37.18


2-304
 
37.19


2-305
 
37.20


2-306
 
37.21


2-307
 
37.22


2-308
 
37.23


2-309
 
37.24


2-310
 
37.25


2-311
 
37.26


2-312
 
37.27


3-1
 
111.01


3-2
 
111.02


3-3
 
111.03


3-4
 
111.15


3-5
 
111.16


3-6
 
111.17


3-7
 
111.18


3-9
 
111.19


3-10
 
111.31


3-11
 
111.32


3-12
 
111.33, 111.99


3-13
 
111.30


3-14
 
111.34


3-15
 
111.35


3-16
 
111.36


3-17
 
111.99


3-27
 
111.50


3-28
 
111.51


3-29
 
111.52


3-30
 
111.53


3-31
 
111.55


3-32
 
111.59


3-33
 
111.56


3-34
 
111.54


3-35
 
111.57


3-36
 
111.63


3-37
 
111.58


3-38
 
111.64


3-39
 
111.62


3-40
 
111.60


3-41
 
111.61


3-42
 
111.65


4-1
 
119.001


4-2
 
119.002


4-3
 
119.003


4-4
 
119.004


4-5
 
119.005


4-6
 
119.006


4-7
 
119.007


4-8
 
119.008


4-9
 
119.009


4-10
 
119.010


4-11
 
119.011


4-12
 
119.012


4-13
 
119.013


4-25
 
119.025


4-26
 
119.026


4-27
 
119.027


4-28
 
119.028


4-29
 
119.029


4-30
 
119.030


4-41
 
119.045


4-42
 
119.046


4-43
 
119.047


4-44
 
119.048


4-46
 
119.049


4-57
 
119.060


4-58
 
119.061


4-59
 
119.062


4-60
 
119.063


4-61
 
119.064


4-62
 
119.065


4-63
 
119.066


4-64
 
119.067


4-75
 
119.100


4-76
 
119.101


4-77
 
119.102


4-78
 
119.103


4-79
 
119.104


4-80
 
119.105


4-81
 
119.106


4-82
 
119.107


4-83
 
119.108


4-84
 
119.109


4-85
 
119.110


4-86
 
119.111


4-97
 
119.125


4-98
 
119.126


4-99
 
119.127


4-100
 
119.128


4-101
 
119.129


4-102
 
119.130


4-103
 
119.131


4-104
 
119.132


4-105
 
119.133


4-106
 
119.134


4-117
 
119.145, 119.146


4-118
 
119.147


4-120
 
119.148


4-121
 
119.149


4-122
 
119.150


4-123
 
119.151


4-124
 
119.152


4-135
 
119.080


4-136
 
119.081


4-137
 
119.082


4-137.1
 
119.083


4-137.2
 
119.084


4-138
 
119.085


4-139
 
119.086


4-140
 
119.087


5-1
 
98.01


5-2
 
98.02


5-3
 
98.03


5-4
 
98.04


5-5
 
98.05


5-6
 
98.06


5-7
 
98.07


5-8
 
98.08


5-9
 
98.09


5-10
 
98.10


5-22
 
98.25


5-24
 
98.26


5-25
 
98.27


5-26
 
98.28


5-27
 
98.29


5-28
 
98.30


5-29
 
98.31


5-30
 
98.32


5-31
 
98.33


5-41
 
98.45


5-42
 
98.46


5-43
 
98.47


6-1
 
151.01


6-2
 
151.03


6-3
 
151.04


6-4
 
151.05


6-5
 
151.06


6-6
 
151.07


6-7
 
151.08


6-8
 
151.09


6-9
 
151.02


6-20
 
151.20


6-21
 
151.21


6-22
 
151.23


6-23
 
151.22


6-24
 
151.35


6-48
 
154.01


6-49
 
154.02


6-50
 
154.03


6-51
 
154.04


6-52
 
154.05


6-53
 
154.06


6-54
 
154.06


6-55
 
154.07


6-56
 
154.08


6-57
 
154.09


6-58
 
154.09


6-59
 
154.10


6-60
 
154.11


6-61
 
154.99


6-62
 
151.36


6-63
 
151.37


6-64
 
151.38


6-65
 
151.39


6-75
 
151.50


6-76
 
151.51


6-77
 
151.52


6-78
 
151.53


6-79
 
151.54


6-80
 
151.55


6-87
 
151.70


6-88
 
151.71


6-89
 
151.72


6-90
 
151.73


6-91
 
151.74


6.5-41
 
117.01


6.5-42
 
117.02


6.5-43
 
117.03


6.5-44
 
117.04


6.5-45
 
117.05


6.5-46
 
117.06


6.5-47
 
117.99


6.5-48
 
117.07


7-1
 
34.01


7-2
 
34.02


7-3
 
34.03


7-4
 
34.04


7-5
 
34.05


7-6
 
34.06


7-7
 
34.07


7-8
 
34.08


7-9
 
34.09


7-10
 
34.10


7-11
 
34.11


7-12
 
34.12


7-13
 
34.13


7-14
 
34.15


7-15
 
34.16


8-1
 
152.01


8-2
 
152.02


8-3
 
152.15


8-4
 
152.16


8-5
 
152.17


8-6
 
152.17


8-17
 
152.30


8-18
 
152.31


8-19
 
152.32


8-20
 
152.33


8-21
 
152.34


8-22
 
152.35


9-1
 
92.001


9-2
 
92.002, 92.999


9-11
 
92.015


9-12
 
92.016


9-13
 
92.017


9-14
 
92.018


9-15
 
92.019


9-16
 
92.020


9-27
 
36.01


9-28
 
36.02


9-29
 
36.15


9-30
 
36.16


9-31
 
36.17


9-32
 
36.03


9-33
 
36.18


9-34
 
36.19


9-35
 
36.21


9-36
 
36.22


9-37
 
36.20


9-38
 
36.23


9-39
 
36.24


9-40
 
36.25


9-41
 
36.26


9-42
 
36.27


9-43
 
36.40


9-44
 
36.41


9-45
 
36.55


9-46
 
36.56


9-51
 
92.035


9-52
 
92.036


9-53
 
92.037


9-54
 
92.038


9-55
 
92.039


9-56
 
92.040


9-66
 
92.055


9-67
 
92.056


9-68
 
92.057


9-69
 
92.058


9-70
 
92.059


9-71
 
92.060


9-72
 
92.061


9-73
 
92.062


9-74
 
92.063


9-75
 
92.064


9-86
 
92.075


9-87
 
92.076


9-88
 
92.077


9-89
 
92.078


9-90
 
92.079


9-91
 
92.080


9-92
 
92.081


9-93
 
92.082


9-103
 
92.095


9-104
 
92.096


9-105
 
92.097


9-107
 
92.098


9-108
 
92.099


9-109
 
92.100


9-120
 
92.115


9-124
 
92.116


9-125
 
92.117


10-1
 
112.01


10-2
 
112.02


10-3
 
112.03


10-14
 
112.15


10-15
 
112.16


10-16
 
112.17


10-17
 
112.18


10-28
 
112.30


10-29
 
112.31


10-30
 
112.32


10-31
 
112.33


11-1
 
54.01


11-2
 
54.02


11-5
 
54.05


11-6
 
54.06


11-7
 
54.07


11-36
 
54.99


12-1
 
93.30


12-2
 
93.31


12-3
 
93.32


12-4
 
93.33


12-5
 
93.34


12-29
 
93.01


12-30
 
93.02


12-32
 
93.03


12-43
 
93.60


12-44
 
93.61


12-45
 
93.62


12-46
 
93.63


12-47
 
93.64


12-58
 
93.45


12-59
 
93.46


12-60
 
93.47


12-61
 
93.48


13-1
 
115.01


13-2
 
115.02


13-3
 
115.03


13-4
 
115.04


13-5
 
115.05


13-6
 
115.06


13-7
 
115.07


13-8
 
115.08


13-9
 
115.09


13-10
 
115.10


13-11
 
115.11


14-1
 
33.30


14-2
 
33.31


14-3
 
33.32


14-4
 
33.33


14-5
 
33.34


14-6
 
33.35, 33.99


15-1
 
110.01


15-2
 
110.02


15-3
 
110.03


15-4
 
110.04


15-5
 
110.05


15-6
 
110.06


15-7
 
110.07


15-8
 
110.08


15-9
 
110.09


15-10
 
110.10


15-11
 
110.11


15-12
 
110.12


15-13
 
110.13


15-14
 
110.14


15-25
 
114.035


15-26
 
114.036


15-27
 
114.037


15-28
 
114.038


15-29
 
114.039


15-30
 
114.040


15-41
 
116.01


15-42
 
116.02


15-43
 
116.03


15-89
 
114.070


15-90
 
114.071


15-91
 
114.072


15-92
 
114.073


15-93
 
114.074


15-94
 
114.075


15-95
 
114.076


15-96
 
114.077


15-97
 
114.078


15-98
 
114.079


15-99
 
114.080


15-110
 
158.01


15-111
 
158.15


15-112
 
158.16


15-113
 
158.17


15-114
 
158.18


15-115
 
158.20


15-116
 
158.22


15-117
 
158.19


15-118
 
158.21


15-119
 
158.23


15-120
 
158.24


15-121
 
158.35


15-122
 
158.36


15-123
 
158.37


15-124
 
158.38


15-125
 
158.39


15-126
 
158.40


15-127
 
158.41


15-128
 
158.42


15-129
 
158.43


15-130
 
158.44


15-130.1
 
158.02


15-131
 
158.55


15-132
 
158.56


15-133
 
158.57


15-135
 
114.001


15-136
 
114.002


15-137
 
114.003


15-138
 
114.004


15-139
 
114.006, 114.999


15-150
 
114.020


15-151
 
114.021


15-162
 
114.095


15-163
 
114.096


15-164
 
114.097


15-165
 
114.098


15-166
 
114.099


15-176
 
114.055


15-177
 
114.056


15-178
 
114.057


15-179
 
114.999


15-186
 
91.001


15-187
 
91.002


15-188
 
91.015


15-189
 
91.016


15-190
 
91.017


15-191
 
91.018


15-192
 
91.019


15-193
 
91.020


15-194
 
91.021


15-195
 
91.022


15-196
 
91.023


15-196.1
 
91.024


15-197
 
91.999


15-201
 
91.035


15-202
 
91.036


15-204
 
91.037


15-205
 
91.038


15-211
 
91.039


15-212
 
91.040


15-213
 
91.041


15-214
 
91.042


15-221
 
91.090


15-222
 
91.091


15-223
 
91.092


15-224
 
91.093


15-231
 
91.055


15-232
 
91.056


15-233
 
91.057


15-234
 
91.058


15-241
 
91.070


15-242
 
91.071


15-243
 
91.072


15-244
 
91.073


15-245
 
91.074


15-246
 
91.075


15-251
 
91.105


15-252
 
91.106


15-253
 
91.107


15-254
 
91.108


15-262
 
91.120


15-263
 
91.122


15-264
 
91.121


15-271
 
120.01


15-272
 
120.02


15-273
 
120.03


15-274
 
120.04


15-275
 
120.05


15-276
 
120.06


15-277
 
120.99


15.5-1
 
157.01


15.5-2
 
157.02


15.5-3
 
157.03


15.5-4
 
157.04


15.5-5
 
157.05


15.5-6
 
157.06


15.5-7
 
157.07


15.5-8
 
157.08


15.5-9
 
157.09, 157.99


16-3
 
70.01


16-7
 
71.061; Chapter 74, Schedule I


16-27
 
71.060


16-30
 
71.047


16-31
 
71.048


16-48
 
71.031


16-49
 
71.030


16-95
 
71.015


16-96
 
71.016


16-121
 
95.01—95.08, 95.99


16-131
 
71.001


16-132
 
71.002


16-133
 
71.003


16-151
 
71.075


16-154
 
71.076


16-155
 
71.077


16-167
 
71.045


16-170
 
71.046


16-182
 
72.015


16-184
 
72.002


16-185
 
72.016


16-186
 
72.017


16-187
 
72.018


16-188
 
72.019


16-189
 
72.020


16-190
 
72.021


16-191
 
72.001


16-193
 
72.022; Chapter 75, Schedule I


16-194
 
72.023


16-195
 
72.999


16-204
 
72.050


16-205
 
Chapter 75, Schedule III


16-206
 
72.051


16-207
 
72.052


16-208
 
72.053


16-209
 
72.054


16-210
 
72.055


16-211
 
72.056


16-212
 
72.057


16-213
 
72.058


16-214
 
72.999


16-215
 
72.059


16-216
 
72.060


16-218
 
72.061


16-222
 
71.090


16-223
 
71.091


16-252
 
70.15


16-253
 
70.16


16-254
 
72.075


16-255
 
72.999


16-261
 
73.001, 73.002


16-262
 
73.003


16-263
 
73.004


16-264
 
73.005


16-264.1
 
73.999


16-265
 
73.021


16-266
 
73.022


16-267
 
73.023


16-268
 
73.024


16-269
 
73.025


16-270
 
73.040


16-271
 
73.041


16-272
 
73.042


16-273
 
73.043


16-274
 
73.044


16-275
 
73.006


16-276
 
73.055


16-277
 
73.115


16-278
 
73.116


16-279
 
73.056


16-280
 
73.085


16-281
 
73.086


16-282
 
73.117


16-283
 
73.070


16-284
 
73.071


16-285
 
73.072


16-286
 
73.073


16-287
 
73.100


16-288
 
73.101


16-289
 
73.102


16-290
 
73.103


16-291
 
73.007


16-292
 
73.008


16-293
 
73.104


16-294
 
73.118


16-295
 
73.119


16-296
 
73.120


16-297
 
73.121


16-298
 
73.020


16-299
 
73.122


16-300
 
73.123


16-313
 
72.036


16-314
 
72.035; Chapter 75, Schedule II


16-315
 
72.999


17-2
 
132.01


17-3
 
113.01—113.10, 113.99


17-4
 
132.02


17-6
 
131.01


17-7
 
133.01


17-8
 
133.02


17-9
 
97.105


17-10
 
133.20


17-11
 
133.21


17-12
 
133.22


17-14
 
133.03


17-15
 
133.23


17-16
 
131.15


17-17
 
131.16


17-18
 
131.17


17-19
 
131.18


17-21
 
133.35


17-22
 
133.36


17-23
 
133.05


17-24
 
133.37


17-25
 
133.50


17-26
 
133.38


17-27
 
132.04


17-28
 
133.51


17-29
 
132.03


17-30
 
130.01


17-31
 
130.02


17-36
 
71.062


17-38
 
97.106, 97.999


17-40
 
131.30—131.39, 131.99


17-41
 
133.04, 133.99


18-1
 
97.020


18-2
 
97.021


18-3
 
97.022, 97.999


18-13
 
97.001


18-14
 
97.002


18-15
 
97.003


18-16
 
97.004


18-28
 
97.035


18-29
 
97.036


18-30
 
97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


18-31
 
97.040


18-32
 
97.042


18-33
 
97.043


18-34
 
97.999


18-35
 
97.038


18-36
 
97.039


18-37
 
97.041


18-44
 
97.055


18-45
 
97.056


18-46
 
97.057


18-47
 
97.058


18-52
 
97.070


18-53
 
97.071


18-54
 
97.072


18-55
 
97.073


18-56
 
97.074


18-57
 
97.075


18-58
 
97.076


18-59
 
97.999


19-11
 
150.01


19-12
 
150.02


19-13
 
150.03


19-14
 
150.04


19-15
 
150.06


19-16
 
150.07


19-17
 
150.05


19-18
 
150.08


20-1
 
153.15


20-2
 
153.16


20-3
 
153.17


20-4
 
153.18


20-5
 
153.19


20-6
 
153.01


20-17
 
153.30


20-18
 
153.31


20-19
 
153.32


20-20
 
153.33


21-1
 
35.01


21-2
 
35.02


21-3
 
35.03


21-4
 
35.04


21-5
 
35.08


21-6
 
35.09


21-7
 
35.10


21-8
 
35.11


21-9
 
35.05


21-11
 
35.12


21-12
 
35.07


21-13
 
35.06


21-14
 
35.13


21-23
 
35.25


21-24
 
35.26


21-25
 
35.27


21-36
 
35.40


21-37
 
35.41


21-37.1
 
35.42


21-38
 
35.43


21-39
 
35.44


21-40
 
35.45


21-41
 
35.46


21-42
 
35.47


22-1
 
96.004


22-2
 
96.015


22-3
 
96.044


22-4
 
96.016


22-5
 
96.017


22-6
 
96.018


22-7
 
96.019


22-8
 
96.020


22-9
 
96.021


22-10
 
96.022


22-11
 
96.023


22-12
 
96.035


22-13
 
96.036


22-14
 
96.037


22-14.1
 
96.038


22-15
 
96.039


22-16
 
96.040


22-17
 
96.041


22-18
 
96.042


22-19
 
96.043


22-20
 
96.046


22-21
 
96.045


22-22
 
96.047, 96.999


22-23
 
96.048, 96.999


22-32
 
96.001


22-33
 
96.002


22-34
 
96.003


22-45
 
96.120


22-46
 
96.121


22-47
 
96.122, 96.999


22-58
 
96.060


22-59
 
96.061


22-60
 
96.062


22-61
 
96.063


22-62
 
96.064


22-73
 
96.075


22-74
 
96.076


22-75
 
96.077


22-76
 
96.078


22-77
 
96.079


22-78
 
96.080, 96.081


22-79
 
96.082, 96.083


22-80
 
96.084, 96.085


22-81
 
96.086


22-82
 
96.087


22-83
 
96.088


22-84
 
96.089


22-85
 
96.090


22-86
 
96.091


22-87
 
96.092


22-88
 
96.093


22-89
 
96.094


22-90
 
96.999


22-95
 
96.105


22-96
 
96.106


22-100
 
96.107


22-101
 
96.108


22-102
 
96.109


23-1
 
159.001


23-2
 
159.002


23-3
 
159.003


23-4
 
159.004


23-5
 
159.005


23-16
 
159.020


23-17
 
159.021


23-18
 
159.022


23-19
 
159.023


23-30
 
159.035


23-31
 
159.036


23-32
 
159.037


23-33
 
159.038


23-34
 
159.039


23-45
 
159.050


23-46
 
159.051


23-47
 
159.052


23-48
 
159.053


23-59
 
159.065


23-60
 
159.066


23-61
 
159.067


23-62
 
159.068


23-63
 
159.069


23-64
 
159.070


23-65
 
159.071


23-66
 
159.072


23-67
 
159.073


23-78
 
159.085


23-79
 
159.086


23-80
 
159.087


23-81
 
159.088


23-82
 
159.089


23-83
 
159.090


23-84
 
159.091


23-85
 
159.092


23-86
 
159.093


24-2
 
38.001


24-26
 
38.060


24-27
 
38.061


24-28
 
38.062


24-31
 
38.090


24-32
 
38.091


24-36
 
38.105


24-37
 
38.106


24-38
 
38.107


24-53
 
38.120


24-54
 
38.121


24-55
 
38.122


24-56
 
38.123


24-57
 
38.124


24-58
 
38.125


24-59
 
38.126


24-60
 
38.127, 38.999


24-61
 
38.128


24-74
 
38.140, 38.999


24-75
 
38.141


24-76
 
38.142


24-77
 
38.143


24-78
 
38.144


24-79
 
38.145


24-80
 
38.146, 38.147, 38.999


25-11
 
93.75


25-12
 
93.76


25-13
 
93.77


25-14
 
93.78


25-15
 
93.79


25-16
 
93.80


25-27
 
94.01


25-28
 
94.02


25-29
 
94.03


25-30
 
94.04


25-31
 
94.05


25-32
 
94.06


25-33
 
94.07


25-34
 
94.08


25-35
 
94.09


26-11
 
118.01


26-12
 
118.02


26-13
 
118.03


26-14
 
118.04


26-15
 
118.05


26-16
 
118.06


26-17
 
118.07


26-18
 
118.08


26-19
 
118.09


26-20
 
118.10


26-22
 
118.11


26-23
 
118.12


26-24
 
118.13


26-35
 
118.25


26-36
 
118.26


26-37
 
118.27


26-38
 
118.28


26-39
 
118.29


26-40
 
118.30


26-41
 
118.31


26-42
 
118.32


27-1
 
50.01


27-16
 
52.001


27-17
 
52.015


27-18
 
52.016


27-19
 
52.017


27-19.1
 
52.019


27-20
 
52.080


27-21
 
52.067


27-31
 
52.035


27-32
 
52.036


27-33
 
52.037


27-34
 
52.038


27-35
 
52.040


27-36
 
52.041


27-37
 
52.042


27-38
 
52.043, 52.999


27-39
 
52.018, 52.039


27-46
 
52.055


27-47
 
52.056


27-48
 
52.057


27-49
 
52.058


27-50
 
52.059


27-51
 
52.060


27-53
 
52.061


27-54
 
52.062


27-55
 
52.063


27-56
 
52.064


27-57
 
52.065


27-58
 
52.066


27-59
 
52.067


27-66
 
52.020


27-67
 
52.021


27-76
 
52.081


27-77
 
52.082, 52.999


27-81
 
52.095


27-82
 
52.096


27-83
 
52.097


27-84
 
52.098


27-85
 
52.099


27-86
 
52.100


27-87
 
52.101


27-88
 
52.102


27-89
 
52.103


27-90
 
52.104


27-91
 
52.105


27-92
 
52.106


27-93
 
52.107


27-94
 
52.999


27-95
 
52.108


27-96
 
52.109


27-111
 
51.060


27-112
 
51.061


27-113
 
51.046


27-114
 
51.041


27-115
 
51.026


27-116
 
51.060


27-117
 
51.066


27-121
 
51.017


27-122
 
51.017


27-123
 
51.022


27-124
 
51.015


27-125
 
51.040


27-126
 
51.018


27-128
 
51.021


27-129
 
51.019


27-130
 
51.024


27-131
 
51.023


27-141
 
51.080


27-142
 
51.081


27-143
 
51.083


27-144
 
51.084


27-145
 
51.085


27-146
 
51.086


27-147
 
51.090


27-148
 
51.088


27-149
 
51.999


27-171
 
53.001


27-172
 
53.002


27-173
 
53.003


27-174
 
53.004


27-175
 
53.015


27-176
 
53.016


27-177
 
53.017


27-178
 
53.018


27-179
 
53.019


27-180
 
53.020


27-181
 
53.021


27-182
 
53.131


27-183
 
53.112


27-184
 
53.113


27-191
 
53.035


27-192
 
53.036—53.038


27-193
 
53.039


27-194
 
53.040


27-195
 
53.041


27-196
 
53.042


27-201
 
53.055


27-202
 
53.056


27-203
 
53.057


27-204
 
53.058


27-205
 
53.059


27-206
 
53.060


27-207
 
53.061


27-208
 
53.062


27-211
 
53.063


27-212
 
53.064


27-213
 
53.065


27-214
 
53.066


27-215
 
53.067


27-216
 
53.068


27-217
 
53.069


27-218
 
53.070


27-221
 
53.085


27-222
 
53.086


27-223
 
53.087


27-224
 
53.088


27-225
 
53.089


27-226
 
53.090


27-227
 
53.091


27-228
 
53.092


27-229
 
53.093


27-230
 
53.094


27-231
 
53.095


27-232
 
53.096


27-233
 
53.097


27-234
 
53.098


27-241
 
53.110


27-242
 
53.111


27-251
 
53.114


27-252
 
53.115


27-253
 
53.116


27-254
 
53.117


27-255
 
53.118


27-256
 
53.119


27-257
 
53.120


27-258
 
53.121


27-261
 
53.122


27-262
 
53.999


27-263
 
53.999


27-264
 
53.123


27-271
 
53.124


27-272
 
53.125


27-273
 
53.126


27-274
 
53.127


27-275
 
53.128


27-276
 
53.129


27-281
 
53.130


27-282
 
53.130


27-283
 
53.130


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
2004 Code




200, App. 1
 
9-16-1998
 
51.001


1960-9
 
6-27-1960
 
114.002


1960-10
 
6-27-1960
 
114.001


1960-14
 
7-11-1960
 
153.19


1960-20
 
10-10-1960
 
119.102


1961-1
 
3-13-1961
 
97.036; 97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1961-8
 
3-27-1961
 
150.08


1961-12
 
4-24-1961
 
159.001, 159.003—159.005, 159.020—159.023, 159.035—159.039,
159.050—159.053, 159.065—159.073, 159.085—159.093


1961-23
 
8-14-1961
 
93.75—93.80


1961-25
 
9-25-1961
 
119.026, 119.046


1961-28
 
10-9-1961
 
32.043


1963-4
 
3-11-1963
 
T.S.O. II


1963-6
 
4-29-1963
 
T.S.O. II


1963-9
 
6-10-1963
 
72.015


1964-1
 
1-27-1964
 
T.S.O. VI


1964-6
 
7-27-1964
 
T.S.O. III


1964-7
 
7-27-1964
 
T.S.O. III


1964-8-A
 
9-28-1964
 
T.S.O. V


1964-9
 
10-12-1964
 
132.03


1965-1
 
1-25-1965
 
T.S.O. V


1965-8
 
6-7-1965
 
115.01—115.10


1965-10
 
6-14-1965
 
T.S.O. I


1965-13
 
8-9-1965
 
T.S.O. VI


1965-14
 
8-9-1965
 
T.S.O. IV


1965-15
 
9-27-1965
 
T.S.O. III


1965-18
 
12-27-1965
 
T.S.O. V


1965-19
 
1-3-1966
 
T.S.O. V


1966-1
 
2-14-1966
 
T.S.O. V


—
 
3-28-1966
 
T.S.O. I


1966-7
 
7-25-1966
 
T.S.O. V


1966-9
 
8-29-1966
 
54.99


1966-10
 
8-29-1966
 
T.S.O. V


1966-10A
 
8-29-1966
 
T.S.O. V


1966-13
 
10-24-1966
 
T.S.O. V


1966-15
 
- -
 
T.S.O. VI


1967-1
 
1-23-1967
 
T.S.O. VI


1967-3
 
1-23-1967
 
T.S.O. V


1967-4
 
3-6-1967
 
T.S.O. III


1967-5
 
2-27-1967
 
T.S.O. I


1967-8
 
5-22-1967
 
T.S.O. V


1967-10
 
5-22-1967
 
T.S.O. V


1967-11
 
6-12-1967
 
T.S.O. IV


1967-17
 
8-21-1967
 
T.S.O. V


1968-1
 
1-22-1968
 
T.S.O. VI


1968-6
 
3-25-1968
 
T.S.O. II


1968-7
 
4-1-1968
 
T.S.O. V


1968-10
 
4-22-1968
 
32.040


1968-14
 
4-29-1968
 
32.002


1968-22
 
6-3-1968
 
159.001, 159.002


1968-26
 
6-17-1968
 
93.63, 93.64


1968-30
 
7-8-1968
 
T.S.O. V


1968-31
 
7-29-1968
 
T.S.O. V


1968-32
 
8-12-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-34
 
8-19-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-35
 
8-26-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-36
 
9-9-1968
 
T.S.O. V


1968-37
 
9-9-1968
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVI, Section 1


1968-38
 
9-23-1968
 
96.036


1968-39
 
10-7-1968
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVIII, Section 1


1968-43
 
11-11-1968
 
T.S.O. II


1968-48
 
12-16-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-49
 
12-23-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-50
 
12-23-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-51
 
12-23-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-52
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VII


1968-53
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-54
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-55
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-56
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-57
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-58
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1968-59
 
12-30-1968
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-1
 
1-13-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-2
 
1-27-1969
 
35.40—35.47


—
 
2-3-1969
 
30.02


1969-6
 
2-17-1969
 
92.056, 152.02


1969-12
 
3-17-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-13
 
3-24-1969
 
T.S.O. II


1969-14
 
4-14-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-15
 
4-14-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-16
 
5-5-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-20
 
5-26-1969
 
97.070—97.076, 97.999


1969-25
 
6-9-1969
 
T.S.O. I


1969-28
 
6-16-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-29
 
6-16-1969
 
T.S.O. VII


1969-34
 
8-11-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-35
 
8-11-1969
 
97.036; 97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1969-36
 
8-11-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-38
 
8-11-1969
 
T.S.O. II


1969-42
 
8-25-1969
 
92.001


1969-43
 
9-9-1969
 
T.S.O. VI


1969-45
 
10-6-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-48
 
10-13-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-53
 
11-5-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-54
 
11-10-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1969-57
 
11-24-1969
 
T.S.O. VIII


1969-59
 
12-16-1969
 
T.S.O. V


1970-1
 
1-12-1970
 
T.S.O. VIII


1970-3
 
1-19-1970
 
T.S.O. VII


1970-2
 
1-26-1970
 
T.S.O. V


1970-4
 
1-26-1970
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. V


1970-5
 
3-9-1970
 
T.S.O. VIII


1970-9
 
4-13-1970
 
T.S.O. V


1970-11
 
5-4-1970
 
T.S.O. VIII


1970-14
 
5-25-1970
 
97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1970-18
 
6-22-1970
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. V


1970-27
 
10-26-1970
 
T.S.O. VIII


1970-30
 
12-14-1970
 
T.S.O. V


1970-31
 
12-14-1970
 
T.S.O. V


1971-2
 
1-25-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-3
 
2-22-1971
 
T.S.O. III


1971-4
 
2-22-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-5
 
2-25-1971
 
T.S.O. V


1971-6
 
3-29-1971
 
T.S.O. V


1971-8
 
4-26-1971
 
97.037; 97.040; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1971-10
 
4-12-1971
 
97.090—97.093


1971-11
 
5-3-1971
 
T.S.O. VI


1971-12
 
5-10-1971
 
T.S.O. VI


1971-14
 
6-14-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-15
 
6-14-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-16
 
6-14-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-17
 
6-28-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-18
 
6-28-1971
 
T.S.O. V


1971-22
 
7-26-1971
 
T.S.O. VI


1971-25
 
8-23-1971
 
T.S.O. VI


1971-26
 
8-23-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-27
 
8-23-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-30
 
9-13-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-31
 
10-26-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-32
 
10-26-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-33
 
10-26-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-34
 
10-26-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-35
 
11-22-1971
 
T.S.O. III


1971-37
 
12-13-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1971-38
 
12-13-1971
 
T.S.O. VIII


1972-1
 
1-24-1972
 
T.S.O. VIII


1972-2
 
2-28-1972
 
T.S.O. V


1972-5
 
6-26-1972
 
T.S.O. IV


1972-6
 
7-24-1972
 
92.002, 92.999


1972-7
 
7-24-1972
 
T.S.O. VIII


1972-8
 
8-14-1972
 
T.S.O. VIII


1972-10
 
10-10-1972
 
T.S.O. III


1972-11
 
10-23-1972
 
T.S.O. VIII


1972-13
 
11-13-1972
 
T.S.O. V


1973-4
 
3-12-1973
 
T.S.O. VIII


1973-5
 
4-9-1973
 
T.S.O. III


1973-10
 
5-14-1973
 
T.S.O. VI


1973-15
 
8-27-1973
 
T.S.O. VIII


1973-19
 
9-24-1973
 
T.S.O. VIII


1973-20
 
9-24-1973
 
T.S.O. VIII


1973-21
 
11-13-1973
 
72.050—72.061; 72.999; Chapter 75, Schedule III


1973-22
 
11-13-1973
 
T.S.O. VIII


1973-25
 
12-10-1973
 
Chapter 75, Schedule III


1973-28
 
1-14-1974
 
72.999


1974-1
 
4-8-1974
 
T.S.O. VI


1974-3
 
8-12-1974
 
T.S.O. VI


1974-6
 
9-23-1974
 
T.S.O. VI


1974-9
 
10-15-1974
 
97.106, 97.999


1974-12
 
9-26-1974
 
T.S.O. VIII


1974-13
 
11-12-1974
 
38.090, 38.091


1974-15
 
11-12-1974
 
T.S.O. VI


1974-16
 
11-25-1974
 
T.S.O. VIII


1975-2
 
4-14-1975
 
37.15—37.26


1975-3
 
5-26-1975
 
111.15, 111.16


1975-7
 
5-12-1975
 
T.S.O. V


1975-13
 
6-23-1975
 
111.56, 111.57


1975-18
 
8-11-1975
 
32.002


1975-23
 
9-22-1975
 
T.S.O. VIII


1975-24
 
9-22-1975
 
T.S.O. VIII


1975-26
 
10-27-1975
 
95.01—95.08, 95.99


1975-27
 
11-24-1975
 
97.037; 97.040; 97.999; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1975-28
 
11-24-1975
 
T.S.O. VI


1976-1
 
1-26-1976
 
T.S.O. III


1976-2
 
1-12-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-3
 
2-9-1976
 
119.085


1976-7
 
3-22-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-16
 
6-28-1976
 
111.30


1976-18
 
- -
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-21
 
12-23-1976
 
96.122, 96.999


1976-22
 
8-23-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-23
 
8-23-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-24
 
9-13-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-27
 
10-12-1976
 
114.021


1976-28
 
10-25-1976
 
T.S.O. VI


1976-30
 
10-25-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1976-32
 
11-22-1976
 
72.022; Chapter 75, Schedule I


1976-34
 
12-13-1976
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-1
 
1-24-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-2
 
2-14-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-3
 
2-14-1977
 
111.57


1977-5
 
4-11-1977
 
T.S.O. III


1977-7
 
5-9-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-17
 
5-23-1977
 
Chapter 75, Schedule III


1977-18
 
5-23-1973
 
97.040


1977-19
 
6-13-1977
 
97.040


1977-21
 
6-13-1977
 
97.037; 97.040; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1977-24
 
8-22-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-25
 
8-22-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-26
 
8-22-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-27
 
8-29-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-30
 
9-26-1977
 
T.S.O. VI


1977-32
 
10-10-1977
 
T.S.O. VI


1977-33
 
10-24-1977
 
T.S.O. VI


1977-34
 
10-24-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-35
 
10-24-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-37
 
11-14-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1977-38
 
11-28-1977
 
T.S.O. III


1977-39
 
11-28-1977
 
54.37


1977-40
 
12-27-1977
 
T.S.O. III


1977-41
 
1-9-1978
 
T.S.O. VI


1977-42
 
12-27-1977
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-3
 
2-14-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-4
 
2-27-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-8
 
5-8-1978
 
T.S.O. VI


1978-9
 
4-24-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-10
 
4-24-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-13
 
5-22-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-14
 
5-22-1978
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XIIA, Sections 1—11


1978-16
 
6-12-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-16A
 
5-24-1978
 
37.16


1978-17
 
7-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VI


1978-18
 
6-26-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-19
 
7-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VI


1978-21
 
7-20-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-22
 
7-24-1978
 
T.S.O. VI, T.S.O. VIII


1978-30
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. III


1978-31
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-32
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-33
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-34
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-35
 
10-10-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-36
 
10-23-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-37
 
11-27-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1978-38, § 1
 
12-26-1978
 
73.001, 73.002


1978-38, § 2.1
 
12-26-1978
 
73.003


1978-38, § 2.2
 
1-26-1978
 
73.004


1978-38, § 2.3
 
1-26-1978
 
73.005


1978-38, § 3.1
 
1-26-1978
 
73.021


1978-38, § 3.2
 
1-26-1978
 
73.022


1978-38, § 3.3
 
1-26-1978
 
73.023


1978-38, § 3.4
 
1-26-1978
 
73.024


1978-38, § 3.5
 
1-26-1978
 
73.025


1978-38, § 4.1
 
1-26-1978
 
73.040


1978-38, § 4.2
 
1-26-1978
 
73.041


1978-38, § 4.3
 
1-26-1978
 
73.042


1978-38, § 4.4
 
1-26-1978
 
73.043


1978-38, § 4.5
 
1-26-1978
 
73.044


1978-38, § 5.1
 
1-26-1978
 
73.006


1978-38, § 5.2
 
1-26-1978
 
73.055


1978-38, § 5.3
 
1-26-1978
 
73.115


1978-38, § 5.4
 
1-26-1978
 
73.116


1978-38, § 5.5
 
1-26-1978
 
73.056


1978-38, § 5.6
 
1-26-1978
 
73.085


1978-38, § 5.7
 
1-26-1978
 
73.086


1978-38, § 5.8
 
1-26-1978
 
73.117


1978-38, § 5.9
 
1-26-1978
 
73.070


1978-38, § 5.10
 
1-26-1978
 
73.071


1978-38, § 5.11
 
1-26-1978
 
73.072


1978-38, § 5.12
 
1-26-1978
 
73.073


1978-38, § 5.13
 
1-26-1978
 
73.100


1978-38, § 5.14
 
1-26-1978
 
73.101


1978-38, § 5.15
 
1-26-1978
 
73.102


1978-38, § 5.16
 
1-26-1978
 
73.103


1978-38, § 5.17
 
1-26-1978
 
73.007


1978-38, § 5.18
 
1-26-1978
 
73.008


1978-38, § 5.19
 
1-26-1978
 
73.104


1978-38, § 5.20
 
1-26-1978
 
73.118


1978-38, § 5.21
 
1-26-1978
 
73.119


1978-38, § 5.22
 
1-26-1978
 
73.120


1978-38, § 5.23
 
1-26-1978
 
73.121


1978-38, § 5.24
 
1-26-1978
 
73.020


1978-38, § 5.25
 
1-26-1978
 
73.122


1978-38, § 5.26
 
1-26-1978
 
73.123


1978-38, § 5.27
 
1-26-1978
 
73.999


1978-40
 
12-11-1978
 
T.S.O. I


1978-42
 
12-26-1978
 
T.S.O. VIII


1979-8
 
4-23-1979
 
T.S.O. VI


1979-13
 
6-25-1979
 
T.S.O. III


1979-14
 
6-25-1979
 
T.S.O. VIII


1979-15
 
7-9-1979
 
T.S.O. VI


1979-20
 
8-27-1979
 
T.S.O. V


1979-26
 
8-27-1979
 
T.S.O. VI


1979-28
 
9-24-1979
 
T.S.O. V


1979-29
 
9-24-1979
 
T.S.O. V


1979-30
 
9-24-1979
 
37.17


1979-31
 
10-9-1979
 
38.120—38.128, 38.999


1979-32
 
9-24-1979
 
T.S.O. VIII


1979-33
 
10-22-1979
 
38.120


1979-36
 
11-26-1979
 
T.S.O. V


1979-37
 
12-26-1979
 
T.S.O. V


1980-1
 
1-28-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-2
 
1-28-1980
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. II


1980-3
 
1-28-1980
 
T.S.O. I


1980-4
 
2-11-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-5
 
2-11-1980
 
72.999


1980-7
 
2-28-1980
 
111.15, 111.16


1980-7A
 
3-24-1980
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. V


1980-9
 
3-27-1980
 
97.037—97.041; 97.999; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1980-10
 
4-14-1980
 
97.040


1980-11
 
4-14-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-14
 
4-14-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-15
 
4-28-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-17
 
4-28-1980
 
96.038


1980-20
 
4-28-1980
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. VI


1980-24
 
5-12-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-27
 
5-27-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-28
 
6-23-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-29
 
7-14-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-31
 
7-28-1980
 
T.S.O. VI


1980-32
 
7-14-1980
 
T.S.O. V


1980-33
 
7-28-1980
 
97.038


1980-35
 
8-25-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-36
 
8-25-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-41
 
9-22-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-43
 
10-14-1980
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. VIII


1980-44
 
10-14-1980
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. V


1980-47
 
10-14-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-52
 
11-24-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-53
 
11-24-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1980-55
 
12-22-1980
 
37.27


1980-56
 
12-22-1980
 
37.24


1980-57
 
12-22-1980
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-1
 
2-23-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-2
 
3-23-1981
 
32.010


1981-4
 
5-11-1981
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. II


1981-6
 
5-26-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-7A
 
6-22-1981
 
T.S.O. V


1981-8
 
7-13-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-9
 
7-13-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-10
 
9-14-1981
 
T.S.O. VI


1981-14
 
8-24-1981
 
T.S.O. VI


1981-15
 
8-27-1981
 
T.S.O. V


1981-16
 
9-14-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-17
 
9-14-1981
 
T.S.O. VIII


1981-21
 
1-11-1982
 
38.060—38.062


1981-22
 
1-11-1982
 
38.105—38.107


1982-1
 
2-22-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-2
 
3-22-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-3
 
4-12-1982
 
T.S.O. VI


1982-4
 
4-12-1982
 
111.57


1982-6
 
5-10-1982
 
119.082—119.084


1982-9
 
5-24-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-10
 
5-24-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-13
 
6-14-1982
 
96.047, 96.999


1982-14
 
6-14-1982
 
T.S.O. V


1982-17
 
6-14-1982
 
T.S.O. VII


1982-18
 
6-16-1982
 
T.S.O. IV


1982-19
 
7-12-1982
 
111.56, 111.57


1982-20
 
7-12-1982
 
T.S.O. IV


1982-23
 
7-12-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-24
 
7-12-1982
 
T.S.O. V


1982-30
 
9-27-1982
 
150.08


1982-32
 
11-22-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1982-33
 
11-22-1982
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-1
 
1-24-1983
 
T.S.O. I, T.S.O. VII


1983-3
 
3-14-1983
 
T.S.O. III


1983-5
 
3-31-1983
 
T.S.O. VII


1983-7
 
5-24-1983
 
T.S.O. V


1983-9
 
5-23-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-10
 
5-23-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-13
 
5-23-1983
 
37.24


1983-14
 
5-23-1983
 
37.16


1983-17
 
6-27-1983
 
T.S.O. VI


1983-20
 
6-27-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-22
 
7-25-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-23
 
7-25-1983
 
T.S.O. I


1983-26
 
8-22-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-29
 
9-12-1983
 
T.S.O. VII


1983-30
 
9-26-1983
 
T.S.O. VIII


1983-32
 
11-28-1983
 
T.S.O. V


1984-1
 
1-23-1984
 
50.01, 52.042, 52.043, 52.067, 52.999


1984-3
 
2-14-1984
 
T.S.O. V


1984-4A
 
3-12-1984
 
T.S.O. I


1984-6
 
3-26-1984
 
T.S.O. VIII


1984-7
 
4-9-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-8
 
4-23-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-9
 
4-23-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-11
 
6-11-1984
 
72.055


1984-13
 
6-25-1984
 
97.002—97.004, 97.020—97.022, 97.999


1984-15
 
7-9-1984
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVIII, Section 1


1984-16
 
7-9-1984
 
T.S.O. III


1984-20
 
8-13-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-22
 
9-10-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-23
 
9-24-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1984-24
 
10-9-1984
 
T.S.O. VI


1985-2
 
1-28-1985
 
111.56, 111.57


1985-3
 
2-25-1985
 
T.S.O. II


1985-5
 
4-8-1985
 
T.S.O. VI


1985-8
 
4-22-1985
 
T.S.O. VIII


1985-7
 
5-13-1985
 
T.S.O. II, T.S.O. III


1985-9
 
5-13-1985
 
T.S.O. VIII


1985-12
 
5-28-1985
 
T.S.O. II


1985-16
 
6-24-1985
 
T.S.O. VIII


1985-18
 
7-22-1985
 
T.S.O. III


1985-19
 
7-22-1985
 
T.S.O. VIII


1985-20
 
8-12-1985
 
97.106, 97.999


1985-22
 
8-12-1985
 
97.035, 97.040, 97.058


1985-25
 
8-12-1985
 
38.123


1985-29
 
10-29-1985
 
T.S.O. VI


1985-30
 
1-27-1986
 
96.075—96.094, 96.999


1985-31
 
12-20-1985
 
T.S.O. V


1986-3
 
1-27-1986
 
37.16, 37.24


1986-6
 
3-24-1986
 
T.S.O. VIII


1986-10
 
4-28-1986
 
T.S.O. VIII


1986-16
 
8-25-1986
 
T.S.O. VIII


1986-19
 
12-8-1986
 
T.S.O. VIII


1986-21
 
12-12-1986
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-1
 
1-12-1987
 
T.S.O. V


1987-5
 
3-23-1987
 
T.S.O. VI


1987-8
 
6-22-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-9
 
6-22-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-10
 
6-22-1987
 
114.055—114.057, 114.999


1987-11
 
7-14-1987
 
T.S.O. VI


1987-12
 
7-14-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-13
 
7-27-1987
 
T.S.O. III


1987-16
 
8-24-1987
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVI, Section 1


1987-17
 
9-28-1987
 
T.S.O. III


1987-21
 
11-9-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-22
 
12-21-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-23
 
12-21-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1987-24
 
12-21-1987
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-1
 
2-8-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-3
 
2-22-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-5
 
3-14-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-6
 
3-14-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-7
 
3-14-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-8
 
3-14-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-10
 
4-25-1988
 
97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1988-11
 
4-25-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-14
 
5-23-1988
 
97.001, 97.002


1988-15
 
5-23-1988
 
54.07


1988-16
 
6-13-1988
 
T.S.O. I


1988-17
 
6-13-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-18
 
6-13-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-19
 
6-13-1988
 
97.040


1988-20
 
6-28-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-21
 
7-25-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-24
 
8-8-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-28
 
9-26-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-31
 
10-24-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-32
 
11-14-1988
 
T.S.O. III


1988-33
 
11-14-1988
 
T.S.O. VI


1988-35
 
11-28-1988
 
T.S.O. VIII


1988-36
 
12-12-1988
 
37.15, 37.16


1989-1
 
1-9-1989
 
32.002


1989-2
 
1-23-1989
 
T.S.O. VIII


1989-3
 
2-13-1989
 
T.S.O. VI


1989-4
 
2-27-1989
 
72.999


1989-5
 
2-27-1989
 
111.57


1989-7
 
3-13-1989
 
52.015—52.018, 52.020, 52.021, 52.035—52.041, 52.055—52.066,
52.080—52.082, 52.095—52.109, 52.999


1989-10
 
4-17-1989
 
T.S.O. VIII


1989-11
 
4-17-1989
 
T.S.O. VIII


1989-12
 
4-17-1989
 
T.S.O. VIII


1989-13
 
3-13-1989
 
52.001, T.S.O. VI


1989-14
 
5-22-1989
 
T.S.O. VIII


1989-16
 
6-26-1989
 
52.043, 52.999


1989-20
 
9-11-1989
 
T.S.O. III


1990-1
 
1-8-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-2
 
1-22-1990
 
T.S.O. III


1990-3
 
1-22-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-6
 
5-14-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-7
 
5-30-1990
 
52.067


1990-9
 
6-25-1990
 
97.040


1990-10
 
7-19-1990
 
Title XV Appendix, Article II


1990-12
 
8-13-1990
 
97.040


1990-13
 
8-13-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-17
 
9-10-1990
 
97.040


1990-18
 
9-24-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-19
 
9-24-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-20
 
9-24-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1990-22
 
11-13-1990
 
133.22


1990-23
 
11-13-1990
 
97.105


1990-24
 
12-10-1990
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-3
 
4-22-1991
 
31.001—31.009, 31.025—31.031, 31.045—31.050, 31.065—31.074,
31.085—31.087, 31.100—31.102, 31.115—31.118, 31.999


1991-4
 
4-22-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-5
 
4-22-1991
 
32.004


1991-6
 
5-13-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-7
 
5-13-1991
 
97.036


1991-10
 
6-24-1991
 
72.999


1991-11
 
7-8-1991
 
93.76, 93.77


1991-13
 
7-22-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-14
 
8-13-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-15
 
8-13-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-16
 
8-13-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-19
 
8-26-1991
 
T.S.O. VIII


1991-22
 
12-9-1991
 
Title XV Appendix, Article II


1991-23
 
12-9-1991
 
Title XV Appendix, Article IX, Section 2


1991-24
 
12-9-1991
 
119.082—119.084


1992-1
 
1-13-1992
 
T.S.O. III


1992-2
 
1-27-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-4
 
2-24-1992
 
111.57


1992-5
 
3-16-1992
 
T.S.O. VIII


1992-7
 
4-14-1992
 
T.S.O. III


1992-9
 
4-27-1992
 
97.001, 97.002


1992-11
 
4-27-1992
 
52.019


1992-12
 
4-27-1992
 
159.090—159.092


1992-14
 
5-11-1992
 
T.S.O. VIII


1992-15
 
5-26-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-16
 
6-8-1992
 
T.S.O. III


1992-17
 
6-8-1992
 
T.S.O. VIII


1992-18
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. III


1992-19
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-20
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-21
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-22
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-23
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-24
 
7-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-26
 
7-27-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1992-27
 
7-27-1992
 
T.S.O. VIII


1992-31
 
9-14-1992
 
72.999


1992-32
 
9-28-1992
 
T.S.O. IV


1992-33
 
10-13-1992
 
T.S.O. VIII


1992-34
 
11-9-1992
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-8
 
3-22-1993
 
T.S.O. VIII


1993-9
 
4-13-1993
 
97.040


1993-10
 
4-26-1993
 
97.001, 97.002


1993-13
 
5-24-1993
 
T.S.O. VIII


1993-16
 
7-12-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-17
 
7-12-1993
 
T.S.O. VIII


1993-20
 
9-20-1993
 
T.S.O. VIII


1993-22
 
9-20-1993
 
T.S.O. VIII


1993-23
 
10-11-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-24
 
10-11-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-25
 
10-11-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-29
 
10-25-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-30
 
11-8-1993
 
T.S.O. VI


1993-31
 
12-13-1993
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVI, Section 1


1994-3
 
1-24-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-4
 
1-24-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-5
 
2-28-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-6
 
2-28-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-7
 
2-28-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-8
 
3-28-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-10
 
4-11-1994
 
151.01—151.03, 151.05—151.09, 151.20—151.23, 151.35—151.39,
151.50—151.55, 154.01—154.11, 154.99


1994-11
 
4-11-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-12
 
4-11-1994
 
157.01—157.09, 157.99


1994-13
 
4-25-1994
 
151.05


1994-19
 
6-27-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-20
 
7-11-1994
 
158.01, 158.02, 158.15—158.24, 158.35—158.44, 158.55—158.57


1994-21
 
7-11-1994
 
96.105—96.109


1994-23
 
8-22-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-25
 
8-22-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-28
 
9-12-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-29
 
9-12-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-30
 
9-12-1994
 
T.S.O. VI


1994-32
 
10-10-1994
 
159.090


1994-33
 
10-10-1994
 
159.091


1994-34
 
9-26-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-35
 
11-14-1994
 
97.105


1994-36
 
11-28-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1994-37
 
12-12-1994
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-1
 
1-23-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-3
 
2-13-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-4
 
2-27-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-5
 
2-27-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-7
 
5-8-1995
 
97.001, 97.002


1995-8
 
5-8-1995
 
97.035—97.037; Chapter 97, Appendix A


1995-10
 
5-8-1995
 
36.01—36.03, 36.15—36.27, 36.40, 36.41, 36.55, 36.56


1995-12
 
5-8-1995
 
35.01—35.13


1995-14
 
5-22-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-15
 
6-12-1995
 
T.S.O. III


1995-16
 
6-12-1995
 
T.S.O. III


1995-18
 
7-10-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-20
 
8-28-1995
 
T.S.O. III


1995-21
 
8-28-1995
 
52.097—52.099


1995-23
 
9-25-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-24
 
10-9-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-25
 
10-9-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-26
 
10-9-1995
 
97.105


1995-27
 
11-13-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-28
 
11-13-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-29
 
10-23-1995
 
Title XV Appendix, Article II; Title XV Appendix, Article XIV, Section 4


1995-30
 
11-27-1995
 
T.S.O. VIII


1995-31
 
11-27-1995
 
T.S.O. VI


1995-33
 
12-21-1995
 
111.01, 111.30, 111.55—111.57


1995-34
 
12-11-1995
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XVI, Section 1


1996-1
 
1-8-1996
 
T.S.O. VIII


1996-2
 
1-22-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-3
 
2-26-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-4
 
2-26-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-5
 
3-11-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-8
 
4-8-1996
 
Title XV Appendix, Article VIII, Section 2; Title XV Appendix, Article IX,
Section 2


1996-9
 
4-22-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-12
 
5-28-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-13
 
5-28-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-14
 
5-28-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-15
 
5-23-1996
 
118.25, 118.27


1996-16
 
5-28-1996
 
37.16


1996-17
 
5-28-1996
 
T.S.O. VIII


1996-18
 
6-10-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-19
 
6-10-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-20
 
6-10-1996
 
97.105


1996-21
 
6-24-1996
 
97.022, 97.999


1996-22
 
6-24-1996
 
111.30, 111.56


1996-24
 
7-22-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-26
 
8-12-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-27
 
8-26-1996
 
151.03


1996-29
 
9-9-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-30
 
9-9-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-31
 
9-9-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-33
 
9-9-1996
 
T.S.O. VIII


1996-35
 
9-24-1996
 
T.S.O. III


1996-37
 
10-14-1996
 
T.S.O. VIII


1996-38
 
10-28-1996
 
131.30—131.39, 131.99


1996-40
 
11-12-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1996-41
 
11-25-1996
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-1
 
1-13-1997
 
111.57


1997-3
 
1-27-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-4
 
1-27-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-5
 
2-10-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-6
 
2-24-1997
 
T.S.O. VIII


1997-7
 
2-24-1997
 
154.10


1997-8
 
3-10-1997
 
T.S.O. III


1997-11
 
4-14-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-12
 
4-14-1997
 
93.64


1997-13
 
5-12-1997
 
T.S.O. III


1997-16
 
4-28-1997
 
38.120


1997-17
 
4-28-1997
 
52.057


1997-18
 
4-28-1997
 
52.097


1997-20
 
5-27-1997
 
T.S.O. VIII


1997-21
 
6-9-1997
 
T.S.O. IV


1997-23
 
8-25-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-24
 
8-25-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-25
 
8-25-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-26
 
8-25-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-27
 
8-25-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-29
 
9-8-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-30
 
9-8-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-31
 
9-8-1997
 
52.064


1997-32
 
9-8-1997
 
52.018, 52.039


1997-34
 
9-8-1997
 
T.S.O. VIII


1997-37
 
9-22-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-38
 
9-22-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-39
 
10-13-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-40
 
10-13-1997
 
111.57


1997-41
 
10-13-1997
 
T.S.O. VIII


1997-43
 
10-27-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-44
 
10-13-1997
 
117.01—117.07, 117.99


1997-45
 
11-10-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-46
 
11-24-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-47
 
12-16-1997
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-1
 
1-12-1998
 
90.01—90.04, 90.99


1998-3
 
4-13-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-4
 
4-13-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-5
 
4-27-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-6
 
5-11-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-9
 
5-11-1998
 
31.010


1998-10
 
5-11-1998
 
52.097—52.099


1998-11
 
5-26-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-12
 
7-13-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


—
 
7-27-1998
 
51.015—51.025, 51.040—51.045, 51.060—51.065, 51.999


1998-13
 
7-27-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-15
 
8-10-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-16
 
8-10-1998
 
111.57


1998-17
 
9-9-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-20
 
9-9-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-21
 
9-9-1998
 
Title XV Appendix, Article II


1998-22
 
9-9-1998
 
157.01, 157.03


1998-23
 
9-9-1998
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XIV, Section 4


—
 
9-16-1998
 
51.080—51.089, 51.999


1998-27
 
10-12-1998
 
157.03


1998-28
 
10-26-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-29
 
11-9-1998
 
T.S.O. VIII


1998-32
 
12-15-1998
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-33
 
12-15-1998
 
95.05, 95.08


1998-34
 
12-15-1998
 
72.999


1998-35
 
12-15-1998
 
72.999


1999-1
 
1-11-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-5
 
2-8-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-6
 
2-22-1999
 
T.S.O. II


1999-7
 
3-15-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-8
 
3-15-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-10
 
4-12-1999
 
38.140—38.147, 38.999


1999-12
 
4-26-1999
 
32.002


1999-14
 
5-10-1999
 
150.01


1999-16
 
5-10-1999
 
31.025


1999-18
 
6-14-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-19
 
6-14-1999
 
38.075—38.078


1999-21
 
6-14-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-22
 
6-28-1999
 
32.025, 32.026


1999-23
 
6-28-1999
 
31.011


1999-24
 
6-28-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-26
 
6-28-1999
 
93.63, 93.64


1999-27
 
6-28-1999
 
30.15—30.19


1999-29
 
8-23-1999
 
91.001, 91.002, 91.015—91.024, 91.035—91.042, 91.055—91.058,
91.070—91.075, 91.090—91.093, 91.105—91.108, 91.120—91.122, 91.999


1999-30
 
9-13-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-35
 
10-11-1999
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-36
 
10-25-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-37
 
10-25-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-38
 
10-25-1999
 
133.04, 133.99


1999-40
 
11-8-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-41
 
11-29-1999
 
T.S.O. VIII


1999-42
 
11-29-1999
 
111.57


1999-43
 
8-23-1999
 
120.01—120.06, 120.99


1999-44
 
11-29-1999
 
T.S.O. III


1999-45
 
11-29-1999
 
53.001—53.004, 53.015—53.021, 53.035—53.042, 53.055—53.070,
53.085—53.098, 53.110—53.131, 53.999


1999-46
 
12-13-1999
 
155.01, 155.02, 155.15—155.19


2000-1
 
1-10-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-2
 
1-10-2000
 
72.035; 72.036; 72.999; Chapter 75, Schedule II


2000-4
 
2-14-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-7
 
3-27-2000
 
111.57


2000-8
 
3-13-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-9
 
3-27-2000
 
37.01


2000-10
 
3-27-2000
 
111.54


2000-11
 
4-10-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-13
 
4-24-2000
 
114.056


2000-14
 
4-24-2000
 
51.081, 52.102


2000-15
 
4-24-2000
 
31.047, 31.102


2000-16
 
4-24-2000
 
52.056, 52.057, 52.059


2000-17
 
5-8-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-18
 
5-8-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-19
 
5-8-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-20
 
5-22-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-22
 
6-12-2000
 
111.33, 111.99


2000-27
 
6-26-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-28
 
6-26-2000
 
T.S.O. II


2000-29
 
7-10-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-30
 
8-14-2000
 
T.S.O. III


2000-31
 
7-24-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-33
 
7-24-2000
 
T.S.O. II


2000-38
 
8-28-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-40
 
9-11-2000
 
115.11


2000-41
 
9-11-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-44
 
10-16-2000
 
T.S.O. VIII


2000-46
 
10-20-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2000-47
 
11-13-2000
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-1
 
1-22-2001
 
38.015—38.032


2001-2
 
1-22-2001
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-5
 
2-12-2001
 
37.27


2001-7
 
4-9-2001
 
T.S.O. III


2001-9
 
4-23-2001
 
52.017


2001-14
 
7-23-2001
 
97.072


2001-22
 
10-22-2001
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-27
 
12-17-2001
 
T.S.O. VI


2001-28
 
12-17-2001
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-1
 
1-14-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-2
 
1-28-2002
 
T.S.O. VIII


2002-4
 
2-11-2002
 
31.010


2002-10
 
5-20-2002
 
111.56


2002-11
 
5-20-2002
 
111.57


2002-16
 
6-10-2002
 
95.02, 95.08


2002-17
 
6-24-2002
 
T.S.O. VIII


2002-18
 
6-24-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-19
 
6-10-2002
 
T.S.O. VIII


2002-21
 
7-22-2002
 
150.08


2002-25
 
8-12-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-26
 
8-26-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-27
 
8-26-2002
 
96.048, 96.999


2002-28
 
9-23-2002
 
92.015


2002-29
 
10-14-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-30
 
11-12-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-31
 
11-12-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2002-32
 
11-12-2002
 
71.061; Chapter 74, Schedule I


2002-35
 
11-25-2002
 
71.061; Chapter 74, Schedule I


2002-36
 
11-25-2002
 
T.S.O. VIII


2002-36A
 
12-16-2002
 
T.S.O. VI


2003-1
 
1-13-2003
 
38.045—38.047


2003-5
 
3-10-2003
 
111.57


2003-6
 
4-14-2003
 
T.S.O. VI


2003-7
 
4-14-2003
 
T.S.O. VIII


2003-8
 
5-5-2003
 
97.001, 97.002


2003-9
 
5-5-2003
 
31.047, 31.072


2003-12
 
6-23-2003
 
96.048, 96.999


2003-14
 
6-23-2003
 
31.052


2003-15
 
6-23-2003
 
34.17


2003-16
 
7-14-2003
 
38.047


2003-17
 
8-11-2003
 
T.S.O. III


2003-18
 
8-11-2003
 
T.S.O. III


2003-19
 
8-11-2003
 
54.50; 54.51; Chapter 54, Appendix B


2003-21
 
8-11-2003
 
96.048, 96.999


2003-23
 
9-8-2003
 
111.57


2003-26
 
10-13-2003
 
113.01—113.10, 113.99


2003-27
 
10-27-2003
 
151.05


2003-29
 
11-10-2003
 
111.01


2003-30
 
11-10-2003
 
111.30


2003-31
 
11-10-2003
 
111.56


2003-32
 
11-10-2003
 
111.57


2003-33
 
11-10-2003
 
95.07


2003-37
 
11-24-2003
 
72.022; Chapter 75, Schedule I


2003-38
 
12-15-2003
 
T.S.O. VI


2004-2
 
1-26-2004
 
97.023, 97.999


2004-3
 
2-9-2004
 
98.09


2004-4
 
2-23-2004
 
T.S.O. VI


2004-5
 
2-23-2004
 
T.S.O. V


2004-7
 
3-22-2004
 
T.S.O. VIII


2004-13
 
5-10-2004
 
30.05


2004-16
 
5-10-2004
 
T.S.O. VIII


2004-22
 
5-24-2004
 
72.003


2004-27
 
7-12-2004
 
111.57


2004-28
 
7-12-2004
 
51.080, 52.097—52.099


2004-31
 
7-26-2004
 
152.02


2004-32
 
8-9-2004
 
93.77


2004-33
 
8-23-2004
 
52.097, 52.099


2004-34
 
8-23-2004
 
51.017, 51.040, 51.081


2004-36
 
9-27-2004
 
31.025, 31.045, 31.050, 31.065


2004-37
 
9-13-2004
 
31.053, 32.027


2004-38
 
9-13-2004
 
97.004, 97.020, 97.043


2004-39
 
9-13-2004
 
T.S.O. VI


2004-42
 
9-13-2004
 
95.03


2004-43
 
9-27-2004
 
Title XV Appendix, Article VII, Section 2


2004-44
 
9-27-2004
 
96.048


2004-46
 
9-27-2004
 
132.21


2004-50
 
10-25-2004
 
92.001, 92.037, 92.038, 92.040


2004-51
 
10-25-2004
 
36.03


2004-54
 
10-25-2004
 
91.019, 91.120


2004-57
 
10-25-2004
 
51.044, 51.045


2004-58
 
10-25-2004
 
52.036, 52.037, 52.040, 52.043, 52.057, 52.059, 52.067, 52.081


2004-59
 
10-25-2004
 
52.102


2004-60
 
10-25-2004
 
51.022, 51.023, 51.061


2004-61
 
12-13-2004
 
T.S.O. V


2004-62
 
10-22-2004
 
35.14


2004-63
 
11-8-2004
 
T.S.O. VIII


2004-64
 
11-8-2004
 
T.S.O. VIII


2004-69
 
12-13-2004
 
97.005


2004-71
 
12-13-2004
 
118.27


2004-72
 
12-13-2004
 
98.11


2004-73
 
12-13-2004
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XXII, Section 3


2005-1
 
1-10-2005
 
159.021, 159.035


2005-2
 
1-24-2005
 
Adopting Ordinance


2005-3
 
1-24-2005
 
72.054


2005-4
 
1-24-2005
 
111.57


2005-6
 
2-14-2005
 
T.S.O. VI


2005-9
 
2-28-2005
 
111.57


2005-10
 
2-28-2005
 
151.02, 151.35


2005-11
 
2-28-2005
 
72.015


2005-12
 
2-28-2005
 
T.S.O. VIII


2005-13
 
3-14-2005
 
151.02, 151.35


2005-14
 
3-28-2005
 
97.115 - 97.120


2005-15
 
4-11-2005
 
151.40


2005-17
 
5-12-2005
 
T.S.O. IX


2005-20
 
5-23-2005
 
Chapter 75, Schedule IV


2005-22
 
6-13-2005
 
151.40


2005-25
 
7-25-2005
 
151.85, 151.86


2005-28
 
7-25-2005
 
Adopting Ordinance


2005-30
 
7-25-2005
 
51.023


2005-31
 
8-8-2005
 
T.S.O. VI


2005-32
 
8-8-2005
 
132.22


2005-33
 
8-8-2005
 
T.S.O. VI


2005-35
 
8-22-2005
 
151.40


2005-38
 
9-12-2005
 
96.047


2005-39
 
9-12-2005
 
157.01, 157.03


2005-40
 
9-26-2005
 
Chapter 75, Schedule V


2005-41
 
10-11-2005
 
T.S.O. III


2005-43
 
11-14-2005
 
T.S.O. VI


2006-01
 
1-23-2006
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-06
 
1-23-2006
 
93.63


2006-11
 
2-13-2006
 
36.40


2006-13
 
2-27-2006
 
111.01


2006-14
 
3-30-2006
 
T.S.O. VI


2006-22
 
6-12-2006
 
T.S.O. VIII


2006-25
 
7-24-2006
 
51.080, 52.099


2006-28
 
8-28-2006
 
T.S.O. IX


2006-29
 
8-28-2006
 
Title XV Appendix, Article XXVI


2006-30
 
9-11-2006
 
93.34


2006-31
 
10-9-2006
 
96.047


2006-32
 
10-9-2006
 
Adopting Ordinance


2006-34
 
10-23-2006
 
T.S.O. VIII


2006-38
 
11-27-2006
 
32.110


2006-40
 
12-18-2006
 
T.S.O. VI


2007-2
 
3-26-2007
 
T.S.O. VI


2007-4
 
5-21-2007
 
97.001, 97.002


2007-6
 
6-11-2007
 
T.S.O. VI


2007-8
 
7-9-2007
 
97.004, 97.005


2007-12
 
8-13-2007
 
Adopting Ordinance


2007-13
 
9-24-2007
 
T.S.O. VII


2007-14
 
10-9-2007
 
T.S.O. VIII


2007-15A
 
10-9-2007
 
T.S.O. VI


2007-18
 
11-26-2007
 
152.03


2008-1
 
1-14-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-2
 
1-14-2008
 
111.57


2008-4
 
2-25-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-5
 
2-25-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-6
 
2-25-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-7
 
2-25-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-8
 
3-10-2008
 
33.50 - 33.53


2008-9
 
3-10-2008
 
T.S.O. VIII


2008-10
 
3-24-2008
 
33.50


2008-11
 
4-14-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-13
 
5-12-2008
 
T.S.O. VIII


2008-14
 
5-24-2008
 
Title XV, Appendix, Article III, Section 4


2008-17
 
6-9-2008
 
Chapter 74, Schedule II


2008-18
 
6-9-2008
 
30.30 - 30.34


2008-19
 
7-14-2008
 
97.040


2008-20
 
7-28-2008
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-21
 
7-28-2008
 
111.57


2008-23
 
8-11-2008
 
T.S.O. III


2008-24
 
8-25-2008
 
Adopting Ordinance


2008-26
 
10-14-2008
 
T.S.O. VIII


2008-28
 
11-10-2008
 
31.085, 31.102


2008-29
 
11-24-2008
 
92.015


2008-34
 
12-15-2008
 
72.023


2009-2
 
1-26-2009
 
111.52


2009-4
 
3-23-2009
 
T.S.O. VIII


2009-7
 
6-8-2009
 
93.34


2009-10
 
6-22-2009
 
T.S.O. III


2009-11
 
6-22-2009
 
T.S.O. VIII


2009-13
 
7-27-2009
 
111.04, 111.05


2009-14
 
8-10-2009
 
152.18


2009-16
 
8-10-2009
 
T.S.O. VI


2009-17
 
8-10-2009
 
T.S.O. VI


2009-18
 
8-24-2009
 
T.S.O. VIII


2009-20
 
9-14-2009
 
Adopting Ordinance


2009-21
 
10-26-2009
 
T.S.O. VI


2009-22
 
11-9-2009
 
T.S.O. VI


2010-1
 
2-22-2010
 
T.S.O. II


2010-2
 
2-22-2010
 
T.S.O. II


2010-3
 
3-22-2010
 
72.015


2010-4
 
3-22-2010
 
93.64


2010-8
 
5-24-2010
 
52.057


2010-9
 
5-24-2010
 
T.S.O. IX


2010-13
 
7-12-2010
 
T.S.O. VI


2010-14
 
7-12-2010
 
T.S.O. IX


2010-15
 
8-23-2010
 
T.S.O. IV


2010-16
 
8-23-2010
 
T.S.O. IV


2010-17
 
9-13-2010
 
T.S.O. II


2010-18
 
9-13-2010
 
156.01


2011-1
 
1-10-2011
 
T.S.O. VI


2011-3
 
3-14-2011
 
T.S.O. VI


2011-4
 
3-28-2011
 
T.S.O. VI


2011-12
 
8-8-2011
 
30.45 - 30.48


2011-13
 
8-22-2011
 
T.S.O. I


2011-14
 
11-28-2011
 
T.S.O. I


2011-15
 
11-28-2011
 
T.S.O. VI


2011-16
 
11-28-2011
 
54.34 - 54.40


2012-2
 
1-23-2012
 
31.026


2012-3
 
2-13-2012
 
T.S.O. I


2012-6
 
4-9-2012
 
111.57


2012-7
 
4-23-2012
 
T.S.O. VI


2012-8
 
4-23-2012
 
T.S.O. VI


2012-10
 
5-29-2012
 
T.S.O. VI


2012-14
 
6-25-2012
 
111.57


2012-15
 
7-9-2012
 
T.S.O. VI


2012-17
 
7-23-2012
 
T.S.O. IX


2012-19
 
10-22-2012
 
Adopting Ordinance


2012-20
 
10-22-2012
 
93.63


2012-26
 
12-10-2012
 
31.032


2013-1
 
1-14-2013
 
32.002


2013-5
 
4-22-2013
 
51.080 , 52.099


2013-8
 
8-12-2013
 
Title XV Appendix, Article II


2013-10
 
8-12-2013
 
T.S.O. V


2013-11
 
8-12-2013
 
T.S.O. V


2013-12
 
8-12-2013
 
T.S.O. V


2013-13
 
8-12-2013
 
T.S.O. VIII


2013-15
 
10-15-2013
 
121.01 - 121.07 , 121.99


2013-16
 
10-28-2013
 
T.S.O. VIII


2013-17
 
10-28-2013
 
T.S.O. VI


2013-18
 
11-12-2013
 
T.S.O. V


2013-20
 
11-6-2013
 
121.01 - 121.07 , 121.99


2014-1
 
2-10-2014
 
72.036


2014-3
 
4-28-2014
 
51.080 , 52.099


2014-7
 
6-9-2014
 
T.S.O. VI


2014-13
 
10-14-2014
 
T.S.O. VI


2014-14
 
11-10-2014
 
T.S.O. VIII


2014-24
 
12-8-2014
 
T.S.O. VIII


2015-1
 
1-12-2015
 
111.56, 111.57


2015-2
 
1-26-2015
 
111.57


2015-4
 
4-13-2015
 
93.63


2015-8
 
8-10-2015
 
37.16


2015-9
 
8-24-2015
 
154.04, 154.06


2015-10
 
8-24-2015
 
T.S.O. VI


2015-12
 
9-14-2015
 
31.047, 31.050


2015-16
 
10-26-2015
 
T.S.O. III


2015-24
 
12-14-2015
 
111.30, 111.56


2016-2
 
2-23-2016
 
Ch. 97, App. A


2016-5
 
4-25-2016
 
95.02


2016-6
 
4-25-2016
 
95.03


2016-7
 
4-25-2016
 
T.S.O. VI


2016-11
 
7-11-2016
 
31.085


2016-12
 
7-11-2016
 
96.002


2016-15
 
8-22-2016
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


2016-17
 
9-12-2016
 
T.S.O. VIII


2016-18
 
9-26-2016
 
111.57


2016-19
 
9-26-2016
 
93.90


2016-21
 
10-11-2016
 
111.57


2016-22
 
10-24-2016
 
132.05


2016-23
 
10-24-2016
 
132.06


2016-25
 
11-14-2016
 
76.01 - 76.07, 76.99


2017-1
 
1-9-2017
 
157.03


2017-5
 
5-8-2017
 
T.S.O. VIII


2017-9
 
8-14-2017
 
T.S.O. IV


2017-10
 
9-25-2017
 
T.S.O. II


2017-11
 
10-23-2017
 
T.S.O. VI


2017-12
 
11-13-2017
 
T.S.O. IX


2017-18
 
11-27-2017
 
T.S.O. III


2017-19
 
12-11-2017
 
30.06


2017-20
 
12-11-2017
 
111.30, 111.56


2018-1
 
1-8-2018
 
111.57


2018-2
 
1-8-2018
 
T.S.O. III


2018-4
 
3-26-2018
 
T.S.O. IX


2018-6
 
4-23-2018
 
114.001 - 114.006


2018-10
 
6-25-2018
 
122.01 - 122.06


2018-11
 
6-25-2018
 
111.30


2018-12
 
8-13-2018
 
92.015


2018-13
 
8-13-2018
 
T.S.O. III


2018-14
 
8-13-2018
 
111.01, 111.56, 111.57


 
 
 
 
 




 


