6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 1/403
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Plano, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2018-30, passed December 17, 2018.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the PLANO CITY CODE and it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the
same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this City Code by title in any legal documents.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the
City Code.
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be insertedaccording to the official instructions when so
authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient
manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office
of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of official and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and
shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council. (1989 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed to the extent they are superseded by the terms of this
Code, except such as are included in this City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained
in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic ordinances involving traffic
schedules1.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 2/403
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense oract so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1989 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection"
or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective
dates of such original ordinances. (1989 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Plano, county of Kendall, state of Illinois.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Plano.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Plano".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. (1989 Code)
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the city shall commence on May1 of each and every year. (R.O. 1924, Ill, §15; amd. 1989 Code)
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 3/403
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Plano".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include anyperson who occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1989 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
re-enacted. (1989 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this City Code, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any offense1, plus all Court costs, including but not limited to, local prosecutor's fees, document storage fee,
Court automation fee, Court security fee, and such other costs as are prescribed, from time to time, by Court rules for the Circuit Court for the Sixteenth
Judicial Circuit, Kendall County, Illinois.
B. A person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this City Code, where a specific fine is set, shall be punished by such fine, plus all Court
costs, including but not limited to, local prosecutor's fees, document storage fee, Court automation fee, Court security fee, and such other costs as are
prescribed, from time to time, by Court rules for the Circuit Court for the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit, Kendall County, Illinois. (Ord. 1994-24, 8-8-94)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this City Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which
is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery orpenalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 4/403
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1989 Code)
Chapter 5
MAYOR
1-5-1: CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, TERM:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall hold office for four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. (R.O. 1924
II, §1; amd. 1989 Code)
1-5-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The mayor shall be a citizen of the United States, a qualified voter and shall reside within the city limits. (R.O. 1924 II, §1)
If the mayor, at any time during the term of his office, shall move from the limits of the city, his office shall thereby become vacant. (R.O. 1924 II, §4)
1-5-3: BOND AND SALARY:
A. Bond: The mayor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00),
with sureties as the city council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of this office. (R.O. 1924 II, §6)
B. Salary: The mayor of the city, duly elected, qualifying and taking office after the effective date hereof shall receive an annual salary in the amount of six
thousand four hundred dollars ($6,400.00) payable in equal monthly installments. In addition thereto, the mayor shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each council meeting and meetings of the committee of the whole attended by the mayor up to a maximum of two thousand six hundred dollars
($2,600.00) per fiscal year. Compensation for attendance at council meetings and meetings of the committee of the whole shall be paid quarterly. For
the duties of liquor commissioner, the duly elected, qualified and acting mayor taking office after the effective date hereof shall receive an annual salary
of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), payable in equal quarterly installments. (Ord. 2002-38, 9-23-2002)
1-5-4: VACANCIES IN OFFICE:
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, and there remains an unexpired portion of the term of at least twenty eight (28) months, and the
vacancy occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days before the general municipal election next scheduled under the general election law, the vacancy
shall be filled at that general municipal election. The city council shall elect one of its members acting mayor who shall perform the duties and possess all
the rights and powers of the mayor until a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected and has qualified. (R.O. 1924 II, §3; amd. 1989 Code)
1-5-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: The mayor shall devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as a faithful and efficient discharge thereof may require. He shall take
care that all the ordinances of the city are duly enforced, respected and obeyed; he shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but shall not vote
except in the case of a tie, when he shall give the deciding vote; preserve order and a quorum; and generally do and perform all acts and things which
are enjoined upon him by the law of the state and the ordinances of the city. (R.O. 1924 II, §2)
B. Appoint Officers, Fill Vacancies: The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers of the city whose
appointment is not otherwise provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office which by law or ordinance he is empowered and
required to fill, he shall, at the next regular meeting of the city council, communicate to the city council the name of his appointee to such office; and
pending the concurrence of the city council in such appointment, he may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office.
(R.O. 1924 II, §7)
C. Supervise Conduct Of Officers: The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all of the officers of the city and see that they faithfully and efficiently
discharge the duties of their respective offices. He shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them or any of them, and cause all neglect
or violation of duty to be promptly corrected. He shall, in case he becomes satisfied that any officer wilfully neglects or violates his duty, cause such
officer to be prosecuted and punished. (R.O. 1924 II, §8)
D. Removal Of Officers, Powers Limited: The mayor shall have the power to remove any officers appointed by him on any formal charge whenever he
shall be of the opinion that the interests of the city demand such removal; but he shall report the reason for such removal to the city council at its
nextregular meeting or at a special meeting called for such purpose, and file with the city clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal; or if the
city council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by yeas and nays to be entered upon its record, disapprove of
such removal, such officer shall thereupon become restored to the office from which he was so removed, and such reinstatement shall also reinstate
his bond and oath of office. (R.O. 1924 II, §9; amd. 1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 5/403
E. Ordinance Approval Or Veto: The mayor shall carefully inspect all ordinances passed by the city council and affix his official signature to such as he
may approve and return them to the city clerk within ten (10) days after their passage; and all ordinances passed as aforesaid which do not meet his
approval shall be returned to the council with his objections thereto in writing at the next regular meeting of the city council, occurring not less than five
(5) days after their passage. In case such ordinance is made by its terms to take effect from and after its passage, the mayor shall call a special
meeting of the city council at which he shall return said ordinance with his objections, which said special meeting shall be not more than ten (10) days
after the passage of said ordinance. It shall not be necessary to call a special meeting for other ordinances. The veto of the mayor may extend to any
one or more items or sections or paragraphs of an ordinance, or to the entire ordinance, and in case the veto only extends to part of such ordinance,
the residue thereof shall take effect and be enforced if such part can stand and take effect without the part so vetoed. In case the mayor shall fail to
return any ordinance with his objections thereto within ten (10) days from the passage thereof as aforesaid, or before the next regular meeting of the
city council as the case may be, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance and the same shall take effect accordingly. (R.O. 1924 II, §10;
amd. 1989 Code)
F. Sign Commissions, Documents, Contracts, Etc.: The mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses and permits authorized by the ordinances of the city. He
shall also sign all contracts where the city is a party, signing on behalf of the city, and it shall be his further duty to see that the other contracting party
shall faithfully comply with the contract. (R.O. 1924 II, §11; amd. 1989 Code)
G. Suits, Advise And Assist Attorney: In all suits where the city is a party, it shall be the duty of the mayor to advise with and assist the city attorney in
prosecuting or defending the same, as the case may be. (R.O. 1924 II, §11)
H. Report To Council: The mayor shall, from time to time, give the city council such information relative to the affairs of the city as he may deem proper,
and recommend for its consideration any measure that he may deem expedient, tending to the well being, security or improvement of the city. (R.O.
1924 II, §8)
I. Additional Duties: In addition to the above and foregoing, the mayor shall perform all such other and further duties pertaining to his office as are, or may
be, required of him by the laws of the state of Illinois or the ordinances of the city. (R.O. 1924 II, §12)
1-5-6: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall elect one of its number to act as mayor pro tem, who, during such absence or
disability, shall possess the powers of the mayor. (R.O. 1924 II, §6)
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: COMPOSITION, VACANCIES IN OFFICE:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen from each of the four (4) wards. It shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
own members, and in case any vacancy shall occur in the office of aldermen by death, resignation, removal or other cause, such vacancy shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-4-14 as amended from time to time. (1924 Code §3-1; amd. 1989 Code)
1-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
A. No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman:
1. Unless he shall be a qualified elector and reside in the ward from which he was elected;
2. If he is in arrears in the payment of tax or any other liability to the city;
3. If he is directly or indirectly interested in any contract whatever to which the city is a party;
4. If he shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery or other corrupt practices or crimes;
B. No person shall be eligible to any office, the salary of which is payable out of the city treasury, if, at the time of his appointment, he shall be a member of
the city council; nor shall any member of the city council at the same time hold any other office under the city government;
C. No council member shall be either directly or indirectly, individually or as a member of a firm, engaged in any business transaction (other than official)
with the city through its mayor or any of its authorized boards, agents or attorneys, whereby any money is to be paid directly or indirectly out of the city
treasury to such member or firm; nor shall any member of the city council sign any bond in any case wherein the city is interested. (1924 Code §3-2)
1-6-3: SALARIES OF ALDERMEN:
All aldermen of the city, duly elected or appointed, qualifying and taking office subsequent to May 1, 2003, shall receive an annual salary of three thousand
six hundred dollars ($3,600.00), payable quarterly, effective May 1, 2003. In addition thereto, the aldermen shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
council meeting and meetings of the committee of the whole attended by the aldermen up to a maximum of two thousand six hundred dollars ($2,600.00)
per fiscal year. Compensation for attendance at council meetings and meetings of the committee of the whole shall be paid quarterly. (Ord. 2002-38, 9-23-
2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 6/403
1-6-4: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be as stated on the schedule of meetings, passed each December by the city council,
at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in the council chamber. (Ord. 1974-14; amd. 1989 Code; Ord. 2015-17, 7-13-2015)
B. Adjourned Meetings: Adjourned meetings may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished business of the regular meeting, or in case of a
want of a quorum, at such time or times as may be determined by the city council. (Ord. 1974-14)
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or any three (3) aldermen whenever, in his or their discretion, they
may deem it necessary, in which event such meeting shall be called in the following manner: The mayor or three (3) aldermen, as the case may be,
shall file in the office of the city clerk a statement in writing setting forth the object and purpose of such meeting and directing the clerk to give notice of
the same. Upon the filing of such statement, the city clerk shall cause to be served personally upon every member of the city council, or left at his
residence, a notice of such meeting, setting forth in said notice the object and purpose thereof and time of holding the same. No business other than
that mentioned in the call shall be transacted at such special meeting and no vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any special
meeting thereof unless at such special meeting there shall be present the same aldermen as were present when such vote was taken. (1924 Code
§§3-4, 3-12)
1-6-5: QUORUM:
Four (4) of the aldermen shall, when present at any regular or special meeting, constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absentees. (1924 Code §3-7)
In case of the absence at any time of a sufficient number of members of the city council to constitute a quorum, those present, or the mayor, may direct the
chief of police or other public officer to find such absentees if within the city. Unless they are unable through some justifiable cause to attend, they, and
each of them so absent, shall be ordered forthwith to attend said council meeting. (1924 Code §3-9; amd. 1989 Code)
1-6-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS OF COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS:
A. Voting Mandatory: Every member of the city council shall vote on all questions in which they are not directly or personally interested which may be
brought before the council for its action in such manner as to require a vote to be taken thereon; but if so interested, such member may be excused
from voting by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the other members present. (1924 Code §3-9)
B. Yeas And Nays: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the city or
for the expenditure or appropriation of its money and in all other cases at the request of any member. When such request is made, the same shall be
entered on the journal of the proceedings and the yeas and nays shall be taken thereon as in other cases.
C. Passing Ordinance Over Veto: In case the mayor shall veto any ordinance or any part of an ordinance and return the same to the council together with
his objections thereto, the vote by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered, and if after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members elected to the city council shall agree by yeas and nays to pass the same, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding the mayor may refuse to
approve the same. In all cases where the vote to pass an ordinance or part of an ordinance over the mayor's veto, the yeas and nays shall be taken
and entered on the journal. (1924 Code §3-11)
D. Committee Reports:
1. Documents Attached: Every committee of the city council, in reporting upon any subject referred to it, shall attach to such report all papers or
documents in the possession of the said committee relative to the matter so referred. (1924 Code §3-13)
2. Reports Deferred: Any report of a committee of the city council shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting after such report
is made, upon the request of any two (2) aldermen. (1924 Code §3-14)
E. Rules And Order Of Business: The following rules of procedure and order of business shall be invariably adhered to by city council unless the same be
temporarily suspended by unanimous consent: (Charter; amd. 1989 Code)
Rule 1. At the appointed hour of the meeting, the city council shall be called to order and the mayor taking the chair, if present, and if the mayor is not
present, then the duly appointed and acting mayor pro tem shall take the chair, if present, and if neither the mayor nor the mayor pro tem are
present, then the city council shall appoint another alderman as temporary chairman of the meeting. The city clerk (or someone appointed to supply
his or her place) shall proceed to call the roll of the members, marking the absentees and announce whether a quorum be present. The council shall
then proceed to the business before it, which shall be conducted in the following order or agenda: (Ord. 2009-17, 5-26-2009)
1. Call to order.
2. Pledge Of Allegiance to the flag.
3. Roll call and establishment of quorum.
4. Adoption of the minutes of the proceedings of the last regular and all special meetings of the city council, amendments to and approval of the
same.
5. Approval of agenda.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 7/403
6. Approval of warrants to be drawn on the treasury.
7. Approval of wage report.
8. Introduction of guests.
9. Citizens' comments.
10. Mayor's report.
11. Plano area chamber of commerce.
12. City attorney's report.
13. City clerk's report.
14. City treasurer's report.
15. Police chief's report.
16. Director of public works' report.
17. Director of water reclamation's report.
18. Director of building, planning and zoning's report.
19. Standing committee reports:
Special events.
Administrative health and safety.
Buildings, grounds and zoning.
Finance.
Parks.
Personnel and insurance.
Streets and utilities.
Economic development/grants.
20. Final citizens' comments.
21. Closed session.
22. Adjournment. (Ord. 2015-17, 7-13-2015)
Rule 2. All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by the mayor.
Rule 3. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the city council.
Rule 4. While the mayor is putting the question or deciding a point of order, the members shall be seated, and no member shall leave the council chamber
without permission from the council.
Rule 5. Every member, previous to his speaking, shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair.
Rule 6. When two (2) or more members rise at once, the mayor shall name the member who shall speak first.
Rule 7. No member shall speak more than twice to the same question, nor more than once to a "previous question", without leave of the council, nor more
than once in any case until every member choosing to speak shall have spoken.
Rule 8. Every member present, when a question is stated by the chair, shall vote thereon unless excused by the council or unless he be directly interested
in the question, in which case he shall not vote.
Rule 9. No motion shall be debated or put unless it be seconded, and when a motion is so seconded, it shall be stated by the chair before debate, and
every such motion shall be reduced to writing upon request of the mayor or any member of the council.
Rule 10. After a motion or resolution is stated by the chair, it shall be deemed in possession of the council, but may be withdrawn by the maker thereof at
any time before a decision or amendment, with the consent of the member seconding the same.
Rule 11. No motion shall embrace more than one subject.
Rule 12. When a question is under debate no motion shall be received unless for the "previous question", "to postpone it indefinitely", "to adjourn to a
certain day", "to lay it on the table", "to amend it" or "to adjourn the city council".
Rule 13. A motion for the "previous question", "to lay the question on the table" or "to commit it", until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments and
debate on the main question, and a motion to "postpone a question indefinitely" or to "adjourn it to a certain day" until it is decided, shall preclude all
amendments to the main question.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 8/403
Rule 14. The "previous question" shall be as follows: "Shall the main question be not put?".
Rule 15. A motion to adjourn the city council shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate, unless the motion shall be to adjourn to a
certain day, when the same may be debated.
Rule 16. In all cases when a resolution or motion shall be entered on the minutes of the city council, the name of the member moving the same shall be
entered upon the minutes.
Rule 17. If any member so requests, the ayes and noes shall be taken upon any question and entered upon the minutes.
Rule 18. All committees shall be appointed by the mayor unless otherwise required by law.
Rule 19. All reports of committees shall be addressed to the "mayor and city council of the city of Plano".
Rule 20. When amendments are offered to any question, the vote shall be first taken upon the last amendment proposed.
Rule 21. The election of any member of the council to the chair during the temporary absence of the mayor shall not deprive such member of his vote as
alderman of the ward he represents; no vote shall be deemed as carried unless by a majority of the aldermen present.
Rule 22. "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the proceedings of the council, except when in conflict with the foregoing rules. (Charter; amd. 1989
Code)
1-6-7: STANDING COMMITTEES:
A. Appointment: It shall be the duty of the mayor, at the first regular meeting of the council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, to appoint
the following named standing committees of the city council, each to consist of not less than three (3) aldermen:
Administrative health and safety.
Buildings, grounds and zoning.
Economic development/grants.
Finance.
Parks.
Personnel and insurance.
Special events.
Streets and utilities.
(Ord. 2015-17, 7-13-2015)
Nothing herein shall preclude the establishment, from time to time, of special committees. (Ord. 2009-17, 5-26-2009)
B. Duties:
1. It shall be the duty of the standing committees of the city council to keep close watch of the affairs of their respective departments of the city
government.
2. They shall have the general management, control and supervision of the things ordered to be done by the city council in their respective
departments, and when necessary or proper, shall make reports to the council of whatever facts may be deemed of importance.
3. Each committee shall promptly investigate and report in writing upon all matters referred to it by the council, and do and perform such other and
further duties as the council may from time to time, by ordinance, resolution or motion, direct. (1924 Code §3-6)
Chapter 7
CITY CLERK
1-7-1: DUTIES:
A. Council Meetings; Attendance, Minutes, Notices: The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and shall keep in a suitable book to be styled
"Record Of The City Council", a full and faithful record of its proceedings. He shall issue and cause to be served upon all aldermen notices of all special
meetings of the city council. Said notices shall also be issued to the members of the different committees of that body, and to all other persons whose
attendance may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the chairman thereof. In the event that the city clerk is unable to attend a
meeting of the city council, the council may select a recording secretary for the purpose of the taking of minutes of any such city council meeting. Any
such recording secretary shall be paid a salary or wage, per hour, as may be determined from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 1980-9, 12-8-1980;
amd. 1989 Code)
B. Corporate Seal: The clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided under the direction of the city council, and all papers belonging to the city and
copies of all papers filed in his office, and transcripts from the records and files of his office certified by him under the corporate seal shall be evidence
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 9/403
in all courts in like manner as if the original were produced.
C. Publication Of Ordinances: The clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the city council imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or
making any appropriation, to be published within ten (10) days after the passage, in some public newspaper printed in the city, and shall procure and
file in his office one or more copies of such paper containing such ordinance or ordinances so published.
D. Elected And Appointed Officials:
1. Notice: It shall be the duty of the clerk, within five (5) days after the result of any election is declared or appointment is made, to notify all persons
elected or appointed of such election or appointment, and unless such persons shall respectively qualify within ten (10) days of such notice, the
office shall become vacant.
2. Record Kept: The city clerk shall keep a record of the elections and appointments of all officers of the city, and said record shall be so constructed as
to exhibit the name of the officer, to what office elected or appointed, the date of such election or appointment, and in the case of an appointive
officer, the date of confirmation; also, the date or dates of any commission or commissions, together with the date of deaths, resignations, removals
or expirations.
E. Records Kept, Turned Over To Successor: The city clerk shall carefully preserve in his office all books, records, papers, maps, plats and other
documents of every description belonging to the city, or appertaining to his office, and at the expiration of his term of office or upon his resignation or
removal, he shall turn over all of said papers and effects to his successor in office.
F. Additional Duties: In addition to the foregoing duties, the clerk shall perform all such other and further duties pertaining to his office as are or may be
imposed upon him by the law of this state, the ordinances of the city or by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1980-9, 12-8-1980)
1-7-2: SALARY:
The city clerk shall receive an annual salary of five thousand six hundred dollars ($5,600.00), said salary to be paid on the same salary schedule as the
city treasurer, and shall be effective immediately following the 2005 municipal election where a city clerk shall be elected for the city. In addition thereto,
and effective for each meeting of the city council or committee of the whole held subsequent to the 2005 municipal election where the city clerk shall be
elected for the city, the city clerk shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for each council meeting and meetings of the committee of the whole attended by the
city clerk up to a maximum of two thousand six hundred dollars ($2,600.00) per fiscal year. Compensation for attendance at council meetings and
meetings of the committee of the whole shall be paid on the same salary schedule as the city treasurer. The salary and meeting allowance herein provided
shall be in lieu of all other compensations or benefits in any form whatsoever accruing to the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2002-38, 9-23-2002)
1-7-3: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
Whenever the office of city clerk becomes vacant, either permanently or temporarily, the mayor shall appoint some suitable person to fill such vacancy, but
such appointment shall always be with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1980-9, 12-8-1980)
1-7-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Appointment And Removal: The city clerk is authorized to appoint one deputy clerk to assist the city clerk in the performance of the duties of the office
of the city clerk. Any deputy clerk appointed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall serve at the pleasure of the city clerk and shall be subject to
discharge by the city clerk.
B. Duties: The deputy clerk shall perform such duties in the office of the city clerk as the city clerk shall from time to time assign, and shall, in the absence
of the city clerk, perform the duties of the office of the city clerk.
C. Salary: The deputy clerk shall be paid a wage or salary as may from time to time be authorized by the city council. (Ord. 1982-15)
Chapter 8
CITY TREASURER
1-8-1: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to the office of city treasurer unless he shall be of legal age and shall have resided within the city one year before his election.
(Ord. 1973-1, eff. 5-1-1973)
1-8-2: OATH, BOND AND SALARY:
A. Oath And Bond: The city treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath prescribed for city officers, and shall execute a bond
to the city in the penal sum of not less than the amount of the estimated city tax for the current year, with good and sufficient surety to be approved by
the city council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office and the payment of all monies received by him according to law and
the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1973-1, eff. 5-1-1973)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 10/403
B. Salary: The city treasurer shall receive an annual salary of five thousand six hundred dollars ($5,600.00), said salary to be paid on the same salary
schedule as the city budget officer, and shall be effective immediately following the 2005 municipal election where a city treasurer shall be elected for
the city. In addition thereto, and effective for each meeting of the city council or committee of the whole held subsequent to the 2005 municipal election
where a city treasurer shall be elected for the city, the city treasurer shall receive fifty dollars ($50.00) for each council meeting and meetings of the
committee of the whole attended by the city treasurer up to a maximum of two thousand six hundred dollars ($2,600.00) per fiscal year. Compensation
for attendance at council meetings and meetings of the committee of the whole shall be paid on the same salary schedule as the city collector. The
salary and meeting allowance herein provided shall be in lieu of all other compensation or benefits in any form whatsoever accruing to the office of the
city treasurer. (Ord. 2002-38, 9-23-2002)
1-8-3: DUTIES:
A. Receive Money, Give Receipts, Keep Accounts: The city treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city and shall keep a separate account of
each appropriation. He shallgive to every person paying money into the city treasury a receipt therefor showing the date of payment and upon what
account paid and shall file copies of such receipts with the city clerk at the date of his monthly report.
B. Pay Debts: The city treasurer shall be authorized and directed to pay all debts incurred by the city upon the city council approving the payment of such
debt or obligation. It shall not be necessary for the city treasurer and/or city clerk to prepare a separate voucher for each check drawn. (Ord. 1973-1,
eff. 5-1-1973; amd. Ord. 1974-7, 7-10-1974)
All checks or drafts for the payment of money drawn on accounts maintained by the city in any banks or depositories shall require the signature of
the city treasurer and one of the following officers of the city: the city clerk, the chairman of the finance committee of the city council or the mayor. (Res.
1987-5, 8-24-1987)
C. Register Of Warrants: The city treasurer shall keep an accurate register of all warrants redeemed and paid by him, showing the number, date and
amount of each, the fund from which paid, and the person to whom paid, and he shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed by him.
D. Reports:
1. General: The city treasurer shall, upon request by any council member, render an account, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date
of such account, the condition of each appropriation and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall accompany such account with a statement of
all monies received into the treasury and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him, which said warrants, with any and
all vouchers held by him, to be delivered to the clerk and filed with his said account in the clerk's office. He shall return all warrants paid by him
stamped and marked "Paid" and he shall keep a register of all warrants.
2. Annual Statement: The city treasurer shall, annually, between May 1 and May 10, make out and file with the city clerk a full and detailed account of
all of the receipts and expenditures of the city, and of all of his transactions as treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, which statement shall
exhibit, under separate and appropriate headings, the several accounts with the several funds or appropriations. The city clerk shall then submit his
counter financial report, together with the report of the treasurer, aforesaid, to the mayor or finance committee of the city council, and if the said
reports shall be found to be correct and a true financial condition of the city, they shall be approved and filed in the office of the city clerk. The clerk
shall then cause the treasurer's annual financial report to be published in some newspaper published in said city.
E. Report Delinquent Officers: It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to report to the city clerk any officer authorized to receive money for the use of the
city who may fail to make a return of the same at the time required by law or by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1973-1, eff. 5-1-1973)
Chapter 9
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-9-1: RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1992-17, 8-10-1992)
1-9-2: VACATION BENEFITS:
Vacation benefits for all employees of the city of Plano shall be governed by the personnel policy of the city in effect, from time to time, as to nonunion
personnel, and shall be governed by collective bargaining agreements for union employees in effect, from time to time. (Ord. 2009-19, 6-22-2009)
1-9-3: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The city does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund, effective January 1, 1973, and the city clerk is hereby directed to promptly
file a certified copy of this section with the board of trustees of the Illinois municipal retirement fund. (Ord. 1972-13, 12-11-1972)
1-9-4: INAUGURATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS:
The date for inauguration of newly elected officers of the city, including the offices of mayor, city clerk, city treasurer and all aldermanic offices, shall be the
first regular or special meeting of the city council conducted in the month of May following the election of such officers to the foregoing municipal positions.
(Ord. 1981-4, 3-23-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 11/403
Chapter 10
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-10-1: ANNUAL BUDGET:
A. State Statutes Adopted: The city hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through and including 5/8-2-9.10 providing for an annual
municipal budget in lieu of the passage of an annual appropriation ordinance. (Ord. 1979-8, 5-24-1979)
B. Compilation And Adoption Of Annual Budget: The budget officer1 shall compile a budget pursuant to the above sections of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes as they are now or may hereafter be amended, containing estimates of the revenues available before the beginning of the fiscal year to which
it applies together with recommended expenditures for the municipality and all of its boards, commissions and departments. Said budget shall be
adopted prior to May 1 of each fiscal year and the first said annual budget shall be compiled by the budget officer and submitted to the corporate
authorities of the city prior to the fiscal year commencing May 1, 1980. (Ord. 1979-8, 5-24-1979; amd. 1989 Code)
C. Public Inspection And Hearing: Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection in printed or typewritten form in the
office of the city clerk for at least ten (10) days prior to the passage of the annual budget. Not less than one week after the budget is available for
inspection and prior to final action on the budget, at least one public hearing shall be held on the budget by the city council. Notice of this hearing shall
be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the time of hearing.
D. Budget Revisions: The city council may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to or change items
previously budgeted to the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the budget officer or mayor
as the city council, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members, may establish. The annual budget may be revised by avote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city
council by deleting, adding to or changing budgeted items, but no revision of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not
available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord. 1979-8, 5-24-1979)
E. Limits Of Expenditures: Neither the city council nor any department or officer of the city shall add to the corporate expenditures in any one year anything
over and above the amount provided for in the annual budget of that year, except as herein otherwise provided, and no expenditure on improvement to
be paid for out of the general fund of the corporation shall exceed, in any year, the amount provided for in the annual budget for that year. Provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council from ordering, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote, any improvement, the necessity for which
has been caused by any casualty or accident happening after such annual budget is made. (R.O. 1924 III, §18; amd. Ord. 1979-8, 5-24-1979)
F. Appropriations Required: No contract shall be hereafter made by the city council or any committee or member hereof, and no expense shall be incurred
by any officers or departments of the city, whether the object of such expenditure shall have been ordered by the city council or not, unless an
appropriation shall have been otherwise expressly provided. (R.O. 1924 III, §19)
1-10-2: ANNUAL TAX LEVY:
The city council shall annually, on or before the third Tuesday in September in each year, estimate the total amount of appropriation for all corporate
purposes legally made and to be collected from the tax levy of this fiscal year, and by ordinance, specifying in detail the purposes for which such
appropriations are made and the sum or amount appropriated for each purpose, respectively, levy the amount as estimated upon all property subject to
taxation within the city as the same is assessed and equalized for state and county purposes for the current year. A certified copy of such ordinance shall
be filed with the county clerk whose duty it shall be to ascertain the rate percentum upon the total value of all the property subject to taxation within the city
as the same was assessed and equalized for state and county purposes, and produce a net amount not less than the amount so directed to be levied; and
it shall be the duty of the county clerk to estimate such a tax in a separate column upon the book or books of the collector or collectors of the state and
county tax within the city. Provided, the aggregate amount of taxes levied for any one year, exclusive of the amount levied for the payment of bonded
indebtedness or the interest thereon, shall not exceed the rate fixed by law upon the aggregate valuation of all the property within the city subject to
taxation as the same was equalized for state and county taxes of the preceding year. (R.O. 1924 III, §20)
1-10-3: LIMIT ON INDEBTEDNESS:
The city council may, whenever the interests of the city require, borrow money on the credit of the city for corporate interests and issue bonds therefor in
such amount or amounts and in such form or forms and on such condition or conditions as it may prescribe, subject to applicable statutory limits. (R.O.
1924 III, §16; amd. 1989 Code)
1-10-4: CONTRACTS:
A. Contracts Over Twenty Thousand Dollars, Procedure:
1. Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the expense
thereof will exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be constructed by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for
bids, in the manner hereinafter prescribed, except that any such contract may be entered into by the proper officers without advertising for bids, if
authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the alderman then holding office; and all material of the value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and
upwards used in the construction of the work or other public improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest responsible bidder in the
manner hereinafter prescribed.
2. The city council shall direct the city clerk to advertise for bids by placing a notice to bid in a newspaper published and having general circulation in
the city on one occasion, the publication date to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the date for letting the contract.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 12/403
3. The notice to bid shall state the specific work to be performed and/or material to be required in order to advise prospective bidders of the nature and
extent of the contract to be let with sufficient information to enable them to bid.
B. Exceptions To Provisions:
1. Federal Government Contracts: Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any contract with the federal government or any agency thereof.
2. City Emergencies: Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from letting contracts without bidding in the event an emergency condition
exists. (Ord. 2005-52, 11-14-2005)
1-10-5: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
A. Wage Rates Provided: To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workmenemployed in any public
works by the state, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for public works2", approved June 25, 1941,
as amended, the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workmen engaged in the construction of public
works coming under the jurisdiction of this city is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in Kendall
County area as determined by the department of labor of the state as of June of each year, a copy of that determination being incorporated herein by
reference. The definitions of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act. (Ord. 1983-11, 6-
13-1983; 1989 Code)
B. Application Of Rates: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction of this city to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
C. Rate To Be Posted: The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this city, this
determination of such prevailing rate of wage.
D. Copies Available To Employees: The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any
person or association of employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular
rates and the particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates. (Ord. 1983-11, 6-13-1983)
1-10-6: VOUCHERS:
It shall not be necessary for the city treasurer and/or city clerk to prepare a separate voucher for each check drawn. (Ord. 1973-1, eff. 5-1-1973; amd. Ord.
1974-7, 7-10-1974)
Chapter 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-11-1: BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY:
The boundaries of the city are and shall be as now determined and as may hereafter be modified by annexations and disconnections. (1924 Code ch. I §1;
amd. 1989 Code)
1-11-2: ELECTION WARDS:
Each of the four (4) wards of the city of Plano be and the same are hereby redistricted and realigned to encompass the following territory within the city of
Plano, Kendall County, Illinois:
A. Ward 1: Ward 1 shall consist of all of that territory now within or hereafter annexed into the corporate limits of the city of Plano lying within and/or
northerly and easterly of the following lines:
Commencing at the center of the intersection of U.S. Route 34 and Eldamain Road; thence westerly along the centerline of U.S. Route 34 to the
centerline of the Big Rock Creek; thence northerly along the centerline of the Big Rock Creek to the centerline of the right of way of the Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Railroad; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said railroad right of way to the intersection thereof with Hale Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of Hale Street, to the intersection thereof with Steward Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Steward Street to
the intersection thereof with Lew Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Lew Street and the prolongation of the centerline of Lew Street to the
northerly corporate limits of the city of Plano.
B. Ward 2: Ward 2 shall consist of all of that territory now within or hereafter annexed into the corporate limits of the city of Plano lying within and/or
southerly and easterly of the following described lines:
Commencing at the center of the intersection of U.S. Route 34 and Eldamain Road; thence westerly along the centerline of U.S. Route 34 to the center
of the Big Rock Creek; thence southerly along the centerline of the Big Rock Creek to the intersection thereof with Hale Street Road; thence continuing
southerly along the centerline of the Big Rock Creek to the southerly corporate limits of the city of Plano.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 13/403
C. Ward 3: Ward 3 shall consist of all of that territory now within or hereafter annexed into the corporate limits of the city of Plano lying within and/or
southerly and westerly of the following described lines:
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right of way and the westernmost corporate limits of the
city of Plano; thence easterly along the centerline of said railroad right of way to the intersection thereof with Ben Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of Ben Street to the intersection thereof with North Street; thence easterly along the centerline of North Street to the intersection thereof with
Hale Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Hale Street to the intersection thereof with the centerline of the right of way of the Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Railroad; thence easterly along the centerline of said right of way to the center of the Big Rock Creek; thence southerly along the
centerline of the Big Rock Creek to the center of Hale Street Road; thence continuing southerly along the centerline of the Big Rock Creek to the
southerly corporate limits.
D. Ward 4: Ward 4 shall consist of all of that territory now within or hereafter annexed into the corporate limits of the city of Plano lying within and/or
northerly and westerly of the following described lines:
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right of way and the westernmost corporate limits of the
city of Plano; thence easterly along the centerline of said railroad right of way to the intersection thereof with Ben Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of Ben Street to the intersection thereof with North Street; thence easterly along the centerline of North Street to the intersection thereof with
the centerline of Hale Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Hale Street to the intersection thereof with Steward Street; thence easterly along
the centerline of Steward Street to the intersection thereof with Lew Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Lew Street and the prolongation of
the centerline of Lew Street to the northerly corporate limits of the city of Plano.
(Ord. 2008-34, 6-23-2008)
Chapter 12
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES: Cannabis, as defined in Illinois Revised Statutes chapter 561/2, section 703(a), and controlled substances as defined in
Schedule I-IV of the Controlled Substances Act, being Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 561/2, section 1100 and following.
CONVICTION: A finding of guilt or imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with the responsibility to determine violations of Federal or
State criminal drug statutes.
CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE: A Federal, State or local criminal statute or ordinance involving the manufacture, sale, distribution dispensing, use or
possession of any controlled substance.
WORKPLACE: A site for the performance of work done in the course of employment by the City, which includes, but is not limited to the following:
A. City Hall.
B. City Garage.
C. Police Station/Fire Station.
D. Water Treatment Plant.
E. Wastewater Treatment Plant.
F. All City parks.
G. All other buildings and properties now owned or hereafter owned or occupied or used by the City of Plano or any of its officers or commissions for
the conduct of official City business.
H. All City streets, alleys and/or rights of way. (Ord. 1992-29, 12-14-92)
1-12-2: POLICY:
The City shall keep and maintain its workplaces free from the use and abuse of controlled substances. (Ord. 1992-29, 12-14-92)
1-12-3: DRUG AWARENESS:
The City Council, with assistance and implementation through the Police Department of the City shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 14/403
A. Establish a supervisory training program to educate all supervisory personnel on the following:
1. Signs and symptoms of drug use.
2. Drug abuse education.
3. City policy on drug use.
4. How to deal with an employee suspected of drug use.
5. How and when to take disciplinary action.
6. Resources available in the community to assist an employee.
B. Establish and employee training program to educate all employees in the following:
1. Drug abuse education.
2. City policy and penalties for drug use in the workplace.
3. Resources available in the community to assist an employee.
4. Dangers of drug use in the workplace.
C. Provide pamphlets and documents necessary for the above training and provide for periodical training sessions, said sessions being at least annually.
(Ord. 1992-29, 12-14-92)
1-12-4: SANCTIONS:
A. An employee convicted of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace shall report said conviction to his supervisor no later than five
(5) days after such conviction.
B. An employee convicted of a violation of a criminal drug statute occurring in the workplace may be dismissed from employment.
C. In the implementation of the policy established by this drug-free workplace legislation, the City shall abide by all the applicable terms and provisions of
the Americans With Disabilities Act, as now in force and hereafter amended. (Ord. 1992-29, 12-14-92)
Chapter 13
ETHICS ACT
1-13-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
A. The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of
the act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
H. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not beincorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 15/403
I. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this section
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 2004-
20, 5-10-2004)
Chapter 14
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
1-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of city ordinances, as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance,
through an administrative adjudication of violations of such city ordinances, thereby expediting the prosecution and correction of code violations, and
establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. To that end, there is hereby
adopted division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-2: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a department of the city government to be known as the city of Plano ordinance enforcement department to have the power to
enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances including ordinances regulating the standing and parking of vehicles and the condition and use of vehicle
equipment, within the city limits, as from time to time authorized by the city council and any offense under the city's building codes, but not any offense
under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and except for any reportable offense
under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. The establishment of the city of Plano ordinance enforcement department does not preclude the mayor
and city council from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-3: DEPARTMENT COMPOSITION:
The city of Plano ordinance enforcement department shall be composed of a hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, a traffic compliance
administrator, a system coordinator/computer operator and such other personnel hereinafter appointed, with the power and authority as hereinafter set
forth.
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint all hearing officers of the city with the advice and consent of the city council. The mayor is hereby authorized to
appoint all other persons to hold the positions set forth below, and such other personnel as needed. Other than the hearing officer, one person may hold
and fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions, and compensation for each of the stated positions shall be as approved by the
mayor and city council.
A. Hearing Officer:
1. The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties:
a. Preside at administrative hearings called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
b. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of the city code violation;
c. Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
d. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
e. Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a city code violation exists; and
f. Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with applicable city code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the
charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
2. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal training
program which includes the following:
a. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside;
b. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/she will adjudicate;
c. Observation of administrative hearings; and
d. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
3. A hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
B. Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of city ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 16/403
2. Adopt, distribute, and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability.
4. Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this chapter, and the laws of the state of Illinois, including 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended.
5. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning the initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
as hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, as from time to time amended.
6. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
7. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by current law.
C. Traffic Compliance Administrator: The traffic compliance administrator is authorized and directed to:
1. Adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance violation notices and other notices required by this code or by Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of parking and compliance ordinances.
3. Operate an administrative adjudication system, in coordination with the ordinance enforcement administrator.
D. System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the
computer programs for the administrative adjudication system of the ordinance enforcement department, including, but not limited to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Establishing court dates and notice dates.
3. Record fine and penalty assessment and payments.
4. Issue payment receipts.
5. Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability;
6. Issue notice of immobilization;
7. Issue notice of impending impoundment;
8. Issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the ordinance enforcement administrator or traffic compliance administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth; and
9. Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if
any, fines and penalties assessed and paid. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-4: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The system of administrative adjudication of any city ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder shall be in accordance with the following
procedures:
A. Violation notice or notice of violation of any ordinance violation including violations of the city motor vehicles and traffic code, title 10 of this code, other
than any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and except for any
reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code (hereinafter the "city motor vehicle code"), as from time to time amended, shall be
issued by the persons authorized under this code and shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the
violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
B. All full time, part time, and auxiliary police officers as well as other specifically authorized individuals of any city department shall have the authority to
issue violation notices.
C. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter or a
violation of any section of any city ordinance, is authorized to issue a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof in the manner
hereinafter set forth.
D. The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
2. The date, time, and place of the violation and the date of issuance of the violation notice.
3. The type and nature of the ordinance violated.
4. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
5. The penalty which may be assessed for failure to appear.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 17/403
6. The names and witnesses of the violation.
7. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
8. The date, and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held,
and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing. The date of the hearing shall not be less than thirty (30) days nor more than forty (40) days after
the violation is reported.
E. The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator where a docket number shall be assigned
and stamped on all copies and a hearing date noted. The notice shall be kept as a record in the ordinary course of business by the ordinance
enforcement administrator. One copy of the violation notice shall be returned to the person issuing the notice in order that he or she may prepare
evidence for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated. One copy of the violation notice shall be served by first class mail, with postage prepaid,
to the alleged violator along with a summons commanding the alleged violator to appear.
F. The violation notice for any ordinance regulating the standing and parking of vehicles and the condition and use of vehicle equipment shall contain, but
shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The date, time and place of a violation of a parking, standing, or condition and use of vehicle equipment regulation.
2. The particular regulation violated.
3. The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
4. The vehicle make and state registration number.
5. The identification number of the person issuing the notice.
6. A statement that the payment of any indicated fine and the payment of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation.
7. A statement as to the opportunity for a hearing for the registered owner of the vehicle cited in the parking, standing or compliance violation notice in
which the owner may contest the merits of the alleged violation and during which formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply provided,
however, that the lessee of a vehicle cited in the violation notice likewise shall be provided an opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded to
the registered owner.
G. The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified and certified by the person issuing said notice by:
1. Signing his or her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
2. In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator or the
traffic compliance administrator, as the case may be, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under his or her
control.
H. The original or a facsimile of the violation notice or, in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the
device, showing the facts entered on the notice, shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary
course of business. A parking, standing or compliance violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this code, a copy of the notice, or
the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The
notice, copy or computer generated records shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.
I. Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-5: SERVICE AND NOTICE OF HEARING; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, CITY BUILDING CODE, CITY ORDINANCES
OR CODE OTHER THAN CITY MOTOR VEHICLE CODE:
A. Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice:
1. In the case of violation of the property maintenance code, the city building code, or any other city ordinance or code, service shall be made by:
a. First class mail, with postage prepaid, to the owner of the property, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing; or
b. If the name of the owner of the property cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or affixing a copy of the notice on the property where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-6: FAILURE TO APPEAR; NOTICE:
A. Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a city ordinance, other than a city motor vehicle code violation, to appear at the time and
date designated for a hearing, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class mail, postage prepaid to
the person who received the notice of an ordinance violation. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-7: SERVICE OF VIOLATION NOTICE REGULATING THE STANDING AND PARKING OF VEHICLES AND THE CONDITION
AND USE OF VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 18/403
A. Service Of Notice: Service of parking, standing or compliance violation notice shall be made by affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to the
vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of the vehicle if he or she is present.
B. Failure To Pay Fine; Content Of Notice: Upon the failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation
of the city motor vehicle code, the registered owner, operator, or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice
shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice.
2. Particular ordinance violated.
3. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
4. Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
5. A section entitled "notice of hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, or in the case of a violation
of the city motor vehicles and traffic code, title 10 of this code, the registered owner, operator, or lessee, may appear at an administrative hearing to
contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing.
6. Date, time, and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
7. Statement that failure to either pay the fine or any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and
place specified will result in a final determination of liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
8. Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the city.
C. Notice Of Final Determination: A notice of final determination of parking, standing or compliance violation liability shall be sent following a final
determination of parking, standing or compliance law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken. Such notice shall state
that the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, is a debt due and owing the city. The notice shall contain warnings that the failure to pay any fine or penalty due
and owing the city, within the time specified, may result in a suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties or both for
ten (10) or more parking violations under this code.
D. Determination Becomes Final: A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty or both after a hearing
officer's determination of violation liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by this code.
Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing
officer's determination of violation liability shall become final upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or upon expiration of the
period for filing the petition without filing having been made.
E. Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for failure to pay
any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on ten (10) or more parking violations. The notice shall state that failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing or both within forty five (45) days of the notice date will result in the city notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for
initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 6-306.5. The notice shall state that the person may obtain a photostatic copy
of an original ticket imposing fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the city along with a request for the photostatic copy.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in the United States post office
approved database.
F. Petition To Set Aside Determination: A petition to set aside a determination of parking, standing or compliance violation liability may be filed by a person
owing an unpaid fine or penalty. The petition shall be filed with and ruled upon by the traffic compliance administrator within seven (7) days of the filing
of the petition with the traffic compliance administrator. The grounds for the petition shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or
lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued, 2) the person has already paid the fine or penalty for the violation(s) in question,
and/or 3) an excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. After a determination by the traffic compliance administrator that the
parking, standing or compliance violation liability has been set aside upon a showing of just cause, the registered owner shall be provided with a
hearing on the merits of that violation notice. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
A. An administrative hearing shall be granted for the following:
1. To adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits.
2. To contest the validity of a notice of impending towing and impoundment, or, the validity of a notice of impending driver's license suspension. The
hearing shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the lessee
of the "cited vehicle", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference, as from time to time amended, and at the date,
time and place as is set forth by the ordinance enforcement administrator or traffic compliance administrator and served upon the registered owner,
operator, or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of notices of impending immobilization or impending impoundment or driver's license
suspension.
B. At any time prior to the date set for the hearing, the hearing officer assigned to hear the violation, at the request of the authorized person issuing the
violation notice or the alleged violator, shall direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 19/403
C. No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer at the hearing except where absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the individual. Lack
of preparation does not constitute cause for a continuance. Except in extraordinary circumstances, no continuance may be granted for more than
twenty five (25) days.
D. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall
consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay may be admitted only if
it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
E. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with section 1-14-12 of this chapter. Persons
appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on the
alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-9: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A. A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of liability and the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth.
B. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior
served or mailed notice pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of a timely petition
to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made.
C. A notice of final determination of liability shall be personally served on the violator or the violator's attorney at the conclusion of the administrative
hearing, or mailed to the violator or his or her attorney (as to the violator, at the violator's last known address) within five (5) days after the final
determination of liability is made, as is herein set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
1. The hearing officer's findings of fact.
2. A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact.
3. A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the city.
4. A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are debts due and owing the city.
5. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the city within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection
procedures.
6. A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking
violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference, as from time to time amended.
7. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the city may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more
vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
8. Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or ordinance. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-10: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under
the Illinois administrative review law, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., and 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., as from time to time amended. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-
25-2013)
1-14-11: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure
to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review law are a debt due and owing the city and may be collected in accordance
with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of a code
violation, the city may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Kendall County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision,
and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against the same person in such a
proceeding. Upon commencement of the action the city shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with state law and the applicable city
ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for in section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested; provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order
does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance
the requirement of state laws and the applicable city ordinance and that the violator had an opportunity for a hearing and for judicial review:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against the violator for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs.
The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the city to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code
violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 20/403
C. In any case in which a hearing officer finds that an individual has failed to comply with a judgment ordering an individual to correct a code violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the hearing officer, shall be a debt
due and owing the city and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
D. A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the individual in the amount of any debt due and owing the city under this
chapter. The lien of a judgment may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this chapter until it has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which the
violator has an ownership interest in real estate.
E. A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after the
issuance of the order of default if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if
the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper service of process. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-12: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
Fines and penalties shall be imposed in accordance with this code, or where no fine or penalty is expressed in this code, the hearing officer may impose a
fine or penalty according to his judgment. However, in no case may the fines imposed by the hearing officer exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
per violation per day, or a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for all building code violations, and two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for all city motor vehicle code violations. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-13: TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s), for
which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be towed and impounded if:
1. The ordinance enforcement administrator or traffic compliance administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for ten
(10) or more ordinance violations, for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
2. The person determined to be liable for ten (10) or more violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the city's geographical
boundaries.
3. The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and
has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability before the ordinance enforcement administrator to contest the validity of the
notice.
4. A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the city which contains, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
a. That a final determination has been made on ten (10) or more ordinance violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid.
b. A listing of the violations for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
(1) The ordinance violation notice number;
(2) Date of issuance; and
(3) Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
c. That the motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the city is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice.
d. Date of impending towing and impoundment.
e. That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by appearing in person before the hearing officer within fifteen (15) days of the
date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove liability, such as the following:
(1) That the registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued; or
(2) That the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice were paid in full; or
(3) That the registered owner has not accumulated ten (10) or more ordinance violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no
appearance was made. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-14: REQUEST FOR HEARING IN THE CASE OF TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the towing and impoundment, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall schedule
an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the
ordinance enforcement administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than thirty (30) days after the request for
hearing is filed and shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address as is set forth on
the request for hearing. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-15: POSTIMPOUNDMENT NOTICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 21/403
Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a posttowing hearing as provided in section 1-14-16 of this chapter and that if
the vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-16: HEARING IN CASE OF VEHICLE TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
The owner of a towed vehicle or other interested person shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the towing was erroneous or whether the
vehicle was properly included on a towing list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing before the hearing officer within fourteen (14) days after
issuance of the notice specified in section 1-14-15 of this chapter or within fourteen (14) days of the towing, whichever is later.
A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless otherwise mutually
agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any
amount deposited pursuant to this chapter shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate
any citation or notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the towed vehicle, but shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly towed by
determining whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by this chapter. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-17: FINES AND FEES FOR TOWING:
The fine for impoundment and towing shall be an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged
reasonable storage and towing fees should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, provided that no fees shall be assessed for any tow which
has been determined to be erroneous. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-18: TOWING SERVICES:
The ordinance enforcement administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an individual, agency, or company to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance herewith, provided that that individual, agency, or company is fully insured and licensed according to local or state law and has available a
secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded
by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded
vehicles. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-19: EVICTION, RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS2:
In the case of a building code violation, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or
instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-
2013)
1-14-20: DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS3:
It shall be a defense to a building code violation if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction
that:
A. The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
B. The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations; the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
C. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code
violation. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
1-14-21: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BUILDING OWNER4:
The order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions imposed by the city as the result of a finding of a code violation shall attach to the property
as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property
to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer. (Ord. 2013-8, 3-
25-2013)
1-14-22: FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS UNDER THE BUILDING CODE5:
A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety
code violations. A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars
($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2013-8, 3-25-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 22/403
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
COMBINED PLAN COMMISSION AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-1-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
Effective May 1, 2007, a combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals ("board") is hereby created and shall consist of seven (7) members who
shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The members of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one
for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years. In each case, each member
of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall serve until such time as their successor or successors shall have been appointed and
qualified. Members of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall reside within the city of Plano or within territory contiguous to the
city of Plano and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included within the corporate limits of any other
municipality. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, RULES AND PROCEDURES:
A. Officers:
1. There shall be a chairman and vice chairman of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals both of whom shall be appointed by the
mayor from the then appointed and acting members of the board with the advice and consent of the city council. The chairman and the vice chairman
shall hold office until their successors are appointed. The vice chairman shall act as chairman when the chairman is absent or is otherwiseunable to
act.
2. At the first meeting of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals, the members of the board shall elect one of their members to
serve as secretary of the board for the ensuing year. The board may employ a court reporter who shall make and keep a record of all of its meetings
and official acts. The building and zoning administrator/inspector shall be the executive secretary to the board and shall attend all meetings called by
the board.
B. Meetings, Rules And Procedures:
1. Meetings: All meetings of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such time as
the board may determine. As to those meetings requiring a public hearing, there shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days'
notice of the time and place of such public hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said notice shall contain a statement of
the particular purpose of the public hearing and a brief description of the location of the property or properties under consideration at such public
hearing and a description of the action requested to be taken by the board.
2. Powers Of The Chair: In all official proceedings, the chairman, or in his or her absence, the vice chairman of the combined plan commission and
zoning board of appeals, or in his or her absence, an acting chairman appointed, for the meeting, by the members of the board, shall have the power
to administer oaths and compel by subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers.
3. Minutes And Records: The combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions.
A copy of every rule or regulation, every appearance, variation and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the
combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall be filed immediately in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. Where
required by this code, findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case and the reasons for the granting or denial of each application
shall be specified.
4. Hearings Open To Public: All hearings shall be open to the public.
5. Minutes Open To Public: The minutes of the board shall be open to public examination at reasonable hours.
6. Rules And Procedures: The combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules andprocedures, not in conflict with this
section or with applicable Illinois statutes, and may require the submission of such records, plats and other information necessary to make its
determinations. A copy of said rules and procedures, and all recommendations thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-
26-2007)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
A. Each of the members of the board shall be paid compensation in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each regular meeting, adjourned regular
meeting, special meeting, and adjourned special meeting, which the member attends. Payment of this compensation shall be made at the conclusion of
the fiscal year of the city which occurs on April 30, unless the city council shall, by resolution adopted, determine to pay the members of the board at
more frequent intervals, and the city treasurer is authorized and directed to pay such compensation to each member of the board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 23/403
B. The secretary of the board shall keep an accurate record of the attendance and shall submit such record to the city treasurer on or before April 30 of
each year. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007)
2-1-5: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers:
A. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the
municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the municipality. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public
grounds and other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the plan commission and as thereafter adopted in this
municipality in this state, may be made applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more
than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. Such plan may be implemented by ordinances:
1. Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to "public improvements" as herein defined;
2. Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs,gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm
water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment; and
3. May designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
B. To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan.
C. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive
plan.
D. To give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the making of
these projects and generally, to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
E. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this chapter as may be conferred by the corporate authorities.
F. To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under all of the provisions of this code, including, specifically, but not by way of
limitation, all zoning matters and subdivision matters upon which it is required to pass, including, in general, amendments to this code, and including,
specifically, amendments to the zoning ordinance of the city and the zoning map.
G. For purposes of implementing ordinances regarding developer donations or impact fees, and specifically for expenditures thereof, "school grounds" is
defined as including land or site improvements, which include school buildings or other infrastructure necessitated and specifically and uniquely
attributable to the development or subdivision in question.
H. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building and zoning administrator/inspector under the
zoning title.
I. To hear and pass upon applications for variations from the terms provided in the zoning title in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the standards
established therein.
J. To hear and decide all matters referred to it and upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title or any other title of this code, and/or as
prescribed by the Illinois municipal code or any other statute. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007)
2-1-6: EFFECT OF BOARD DECISIONS:
All decisions and findings of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals, whether on appeal, upon application for a variation or a special
use, or for an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or map, after such hearings as may be required by law, shall be recommendations only to the city
council. The city council shall, in all instances, make the final determination, which shall be subject to review as by law may be provided. All variations shall
be implemented by the city council by the adoption of ordinances. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007)
2-1-7: EXPENSES:
Expenses incurred by the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals are to be itemized and shall be borne by the city. (Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-
2007)
2-1-8: REFERENCE TO TERMS:
Wherever in this code reference is made to the "plan commission", "planning commission", "zoning board of appeals" or the "board of appeals", said terms
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 24/403
shall mean the "combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals" established pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-16,
3-26-2007)
Chapter 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-16, 3-26-2007, eff. 5-1-2007)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED, MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three (3) members. They shall be officers of the municipality as provided by
statute1. (Ord. 1976-1)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT, TERMS OF OFFICE, REMOVALS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, with the consent of the city council. The terms of office of the
members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified;
provided, that no such appointments shall be made by any mayor within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office; and provided further,
that the mayor shall appoint the first members of such board, one of whom is appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal year in which such
appointment is made, another shall serve until the end of the municipal year next ensuing, and the third shall serve until the end of the municipal year
second next ensuing; provided, that each of the first members of the board shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified.
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be subject to removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the city. (Ord.
1976-1)
2-3-3: QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND BOND:
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall have such qualifications as are now or may hereafter be required of them by law. Each
member of the board shall take oath or affirmation of office and shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
with such sureties as the mayor and city council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of theduties of his office. (Ord. 1976-1)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have such powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be given to it by law; provided, however, that
the chief of the fire department and the chief of the police department shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, and
may be removed or discharged by the appointing authority as is now or may hereafter be provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4 and 5/2.1-
17. (Ord. 1976-1; amd. Ord. 1981-16, 11-23-1981)
2-3-5: COMPENSATION:
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall serve with such compensation as the corporate authorities may determine and provide
by ordinance, where compensation shall be as follows: (Ord. 1976-1)
A. The chairman of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be paid compensation in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year for
each year of service. The remaining two (2) members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be paid compensation in the amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per year for each year of service. Such compensation shall be effective May 1, 2005. (Ord. 1995-8, 4-24-1995; amd. Ord.
2001-4, 4-23-2001; Ord. 2005-17, 3-28-2005)
B. Payment of this compensation shall be made at the conclusion of the fiscal year of the city which occurs on April 30 and the city treasurer is authorized
and directed to pay such compensation to each member of the board, commencing with the end of the fiscal year to occur on April 30, 1976.
C. In the event that any board member shall not serve for any full fiscal year, payment shall be prorated for the number of months which such member
shall have served. Further, any appointee to the board who shall serve for less than a full fiscal year shall receive payment at the end of the city's fiscal
year for the number of months actually served. (Ord. 1975-11)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF POLICE PENSION FUND
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 25/403
A Board of five (5) members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the City to be chosen as hereinafter provided, shall be and constitute a Board of
Trustees to provide for the disbursement of the Police Pension Fund and designate the beneficiaries thereof as directed in Section 9-1-1 of this Code,
which Board shall be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the City of Plano". (Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74)
2-4-2: MEMBERS APPOINTED AND ELECTED, TERMS OF OFFICE:
Two (2) of said Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City, with the advice and consent of the City Council; one of said members shall serve from
the date of appointment until April 30, 1975; the other of said members shall serve from the date of appointment until April 30, 1976; the successors to the
foregoing Trustees shall serve for a period of two (2) years or until such time as their successors are appointed and qualified. The third and fourth
members of the Board shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members. The fifth member shall be elected from the beneficiaries by
such beneficiaries. The members to be elected shall be elected for a period from the date of election until April 30 and for two (2) year terms thereafter.
(Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74; 1989 Code)
2-4-3: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers: At the first meeting of the Board, it shall elect one of its members who shall act as the president thereof for the period of one year or until such
time as his successor is elected and qualified. Said Board on the same day, also shall elect another of its members as secretary and another as vice
president, both of whom shall serve for a period of one year or until such time as their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74)
B. Meetings: The Board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of May, August, November and February of each year
and special meetings upon the call of the president of said Board. (Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74; 1989 Code)
2-4-4: POWERS:
In addition to the other powers granted in Section 9-1-1 of this City Code, the following further powers and authority are hereby conferred upon the Board:
A. The exclusive control and management of the Police Pension Fund and of all moneys donated, paid or assessed for the relief or pensioning of disabled,
superannuated and retired members of the Police Department, their widows, minor children and dependent parents. All such moneys shall be placed
by the City Treasurer to the credit of the Fund subject to the order of the Board.
B. To draw such Pension Funds from the Treasury and invest such Funds, or any part thereof, in the name of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund, in interest-bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants of the United States, or the State of Illinois, or any county of this State, or of any township
or municipal corporation of the State of Illinois, and in insured shares of Federal chartered savings and loan associations if the shares are insured by
the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. All securities shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the City and shall be subject to the order of
the Board. The interest received from any such investment, shall be credited to the account of the Pension Fund.
C. To appoint a clerk and define his duties; provided, however, that no person drawing a pension under Section 9-1-1 of this Code be employed by the
Board as a clerk.
D. To provide for the payment from the Fund of all necessary expenses including clerk hire, attorney's fees, printing and witness fees; provided, that no
compensation shall be paid to any member of the Board for any duty required or performed under this Chapter.
E. To make all necessary rules and regulations for its guidance in conformity with the provisions of the Police Pension Fund regulations.
F. To do any and all other acts required under the provisions of chapter 1081/2, paragraphs 3-101 through 3-149 of "Policemen's Pension Fund-
Municipalities 500,000 and Under", Illinois Revised Statutes, as amended in 1963. (Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this City at the rate of
one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
B. Receipt Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the City shall file on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department of Revenue required by section three (3) of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 26/403
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended1.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 1955-10; 1989 Code)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.
CLUB: See definition of "club" in subsection 3-2-6-4B of this chapter.
COMMUNITY EVENT: A fair, fete, carnival, corn boil, or similar public gathering sponsored by a government, or not for profit entity with home offices in
Plano.
HOTEL (FULL SERVICE): Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, in which twenty four (24) or more rooms are
used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity. Each sleeping room shall have an individually
accessible, private full bathroom.
HOTEL (LIMITED SERVICE): Any building or other structure that meets all the requirements of the definition of "hotel (full service)" other than having a
dining room or kitchen on the premises.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any building, portion of a building and secured enclosed area used by the licensee in the operation of said licensed premises.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any container whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT OR RESTAURANT BUSINESS: Any business used, kept, maintained, advertised and held out to the public primarily as a place where
meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALES: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner of the city. The commissioner may appoint, with the
advice and consent of the city council, a person or persons to assist him/her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein
provided for such local liquor control commissioner.
When in this chapter the local liquor control commissioner shall be referred to, it shall include any committee or other agency appointed by the
commissioner.
B. Duties Of Commissioner: Subject to any restrictions imposed by the Illinois liquor control act1, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the
following powers, functions, and duties with respect to licenses and licensees in the city:
1. To grant and revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the jurisdiction of the commissioner.
2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the state law relating to alcoholic liquor or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or any of the provisions of this chapter
have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.
3. To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the city clerk.
4. The commissioner shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined under oath, any applicant for a local license or renewal thereof, or any
licensee upon whom notice of revocation has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books
and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof of information in any manner from the applicant or licensee,
pertaining to any part of his/her performance of his/her duties, and for any such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of
this state. For the purpose of obtaining information as allowed under this section, the local liquor control commissioner may authorize his/her agent to
act on his/her behalf.
5. The commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him/her, and shall furnish the clerk, treasurer and
chief of police with copies thereof. Upon issuance of any new license or the revocation of an old license, he/she shall give written notice of such
action to each of these officers within forty eight (48) hours of such action.
6. The commissioner may without notice or hearing, close an establishment upon the issuance of a written order in the event the public peace or
welfare of the community is likely to be threatened or endangered by the keeping open of the establishment in accordance with the Illinois liquor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 27/403
control act. The chief of police shall also be given the power to close a premises if the premises constitutes a crime scene and such closing could
prevent the loss or destruction of evidence and facilitate a police investigation or if the premises was the scene of a violent disturbance involving
injury or threat to citizens. The chief of police will document such closing and the reasons therefor and submit a written report to the commissioner.
7. To exercise such other powers as are granted to him/her under the Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; BYOB PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the terms
of such license.
B. No person shall allow alcoholic liquor to be brought into and/or consumed on the premises of a business open to the public without having a liquor
license specifically allowing alcoholic liquor to be brought into and/or consumed on such premises; provided, however, nothing contained in this
subsection shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the lawful, noncommercial use of the possessor, and his family and
guests within the possessor's own property. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Definition: For purposes of this chapter, "applicant" shall mean and include in the case of an individual, the individual; in the case of a copartnership, the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, officers and directors, and shareholders with a five percent (5%) or more
interest; and in the case of a limited liability company, each member holding a five percent (5%) or more interest in the limited liability company and
each manager thereof.
B. License Application: Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, on forms to be provided by the city clerk
signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation or limited liability company, verified by oath or
affidavit and shall contain the following statements and information. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
C. Processing Fee: All applicants for a new liquor license shall be subject to and shall pay a nonrefundable two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) processing
fee per business, plus a forty dollar ($40.00) live scan fee for each individual owner of a sole proprietorship, and the individual making application on
behalf of a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company. (Ord. 2017-5, 1-23-2017)
D. Statements And Information Required:
1. The name and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the names and addresses of the persons entitled
to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors,
and shareholders with a five percent (5%) or more interest; and in the case of a limited liability company, the names and address of its manager(s)
and the names and addresses of each member holding a five percent (5%) or more interest in the limited liability company. In each case, there shall
also be provided the driver's license number and social security number of each individual named in the application.
2. A statement that if a copartnership, all members of the copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.
3. A statement that if a corporation, or limited liability company, all officers and directors and shareholders, and all managers and members with a five
percent (5%) or more interest are eligible to receive a license hereunder for every reason other than residence. If a shareholder or member is also a
corporation or limited liability company, the same information shall be provided as to all shareholders, members and managers of the owning entity.
4. The citizenship of the applicant, each officer or director of a corporate applicant and member or manager of a limited liability company, and their
respective dates of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of such naturalization.
5. A description of and the character of the business of the applicant.
6. The length of time said applicant has been in business of this character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued, or in
the case of a limited liability company the date of filing/issuance of its articles of organization, together with evidence of authority to transact business
in the state of Illinois and a certificate of good standing.
7. A statement that the applicant does beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does have a written lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued, accompanied by a copy of the lease.
8. A statement that the applicant is not a law enforcing public official, mayor or alderman of the city, and that no such official has any interest in any
way, either directly or indirectly, in the sale, manufacturing or distribution of alcoholic liquor, or in the business of the applicant.
9. A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame and has not been convicted of pandering
or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.
10. A statement that if the business is conducted by a manager or agent, said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
11. A statement that the business premises are not within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent person
or for veterans, their wives or children.
12. A statement that a majority of the customers are not or will not be minors and that the principal business does not consist of selling school books,
supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
13. The location and description of the premises or place of business, which is to be operated under such license.
14. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license of premises other than described in the application, and the
disposition of such application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 28/403
15. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, the laws of this state or any other state, or the ordinances of this city.
16. A statement whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor.
17. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state, or of the United States, or any ordinance of
the city in the conduct of his/its place of business.
E. Background Checks: All applicants for a liquor license shall be subject to background checks to be conducted by the city police department.
F. Incomplete Applications:
1. Application for licenses, which are incomplete, inaccurate or fail to contain the statements or information required by this chapter, shall be rejected.
The commissioner shall issue a written rejection of such application setting forth the deficiency in said application within sixty (60) days of its receipt
by the city clerk. Prior to such rejection, the applicant may submit the additional information or statements required to complete such application.
2. Administrative or legal expenses incurred in reviewing incomplete or inaccurate liquor applications, advising the applicant of such deficiencies and
rejecting such applications shall be paid by the applicant. A bill or invoice shall be submitted to the applicant specifying the additional administrative
or legal expenses incurred in processing the applicant's incomplete liquor application, which shall be paid by the applicant together with the annual
license fee prior to the issuance of such license. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the city or a corporation or a limited liability company.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he/she resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, unless the Illinois liquor control commission determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering the matter set forth in such person's application and the Illinois liquor
control commission investigation.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license, including residency.
J. A corporation or limited liability company, if any officer, director or any shareholder having a five percent (5%) or more interest, or any member having a
five percent (5%) or more interest therein would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
L. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his/her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
M. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
issued.
N. Any law enforcing public official, mayor or alderman of the city and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
O. Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6: LOCATION/ZONING REQUIREMENTS, CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES, AND REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 29/403
Liquor licenses shall be issued only for premises located in zoning districts which allow, either as a permitted use or a special use, the sale or consumption
of alcoholic liquors. This restriction shall not, however, apply to class H licenses.
Retail licenses to sell alcoholic liquors shall be of the following kinds and classes. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-1: CLASS A LICENSE:
A. Description: Class A licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for consumption on or off the premises.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for such license shall be as set forth in this chapter, and the number of class A licenses issued
and in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Facilities And Premises:
1. The holder of a class A license must have available the necessary facilities and equipment for dispensing liquor on the premises.
2. In the event a class A license shall be granted to a person conducting another business on the same premises, the area designated for sale of
alcoholic liquors shall be completely enclosed and separated from all other operations being conducted on the premises; provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not be deemed to prohibit the sale and distribution of alcoholic liquors throughout the premises used for restaurant purposes. (Ord.
2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-2: CLASS B LICENSE:
A. Description: Class B licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors in original packages only, not for consumption on
the premises where sold.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for class B licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and
in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Premises: In the event a class B license shall be granted to a person conducting another business on the same premises, the area designated for sale
of alcoholic liquors shall be completely enclosed and separated from all other operations being conducted on the premises.
D. Product Sampling: Product sampling shall be permitted by a class B licensee. All such product sampling shall be in strict compliance with the provisions
of sections 6-312 and 6-283 of the Illinois liquor control act, the terms and provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference, as though fully set
forth herein verbatim. Class B licensees shall acquaint themselves with the terms and provisions of sections 6-31 and 6-28 of the Illinois liquor control
act before conducting any product sampling. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-3: CLASS B-1 LICENSE:
A. Description: Class B-1 licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine only, in original packages only, not for consumption on the
premises where sold.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for such license shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and in
effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Premises: In the event a class B-1 license shall be issued to a person, firm or corporation conducting another business on the same premises, the area
designated for sale of beer and wine shall be, to the extent possible, enclosed and separated from other operations being conducted on the premises.
D. Drive-Up Facility: From and after the effective date hereof, no "drive-up" facility whereby packaged liquors are delivered to patrons or customers from
the inside of the licensed premises to the outside of the licensed premises through any window or "drive-up" facility shall be permitted. (Ord. 2013-22,
10-28-2013)
3-2-6-4: CLASS C LICENSE:
A. Description: Class C licenses, to be generally known as club licenses, shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises specified in the license.
B. Definition Of Club, Application Requirements: For the purpose of qualifying for a class C or club license, the "club" shall be defined as follows: a
corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning or leasing a building or
space therein of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests; provided, that such club file with the mayor at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a
list of names and residences of its members; and provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquors to the club or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 30/403
members of the club, or its guests introduced by the members, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by
the members or by its board of directors, or other governing body, out of the general revenue of the club.
Each club, at the time of making application for a license, will attach thereto a statement signed by each of the governing board that he has read and is
familiar with the city ordinances governing the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for class C licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and
in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
D. Liquor Sales Regulations:
1. Each club shall have a duly elected governing body of the club and such governing body shall have complete charge of all sales of liquor on the
premises and under the license granted.
2. The sale or serving of alcoholic liquors shall be confined solely to the club members and their bona fide guests.
E. Conduct Of Licensee: No club shall permit any rowdyism, brawl or disturbances in or around their premises affecting the peace and quiet of their
immediate neighborhood. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-5: CLASS D LICENSE:
A. Description: Class D licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail draft beer only, for consumption on the premises where sold.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for class D licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and
in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Condition Of License, Restaurant As Permanent Business: The holder of a class D license shall operate and maintain a restaurant for the retail sale of
food as the primary business on the same premises. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-6: CLASS E LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class E licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed
premises; provided that the issuance of class E licenses shall be restricted to establishments which are primarily engaged in the restaurant business. It
shall be the duty of the commissioner to determine whether an applicant is qualified for the issuance of a class E license if any question or issue is
raised as to the primary use of the business establishment.
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for such license shall be as set forth in this chapter. The number of licenses authorized to be issued and in effect at
any given time shall be as set forth in this chapter.
C. Condition Of License, Restaurant Facilities Required: The holder of a class E license must have available on the premises, the necessary facilities for
the preparation and dispensing of food and related items incidental to a restaurant business. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-7: CLASS E-1 LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class E-1 licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed
premises, and shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine only, for consumption off the licensed premises; provided, that the issuance of
a class E-1 license shall be restricted to establishments which are primarily engaged in the restaurant business. It shall be the duty of the
commissioner to determine whether an applicant qualifies for the issuance of a class E-1 license if any question or issue is raised as to the primary use
of the business establishment.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for class E-1 licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued
and in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Conditions Of License, Liquor And Restaurant Facilities Required: The holder of a class E-1 license must have available on the premises, the
necessary facilities and equipment for the dispensing of alcoholic liquors, and shall have available on the premises, the necessary facilities for the
preparation and dispensing of food and related items incident to a restaurant business. Furthermore, the holder of a class E-1 license must have
available on the premises and use at all times, the necessary facilities and equipment for the storage of beer and wine for sale at retail for consumption
off the premises, which facilities, by reason of their location and accessibility within the licensed premises, shall be accessible to the licensee and
employees of the licensee for dispensing to the public and not available, generally, to the public from storage containers or coolers which are
accessible by the public. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-8: CLASS F LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class F licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises
specified in the license; provided, that the issuance of a class F license shall be restricted to establishments which are primarily engaged in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 31/403
entertainment business. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to determine whether an applicant qualifies for the issuance of a class F license if any
question or issue is raised as to the primary use of the business establishment.
B. License Fee And Number Issued: The annual license fee for class F licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and
in effect at any given time shall be as specified in this chapter.
C. Conditions Of License: Notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in this chapter, the issuance of class F licenses shall be limited to business
establishments which are a showplace for live entertainment. Alcoholic liquors shall be sold for consumption on the premises only, and shall be sold
only incidental to live entertainment programs both before, during and after such programs, and shall be limited to the following hours: seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on any day of the week. In no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold or dispensed on the premises when the
premises are being used for the entertainment of children or for religious programs. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-9: CLASS G LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class G licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine only, for consumption on the premises specified
in the license; provided, that the issuance of a class G license shall be restricted to establishments which are primarily engaged in the restaurant
business; and, provided further, that the dispensing of beer and wine within the premises shall be from a service bar only. It shall be the duty of the
commissioner to determine whether an applicant qualifies for the issuance of a class G license if any question or issue is raised as to the primary use
of the business establishment.
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for class G licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and in effect at any
given time shall be as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-10: CLASS G-1 LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class G-1 licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine, only, for consumption on the premises
specified in the license; provided, that the issuance of a class G-1 license shall be restricted to establishments which offer food, such as sandwiches,
snacks, and light meals, for consumption on the premises in conjunction with video gaming as authorized by and licensed under the Illinois video
gaming act and licensed by the city.
No person(s) under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be permitted to be or remain on the premises.
It shall be the duty of the commissioner to determine whether an applicant qualifies for the issuance of a class G-1 license if any question or issue is
raised as to the use of the business establishment.
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for class G-1 licenses shall be as set forth in this chapter and the number of licenses issued and in effect at any
given time shall be as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-6-11: CLASS H LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class H licenses (special events license) shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail all kinds of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the licensed premises only; provided, that the issuance of a class H license shall be restricted to religious, charitable or not for profit
organizations when the proceeds to be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be used for religious, educational, charitable or other social
purposes and not for individual profit of any person or corporation. It shall be the duty of the liquor commissioner to determine whether an applicant
qualifies for the issuance of a class H license if any question or issue is raised as to the primary use or purpose of the issuance of the license.
B. License Fee: At the time of the issuance of a class H, special events license, there shall be paid a base fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus a fee
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day of the special event in excess of one day.
C. Certificate Of Insurance: The holder of a class H license must exhibit to the liquor commissioner, prior to the issuance of such license, a certificate
evidencing that dramshop insurance is or will be in force at the time of said special event.
D. Term Of License: Said licenses shall be for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) hours.
E. Condition Of License, Required Facilities: The holder of a class H license must have equipment for the dispensing of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 2013-22,
10-28-2013)
3-2-6-12: CLASS I LICENSE:
A. Description, Use Restricted: Class I licenses shall authorize the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine for consumption on the licensed premises only;
provided, that the issuance of a class I license shall be restricted to bed and breakfast facilities, and the surrounding grounds, operated pursuant to
special use granted by the city. It shall be the duty of the liquor commissioner to determine whether an applicant qualifies for the issuance of a class I
license if any question or issue is raised as to the primary use or purpose of the issuance of the license. The hours of sale shall be in accordance with
this code, except as otherwise restricted or governed by the terms of the special use ordinance. (Ord. 2014-28, 7-28-2014)
3-2-6-13: CLASS BYOB LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 32/403
A. License Required: No person shall allow alcohol to be carried in for consumption on the premises of a public accommodation without having a BYOB
license which is hereby created.
B. Application Requirements:
1. Applicant must show proof of ownership or present a fully executed lease for the period for which the license is to be issued for the premises for
which the license is sought.
2. If applicant is not the property owner, proof must be provided of consent of property owner to obtain BYOB license for the premises.
3. Applicant must be the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
4. Applicant must provide a certificate of insurance reflecting general liability in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), naming
the city of Plano as certificate holder and additional insured.
5. Applicant must agree in writing to save and hold harmless the city of Plano from any and all claims arising out of consumption of alcoholic liquor on
the premises.
6. Applicant must agree to abide by the city of Plano liquor code, including the prohibition of allowing minors to consume and the observance of the
hours of consumption.
C. Terms And Conditions: All BYOB licenses shall be subject to the following terms and conditions. Violation of these terms and conditions may be cause
for revocation of license at the discretion of the liquor commissioner.
1. Term: A license is purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year from the date of issuance. The one year period shall be from May 1 of
each year to April 30 of each following year, unless sooner revoked or suspended.
2. Expiration: All licenses, regardless of the date of issuance, shall terminate on April 30 of each year following the date of issuance.
3. Closing Hours: All persons to whom licenses are issued authorizing them to allow BYOB shall close their respective places of business, regardless
of whether they are conducting other types of business on the premises for which said licenses are issued:
a. At twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday;
b. At one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights; and
c. At two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday nights of each week.
Licensees shall keep their respective places of business closed until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in the morning following, except, on Sunday they shall
keep their said places of business closed until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Provided, however, any licensee who is engaged in operating any other
business at the same location may open said place of business at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sundays solely for the purpose of transacting such
other business, but in no case shall it be lawful for any licensee to allow BYOB during the hours said liquor establishments are required to be kept
closed under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any patron to remain within the licensed premises for longer than twenty (20)
minutes after closing time and it shall be the duty and responsibility of each licensee, and the agents and employees of each licensee, to enforce
this regulation by requiring all patrons to leave the premises within the time specified after closing time.
The hours mentioned herein shall be Central Standard Time except when daylight saving time is in effect, and then said hours shall be Central
Daylight Saving Time.
4. Serving Or Furnishing Alcohol: No license holder under this section shall serve or allow beer or wine to be consumed by any person under the age of
twenty one (21), or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of mental treatment, or
harbor or license any intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises described in the license or allow any conduct which shall tend to disturb the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood, or the premises.
5. Service By Minors: No holder of a BYOB license shall suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) to open, dispense, pour, or serve
any beer or wine or any other alcoholic beverage, or in any way tend bar as an employee of any licensed premises. This shall not prevent persons
eighteen (18) years of age and over, as employees of licensed premises, from delivering beer and wine for consumption on the premises if allowed
by the specific license classification.
D. Classes Created: There are hereby created the following classes:
1. BYOB-Corkage: Permits customer to bring beer or wine only into the licensed premises of a restaurant to be consumed on premises only as a
complement to food. For the purposes of this BYOB-corkage license, a restaurant must derive more than forty percent (40%) of its gross revenue (on
an annual basis) from the sale of food. The determination of whether the forty percent (40%) gross revenue standard has been met shall be made at
the time of license renewal for the year just ended. In the event a license holder has not possessed a BYOB-corkage license for a full year, the
determination of whether the forty percent (40%) standard has been met shall be deferred until the next license renewal period. The records used to
determine whether said forty percent (40%) standard has been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements, corporate
financial reports, tax return information, or any other form of information deemed acceptable by the city.
a. The following terms and conditions shall apply to a BYOB-corkage license:
(1) Amenities: The license holder is permitted to provide glasses and other amenities for the consumption of beer and wine only on premises.
(2) Opening And Pouring: The license holder and employees over the age of twenty one (21) are permitted to open and pour the wine or beer.
(3) Storage: The license holder is permitted to provide storage for the beer or wine as allowed by all applicable laws.
(4) Corkage Fee: The license holder may charge a corkage fee for these services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 33/403
(5) Opened Bottles: An opened bottle of wine may be removed from the restaurant provided staff seals the container in a tamperproof bag as
provided by law.
(6) Dramshop Insurance: Each licensee shall procure and maintain, at all times while the license is in effect, a policy or policies of dramshop
insurance, in the minimum statutory limits. At the time of the initial application for a liquor license and at the time of the renewal of such liquor
license proof of the existence of such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall be tendered to the liquor commissioner. Upon request by
the liquor commissioner, each licensee shall, periodically, provide the liquor commissioner with evidence that such policy or policies of dramshop
insurance are in full force and effect. Failure to procure and maintain such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall constitute sufficient
grounds to deny the application for or renewal of a liquor license under this chapter.
(7) Number And Fee: The number and fee for a BYOB-corkage license shall be as set forth in section 3-2-7 of this chapter.
2. BYOB License: Permits customer to bring beer or wine only into the licensed premises of a restaurant to be consumed on premises only as a
complement to food. For the purposes of this BYOB license, a restaurant must derive more than forty percent (40%) of its gross revenue (on an
annual basis) from the sale of food. The determination of whether the forty percent (40%) gross revenue standard has been met shall be made at the
time of license renewal for the year just ended. In the event a license holder has not possessed a BYOB license for a full year, the determination of
whether the forty percent (40%) standard has been met shall be deferred until the next license renewal period. The records used to determine
whether said forty percent (40%) standard has been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements, corporate financial reports,
tax return information, or any other form of information deemed acceptable by the city.
a. The following terms and conditions shall apply to a BYOB license:
(1) Amenities: The license holder is permitted to provide glasses and other amenities for the consumption of beer and wine only on premises.
(2) Opening And Pouring Prohibited: No license holder, or any employee or staff member is permitted to open and pour the wine or beer.
(3) Storage Prohibited: No storage of beer or wine is permitted.
(4) Corkage Fee Prohibited: No corkage fee may be charged.
(5) Opened Bottles: An opened bottle of wine may not be removed from the restaurant but must be disposed of before the customer leaves the
premises.
(6) Dramshop Insurance: Each licensee shall procure and maintain, at all times while the license is in effect, a policy or policies of dramshop
insurance, in the minimum statutory limits. At the time of the initial application for a liquor license and at the time of the renewal of such liquor
license proof of the existence of such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall be tendered to the liquor commissioner. Upon request by
the liquor commissioner, each licensee shall, periodically, provide the liquor commissioner with evidence that such policy or policies of dramshop
insurance are in full force and effect. Failure to procure and maintain such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall constitute sufficient
grounds to deny the application for or renewal of a liquor license under this chapter.
(7) Number And Fee: The number and fee for a BYOB license shall be as set forth in section 3-2-7 of this chapter.
3. BYOB-Nonrestaurant: Permits customer to bring beer or wine into the licensed premises of a retail establishment to be consumed on premises only
at a special event.
a. The following terms and conditions shall apply to a BYOB-nonrestaurant license:
(1) Amenities: The license holder is permitted to provide glasses and other amenities for the consumption of beer and wine only on premises.
(2) Opening And Pouring Prohibited: No license holder, or any employee or staff member is permitted to open and pour the wine or beer.
(3) Storage Prohibited: No storage of beer or wine is permitted.
(4) Opened Bottles: An opened bottle of wine or beer may not be removed from the premises but must be disposed of before the customer leaves
the premises.
(5) Dramshop Insurance: Each licensee shall procure and maintain, at all times while the license is in effect, a policy or policies of dramshop
insurance, in the minimum statutory limits. At the time of the initial application for a liquor license and at the time of the renewal of such liquor
license proof of the existence of such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall be tendered to the liquor commissioner. Upon request by
the liquor commissioner, each licensee shall, periodically, provide the liquor commissioner with evidence that such policy or policies of dramshop
insurance are in full force and effect. Failure to procure and maintain such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall constitute sufficient
grounds to deny the application for or renewal of a liquor license under this chapter.
(6) Number And Fee: The number and fee for a BYOB-nonrestaurant license shall be as set forth in section 3-2-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-17, 4-
25-2016)
3-2-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES AND FEES:
A. Maximum Number Allowable: The maximum number of allowable licenses in each classification shall be determined from time to time by the city council
by ordinance.
B. Fees: The fee for each class of license shall be set and determined from time to time by the city council by ordinance.
C. Number Authorized: On the date of adoption of this chapter, the following numbers of licenses are authorized and the following fees apply to the
following type of license: (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 34/403
Class A 4 $1,000.00
$500.00 on May 1
500.00 on November 1
Class B 4 1,250.00 625.00 on May 1
625.00 on November 1
Class B-1 5 1,250.00 625.00 on May 1
625.00 on November 1
Class C 1 500.00 250.00 on May 1
250.00 on November 1
Class D 0 450.00 450.00 on May 1
Class E 3 750.00 375.00 on May 1
375.00 on November 1
Class E-1 1 1,000.00 500.00 on May 1
500.00 on November 1
Class F 0 750.00 375.00 on May 1
375.00 on November 1
Class G 1 600.00 300.00 on May 1
300.00 on November 1
Class G-1 3 1,000.00 500.00 on May 1
500.00 on November 1
Class H 100.00 Base fee per event, plus an additional fee of $25.00 for each day of a special event in excess of 1 day.
Said fee shall be payable at the time of application for a Class H license (special events license).
Class I 1 500.00 $250.00 on May 1
250.00 on November 1
Class BYOBcorkage
400.00 200.00 on May 1
200.00 on November 1
Class BYOB 200.00 100.00 on May 1
100.00 on November 1
Class BYOBnonrestaurant
200.00 100.00 on May 1
100.00 on November 1
(Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-28, 7-28-2014; Ord. 2015-15, 4-27-2015; Ord. 2016-15, 4-25-2016; Ord. 2016-17, 4-25-2016; Ord. 2018-30,
12-17-2018)
The foregoing fees shall be reduced in proration to the full calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance of the license.
(Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-8: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Dramshop Insurance: Each licensee shall procure and maintain, at all times while the license is in effect, a policy or policies of dramshop insurance, in
the minimum statutory limits. At the time of the initial application for a liquor license and at the time of the renewal of such liquor license proof of the
existence of such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall be tendered to the Liquor Commissioner. Upon request by the Liquor Commissioner,
each licensee shall, periodically, provide the Liquor Commissioner with evidence that such policy or policies of dramshop insurance are in full force and
effect. Failure to procure and maintain such policy or policies of dramshop insurance shall constitute sufficient grounds to deny the application for or
renewal of a liquor license under this chapter. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-9: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be for a term of one year, to begin on May 1 and to end on April 30 of each year. Except for
Class H licenses, the fees for such licenses shall be payable in two (2) installments as set forth in section 3-2-7 of this chapter. Provided, however, that
where application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a license may be issued for the remainder thereof, upon the payment of a
proportionate part of the annual fee which shall be payment for the unexpired portion of that particular license year. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-10: PRIVILEGE GRANTED TO LICENSEE AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Except as provided in section 6-1 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act4, which is incorporated herein as though set forth herein verbatim, no license is
transferable. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-11: DISPOSITION AND REFUND OF FEES:
Type Of
License
Number
Authorized
Annual
Fee
MMaannnneerr OOff PPaayymmeenntt
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 35/403
All license fees shall be paid to the City at the time the license is issued and shall be forthwith turned over to the City Treasurer.
No refund of any license fee shall be made. (Ord. 2018-25, 11-26-2018)
3-2-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
Any licensee may renew his/her license at the expiration thereof, provided that licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
vested right which would in any case prevent the commissioner from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the city. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-
2013)
3-2-13: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Main Floor Location Required: No license shall be issued hereunder to any person (except to a club) whose place of business is not located on the
main floor of the building which it occupies.
B. Change Of Location: A licensee shall not be permitted to change locations, except upon the following conditions:
1. Written application shall be made to the commissioner stating the location of the proposed site and affirmatively showing that the location is properly
zoned and is a first floor site. An executed lease or a deed showing ownership of said premises shall be presented to the liquor commissioner for
approval prior to licensee's commencement of business at each new location, in the event change of location is approved.
2. The commissioner may, in his discretion, request the members of the city council to approve or object to such application for change of location.
Such recommendation, if requested, shall be solely advisory.
3. The final decision shall be made by the commissioner and such decision, when made, shall be an administrative decision and shall be subject to
review under the administrative review act of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-14: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location Restrictions: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school,
hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
B. Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches, Etc.: No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other
place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school
supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
C. View From Street: In the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises is licensed (other than a restaurant, hotel or
club) no screen, blind, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows, or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such
premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall
prevent a clear view of the entire interior from the street, road or sidewalk. All areas where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be
continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the
view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by licensee wilfully permitted to
be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the
provisions of this subsection, the mayor shall have the right to require the filing of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view
as above required.
D. Sale, Delivery And Consumption On City Property:
1. Sale Prohibited: Except as hereafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, organization, group of individuals or any entity or group of any type
or kind to sell, deliver or consume alcoholic liquors on any city property, building, or park.
2. Allowable Sale And Consumption: Such sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors will be allowed only in conjunction with the use of the city parking
lot(s) or streets by a holder of a valid retail liquor license issued by the city as authorized from time to time by resolution of the city council, and such
sale or consumption must be in conjunction with the use of the city parking lot(s) or streets for community events only.
3. Application For Use Of City Parking Lot Or Street: Any person, group, organization, or entity, which desires to sell or consume alcoholic liquors at the
city parking lot(s) or street during its use of same, must so indicate on its application for use. City staff is authorized to develop appropriate forms for
said application and guidelines and restrictions for such use. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-15: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Closing Hours: All persons to whom licenses are issued authorizing them to sell alcoholic liquors shall close their respective places of business,
regardless of whether they are conducting other types of business on the premises for which said licenses are issued:
1. At twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 36/403
2. At one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday nights; and
3. At two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday nights of each week.
Licensees shall keep their respective places of business closed until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in the morning following, except, on Sunday they shall
keep their said places of business closed until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. Provided, however, any licensee who is engaged in operating any other
business at the same location in conjunction with his or her or its liquor business may open said place of business at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on
Sundays solely for the purpose of transacting such other business, but in no case shall it be lawful for any licensee to sell or to offer for sale any
alcoholic liquors during the hours said liquor establishments are required to be kept closed under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful
for any patron to remain within the licensed premises for longer than twenty (20) minutes after closing time and it shall be the duty and responsibility
of each licensee, and the agents and employees of each licensee, to enforce this regulation by requiring all patrons to leave the premises within the
time specified after closing time. (Ord. 2014-19, 6-9-2014)
B. Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor within the corporate limits of the city.
C. Gambling: Except as is authorized by the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act as amended from time to time, and except as is authorized by the Illinois
video gaming act, as amended from time to time, and subject to the payment of annual fees for the operation of video gaming terminals on the licensed
premises as provided in chapter 9 of this title, it shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any other type or kind of gambling or to keep or allow any
other type or kind of gambling devices in his, her or its place of business.
D. Dancing: No dancing shall be permitted in any retail class licensed premises except in accordance with the provisions of chapter 6 of this title. (Ord.
2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-16: EMPLOYEES:
A. Requirements: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease
to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any
person who has not attained twenty one (21) years of age to serve, sell, draw, pour or mix alcoholic liquors in any establishment licensed under this
chapter.
For purposes of this section "to sell" shall be defined as the act of allowing customers to acquire alcoholic liquors wherein the employee, contractor or
other party or entity acting under authority of the licensee participates directly in the transaction or occurrence wherein the alcoholic liquors are given in
exchange for legal tender or other consideration, and shall include such acts whether they be in connection with the sale of package goods of any and
all types and kinds or for the sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. Provided, however, that licensees whose businesses are not
predominantly the sale of alcoholic liquor, such as, but not limited to, clubs, grocery stores and drugstores and entertainment establishments, and
convenience marts, may employ persons under the age of twenty one (21) years otherwise qualified by law for such employment in connection with
these portions of such business.
B. Training Requirements:
1. Training Requirements (BASSET); Class A, B, B-1, C, D, Or F: For all class A, class B, class B-1, class C, class D, or class F licenses, issued on or
after ninety (90) days after the passage of this chapter and all original or renewal applications for class A, B, B-1, C, D, or F liquor licenses, the
issuance of or renewal of the license shall be conditioned upon proof of completion of a state certified beverage alcohol seller's and server's
education and training (BASSET) program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on the premises
and anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchases of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to those licenses.
2. Training Requirements (BASSET); Class E, E-1, G, G-1, Or H: For all class E, class E-1, class G, class G-1 or class H licenses issued on or after
ninety (90) days after the passage of this chapter and all original or renewal applications for class E, E-1, G, G-1, or H liquor licenses, the issuance of
or renewal of the license shall be conditioned upon proof of completion of a state certified beverage alcohol seller's and server's education and
training (BASSET) program for the manager in charge working on the premises and anyone whose job description entails pouring, mixing, or
dispensing of alcohol, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to
those licenses. At least one person shall be required to be on the premises, who has completed BASSET training during any periods of time when
alcoholic beverages may be purchased or sold or dispensed.
3. BASSET Definition: A "state certified BASSET training program" shall be defined as a BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control
commission (ILCC) as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12 (11.1) and 6-27 and title 77 of Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI,
section 3500. All licensed BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications and provide
a certificate of course completion and a card (a picture type ID is optional), to participants as proof of completion.
4. After Passage Of Chapter: After ninety (90) days after passage of this chapter, any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET
training shall within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server
training program and shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.
5. Certificate Of Completion: A photocopy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers, employees, or agents required by this chapter to have
BASSET training shall be maintained by the establishment in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or
local liquor control authorities.
C. Supervisory Requirements: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a person eighteen (18) years of age and over may serve alcoholic beverages
within an establishment holding a class D, class E, class E-1 or class G liquor license granted under this chapter, if said service is in the dining area
(but excluding a bar area of the premises, regardless of whether food is served in the bar area) of the establishment during times in which meals are
being served, in which case persons eighteen (18) years of age and over may serve said beverages in said area. However, if persons eighteen (18)
years of age to twenty one (21) years of age serve said beverages, each such establishment shall have, on duty at all times, supervising personnel not
under the age of twenty one (21) years to make the verification required under this section for any person being served by an employee under twenty
one (21) years of age. Such person(s) shall have supervisory authority over, and be responsible for the actions of all such employees eighteen (18)
years of age to twenty one (21) years of age who serve said beverages. Prior to allowing servers eighteen (18) years of age to twenty one (21) years of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 37/403
age, any such establishment seeking to operate under this subsection shall submit a sketch plan of the premises delineating the area designated for
dining to be approved by the commissioner. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-17: SANITARY PREMISES:
A. Generally: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. Health Inspections:
1. Certificate Of Inspection: Every application for a retail liquor dealer's license for the sale of alcoholic liquors on premises which are subject to
inspections by the Kendall County health department shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Kendall County health department that the
premises have been inspected and are found to be in satisfactory condition for the issuance of a health permit.
2. License Renewal Inspections: Prior to May 1 of each year, the date for renewal of all liquor licenses within the city, the licensee shall produce
evidence to the city that the licensed premises, if subject to health inspection by the Kendall County health department, have satisfactorily passed a
health inspection conducted within three (3) months prior to the renewal of any such liquor license. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-18: MINORS, INTOXICATED PERSONS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS, PRIVATE PARTIES/EVENTS, ENTERTAINMENT AND
ON SITE ACTIVITIES:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, not an employee of the licensee, to loiter in
or about his or her or its place of business or to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person or persons under the age of twenty one (21) years, or
to any intoxicated person or to any person known to him or to any servant or employee of the licensee to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift or insane
person or a feeble minded or distracted person. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or spouse, who is over the age of twenty one (21), or to any licensed premises which
derives its principal business from the sale of service or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
B. Presence Of Minors Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be present in a class A tavern during the
times that alcoholic liquor is sold. If the license is issued for a business which is not predominantly for the sale of alcoholic liquor, such as hotels or
bowling alleys, this subsection shall only apply to the room or area set aside for the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor; provided, that persons
under the age of twenty one (21) years may be present in said licensed premises during times at which a meal is being served as long as they are
accompanied by a parent, guardian, or spouse twenty one (21) years of age or older.
C. After Hours: No person, except peace officers in the performance of law enforcement duties, the licensee and licensee's employees or agents actually
working, shall be present in a class A tavern between the hour of closing and the hour of opening as established in this chapter; provided, that if the
license is issued for a business which is not predominantly for the sale of alcoholic liquor such as hotels or bowling alleys, this subsection shall apply
only to the room or area set aside for the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor.
D. Conduct Of Place Of Business: Every licensee shall conduct his, her or its place of business in a quiet, decent and respectable manner and shall eject
therefrom or refuse admittance thereto all persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of undue noise or other acts disturbing
the peace.
E. Unlawful Conduct: Every licensee shall immediately report to the police department of the city any act by any person or patron rendering such person or
patron objectionable, causing undue noise or disturbance, causing a breach of the peace or participating in other unlawful conduct. Such report shall
be made immediately upon the occurrence of any act described herein to the end that the police department shall be notified to come to the aid or
assistance of the licensee in maintaining the peace in and about the licensed premises.
F. Disturbances: No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall make or allow any loud or boisterous talking or obscene or profane language,
quarreling, fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any street or public way in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and
quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.
G. Clothing: All licensees dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor shall be decently clothed. Topless or similar attire is prohibited. Shoes must be
worn in the licensed premises by all employees and patrons at all times.
H. Obscene Acts: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any act or form of entertainment which, when considered as a whole, would be
considered "obscene" (i.e., has a predominant appeal to prurient interest) such as that term is defined by law.
I. Inspection: Every licensee shall notify the chief of police or his designee and the liquor commissioner at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the
date and time of any private party to be held or conducted on the licensed premises and the licensed premises shall be subject to inspection during any
such private party.
J. Employee Actions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter, waitress, bartender, entertainer, vendor or in any other
position, to:
1. Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
2. Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 38/403
3. Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
4. It shall be unlawful to allow any customer or any other person to perform any of the foregoing acts.
K. Licensee Actions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to:
1. Permit or allow any waiter, waitress, bartender, entertainer, vendor or any other employee or any person to commit any of the unlawful acts in this
section. A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress, bartender, vendor or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to
whether or not such person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed.
2. Permit or allow any act or form of entertainment which, when considered as a whole, would be considered obscene (i.e., has its predominant appeal
to prurient interest) as such term is defined by state law.
3. Permit or allow any of the following: "male or female striptease" (defined to be the removal of substantially all of their clothes), lingerie (either male or
female) fashion shows, lingerie raffles, wet T-shirt contests, mud or jello wrestling or wrestling in any substance, and any similar contest or
performance which would constitute obscene conduct as defined pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20(6)(b) as follows:
Any material or performance is obscene if: (1) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a
whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and (2) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or
describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or
masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and (3) taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
4. To suffer in his, her or its premises or any part thereof or any places adjacent thereto under his, her or its control any violation of this section.
5. To suffer or permit the following conduct on licensed premises:
a. Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or other sexual act.
b. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus or genitals.
c. The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
d. Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes to public view a portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva or
anus. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-19: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the
commissioner or any police officer, fire inspector or city inspector authorized by the commissioner for the purpose of making an inspection of such
premises, or any part thereof. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-20: PEDDLING:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-21: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Violation: The commissioner may suspend, for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause any liquor dealer's license for any violation of any
provision of this chapter or for any violation of the laws of the state pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
B. Written Order: If the commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, the commissioner may, upon issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice of hearing, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such
other business or businesses.
C. Notice And Hearing: No license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the commissioner with a five (5) day written notice to
the licensee affording licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
D. Order Of Revocation Or Suspension: The commissioner shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if the commissioner determines after such hearing
that license should be revoked or suspended, state the reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a
copy of such order within five (5) days upon licensee. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-22: PENALTIES:
A. In the event that the local liquor control commissioner shall find a licensee guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, he or she may order the
licensee to pay to the city any one or more of the following:
1. A fine or fines as provided for in and authorized by the Illinois liquor control act.
2. Reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city and/or the commissioner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 39/403
3. Reasonable costs, including court reporter fees, incurred at the hearing.
B. The aforesaid remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies and penalties available to the city or commissioner, both at law or in equity and not in
lieu thereof.
C. Any penalties, costs or fees assessed under this section shall be payable upon the order of the commissioner unless notice of appeal has been filed by
the licensee, in which case, payment is stayed until the final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
3-2-23: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any portion of this chapter is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, said invalid portion shall be considered to be severed
therefrom and the balance shall remain in effect. (Ord. 2013-22, 10-28-2013)
Chapter 3
TRANSIENT BUSINESS LICENSES
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms defined in this section shall have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR: Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling from place to place, from house to house, from building to
building, or from street to street, and selling goods or taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods for future delivery, or for services to be
furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he/she
is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. This chapter does not apply to students of educational institutions located within the City limits
participating in fundraising events or charitable activities.
GROUP SALES EVENT: A temporary event of three (3) or less consecutive days at a fixed location consisting of contiguous selling areas sponsored or
arranged by a person, local unit of government or charitable or religious institution and which includes three (3) or more transient merchants, commonly
known as a "flea market", "craft show", "antique market", or "farmers' market".
ITINERANT VENDORS: Any person who transports tangible personal property for retail sale within the City who does not maintain in this City an
established office, distribution house, in-sales office, warehouse, or service center from which said business is conducted. However, this chapter does not
apply to any person who delivers personal tangible property within this City who is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or placed by mail
or other means.
SPECIAL EVENT: This chapter does not apply to permanently established businesses holding short duration (defined as 1 to 7 days) events on their
premises or on other property within the City with the permission of the property owner. Such events could include tent sales, customer appreciation days,
and similar events.
TRANSIENT BUSINESS: Any entity conducting business within the City of Plano which: a) does not intend to conduct business continuously for a twelve
(12) month period (except for normal holiday and vacation closures), or b) does not conduct business in the City of Plano from a permanent building with
street address, connected to public water and sewer services or private well and septic systems. Types of this business include, but are not limited to,
itinerant vendors, transient merchants, commercial solicitors, group sales events, peddlers, door to door salesmen, canvassers, and hawkers.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person, who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, foodstuffs, wares or merchandise in the City and who, for
the purpose of conducting such business, occupies any fixed location, including but not limited to: any non-permanent structure of any kind, vacant lot, or
vehicle. Provided, however, this chapter shall not apply to any farmer, fruit and vine grower, and gardener who shall have an undisputed right to sell
produce of his farm, orchard, vineyard and garden in any place or market where such articles are usually sold, and in any quantity he may think proper in
conformity with the provisions of section 70/1 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes1 and no license shall be required for such activity. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017;
amd. Ord. 2017-27, 6-12-2017)
3-3-2: LOCATION OF OPERATION:
Itinerant vendors and transient merchants may not operate within six hundred feet (600') of a church or a school, or within one hundred twenty feet (120')
of either the north or south edge of right-of-way of Illinois Route 34 or within sixty feet (60') of either the north or south edge of right-of-way of Main Street,
unless a shorter distance is otherwise approved by the City Council on a case by case basis. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-3: MODE OF OPERATION:
A. Itinerant vendors may operate only motorized vehicles and then only in the street or right-of-way.
B. Nonmotorized carts, wagons, trailers, or other contrivances may operate only as authorized by permit within certain City of Plano parks as follows:
1. Such nonmotorized vehicles or contrivances must be dropped at their fixed location no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and be picked up no later
than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. each day. Under no circumstances shall they be pushed or walked to their location.
2. All transient businesses shall display their City issued license at all times. Permits must be carried by each solicitor and be displayed upon request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 40/403
C. Time limits are between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday and at no time on Sunday or on a State or national holiday.
D. No vendor may utilize prerecorded music, chimes, bells or any electrically amplified device for the purpose of attracting public attention, which exceeds
sixty (60) decibels measured from a point no more than within fifty feet (50') from the sales area, nor shall any vendor, merchant or solicitor use abusive
language, threats or refuse to leave any premises in the City when requested by the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-4: PREREQUISITES TO CONDUCTING BUSINESS:
A. Compliance Requirements: It is a violation of this chapter for any person, either as a principal or an agent, to conduct business as a transient merchant,
itinerant vendor, commercial solicitor, or to conduct a group sales event without first:
1. Complying with the requirements of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, to include obtaining a certificate of registration and posting the required bonds
or other approved security.
2. Complying with all requirements of the zoning district under the zoning ordinance.
3. Obtaining a license under this chapter.
B. Prima Facie Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant or itinerant vendor under this chapter if the person does not
transact business from a fixed location in a permanent structure on property owned or leased for a period of not less than twelve (12) months by the
person conducting said business. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-5: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required: Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a transient merchant, itinerant vendor, commercial solicitor, or hold a group sales event shall
file a license application with the Office of the City Clerk, which is designated as the licensing agency.
B. Application: A completed license application must be submitted to the City Clerk not less than forty five (45) days prior to the requested date to
commence sales hereunder.
C. Contents Of Application: This license application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: the applicant's name, address of the residence of the
principal (if the applicant is a corporation, the residential addresses of the officers of the corporation), the location at which the applicant proposes to do
business, the nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the retailers' occupation
tax act, a complete inventory of the goods the applicant intends to offer for sale, sureties or bonds, certificates of insurance, employee list, and a list of
all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant obtained in the twelve (12) month period prior to the application.
D. Term: A license shall be required for each calendar year in which an applicant transacts business in the city, as defined by this chapter and shall expire
on December 31 of the year of issuance.
E. Fee: Each license application shall be accompanied by a license application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the applicable transient business
license fee, all as set forth in the application for transient business license set forth in section 3-3-10 of this chapter.
F. Failure To Obtain A License: If any person makes retail sales as a transient merchant, itinerant vendor, or commercial solicitor without first having
obtained a license, the city clerk may hold the inventory, truck, cart, or other personal property of the person until he obtains a license to conduct
business. If the property has been held by the city clerk for more than sixty (60) days and the person whose property is being held has not obtained a
license, the city may petition the circuit court for an order of the sale of the property being held. If the court finds that the person whose property is held
has not obtained a license, the court may order the city to sell the property. Proceeds of the sale of the property, less reimbursement to the city clerk for
the reasonable expenses of storage and sale of the property shall be deposited in the general funds of the city.
G. Exemptions (No Permit Required):
1. Prior Invitation: Any person who, for the purposes of selling or taking orders for sales of merchandise or services, has been previously invited by the
occupant of a residence to call thereon.
2. Nonprofit Organizations: Any person engaged in peddling or soliciting which is not prohibited by law on behalf of the charitable, religious or nonprofit
organization organized as a not for profit corporation under state or federal law. However, not for profit organizations shall register with the city.
3. First Amendment Activities: Any person exercising their first amendment rights, including the free exercise of religion, the freedom of speech or
press, the right of assembly and not engaged in peddling, soliciting or itinerant merchandizing for commercial gain.
4. Students And Educational Institutes: Any person engaged in fundraising for an educational institute. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-6: FOOD VENDOR AND MERCHANTS; SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
In accordance with all county and state health regulations:
A. All vehicles, carts or other contrivances shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 41/403
B. It shall be unlawful to permit any stale food, decaying matter or any other waste material or product to accumulate in, on, or around any such vehicle
while it is so used. Vendors shall remove such matter from the premises on a daily basis.
C. If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened or
protected against dust and insects. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Other Licenses: Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or preempt any other license or regulation which may be required by a person under this
code. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-8: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the police department to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-9: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the mayor for any violation of any section or regulation hereof,
and such suspension shall be in addition to any fine imposed. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-10: APPLICATION FOR TRANSIENT BUSINESS LICENSE:
CITY OF PLANO
CITY CLERK'S OFFICE
17 E. Main St. - Plano, IL 60545
City Clerk's Office 630-552-8275
TRANSIENT BUSINESS
LICENSE APPLICATION
(Please return completed Application and Fee to City of Plano Clerk's Office)
ALL FIELDS MUST BE FILLED OUT (IF IT DOES NOT APPLY-ENTER N/A)
FOR WHICH LICENSE ARE YOU APPLYING?
Itinerant Vendor - $100.00 Application Fee
$100.00 Annual Fee (per vendor)
Transient Merchant - $100.00 Application Fee
$100.00 Annual Fee (per location)
Commercial Solicitor - $100.00 Application Fee
$100.00 Annual Fee (per salesperson)
Group Sales Event - $100.00 Application Fee
$100.00 Event Fee (per event)
Business/Individual requesting permit:
Applicant Name: Date:
Date of Birth: SSN: Daytime or cell number:
Current Address:
City: State: Zip:
Length of time at current address:
Height: Weight: Eye Color: Hair Color:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 42/403
Male: Female: Driver's License Number: State Issued:
Previous Residence Information (if current residence less than three (3) years)
Previous Address:
City: State: Zip:
Name of Current Employer (this section must be completed)
Name of Employer:
Address:
City: State: Zip:
Length of Employment:
Previous Employer (if at current employer less than three (3) years)
Name of Employer:
Address:
City: State: Zip:
Additional (this section must be completed)
Date of Any Previous Applications for this type of permit (list City and State):
Date sales are to be commenced
List proposed location(s) where sales are to be conducted
List the type of goods, foodstuffs, wares, merchandise or services that the applicant intends to offer for sale at the above location
If a motor vehicle is utilized for the sale of foodstuffs, list the following:
A) Make of vehicle
B) Body Style
C) License Plate #
D) Licensing State
E) Driver(s) Name and Driver's License #
Food Vendors must attach a copy of a Kendall County Health Permit
Food Vendors must attach evidence of insurance (with the City of Plano named as additionally insured) that applicant is insured in an amount of not less
than one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) for property damage and injuries, including injury resulting in death, caused by the operation of the business.
Has previous license ever been revoked: Yes / No
Any prior conviction/violation of this Ordinance or other in another Illinois Municipality: Yes / No
Are you a registered sex offender? Yes / No
Any felony convictions of Illinois or federal law of the U.S.? Yes / No
List any additional information (if necessary)
The undersigned does hereby state under penalties of perjury that all statements in the foregoing application are true and correct.
Date:
Signature of applicant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 43/403
Print Name
Fees
All Fees payable at the City of Plano Clerk's Office located at 17 E. Main St., Plano, IL.
LICENSE APPLICATION FEE
AnnualFees: $100
LICENSE PERMIT FEE
Annual (per salesperson, event, vendor or location)
Fees: $100
FINGERPRINT FEE - below to be completed by office personnel
Per salesperson, event, vendor or location
Live scan fee$40.00
Non-resident home or business$40.00
Clerk initials: Total Fees Paid:$
Total # of Permits to be issued/covered:
CONSENT TO CONDUCT BACKGROUND CHECK
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
I authorize and empower the City of Plano Clerk's Office to obtain, prepare, use and furnish information concerning my general reputation, personal
characteristics and mode of living through correspondence or personal interviews with neighbors, friends of associates or others with whom I am
acquainted or who may have knowledge concerning any of above items.
Upon written request, I understand that said Clerk's Office would provide me with information regarding the scope of the investigation if one was/is made.
CONSENT FOR YOUR BUSINESS NAME/INDIVIDUAL'S NAMES
THAT HAVE BEEN APPROVED FOR A SOLICITOR'S PERMIT
BE PLACED ON THE CITY WEBSITE
I also consent to my Name/Business name be placed on the City Website for the safety of the citizens of the City of Plano.
Signature:
Address:
Date:
TRANSIENT BUSINESS PERMIT APPLICATION FOR:
List name of business on application above
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) ss
KENDALL COUNTY)
Under penalties as provided by law pursuant to Section 5/1-109 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the undersigned certifies that the statements set forth in
this instrument are true and correct.
The applicant has reviewed the City of Plano Code of Ordinances and the State of Illinois Compiled Statutes and is not disqualified by reason of any
matter or thing contained in either document.
being first duly sworn deposes and says that
has read the above foregoing Application, caused the answers to be provided thereto, and all of the information given by on said Application is true and
correct.
Signature of Applicant
Print Name
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 44/403
Subscribed and sworn to before me, this day of , A.D. 20
Notary Public
NOTE: In the event Applicant is a partnership, or a Limited Liability Company, the Application should be signed and sworn to in the same
manner by all partners members and managers.
In the event Applicant is a corporation, the Application should be signed and sworn to by the officers and the local manager.
(Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
3-3-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Penalty: Any person found liable/guilty by preponderance of the evidence of a violation of this chapter in an administrative/judicial hearing shall be
subject to a fine, plus applicable hearing costs. The fine amount is not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to a maximum fine not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus applicable hearing costs. The city mayor/clerk may revoke the license of any applicant under this chapter for
any violation of this chapter.
B. Settlement Of Violations: Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise this claim of violation against him by paying the
fine to the city, within ten (10) days of the time such alleged violation or offense was committed. (Ord. 2017-3, 1-9-2017)
Chapter 4
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS
3-4-1: APPLICABILITY AND APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all businesses, being any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, establishment, concern, or any other
type of activity, together with all devices, machines, equipment, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, now or hereafter conducted in any zoning
district of the city other than the residentially zoned districts.
Applications for all licenses and permits described herein shall be made in writing to the city clerk. Each application shall state the name of the applicant,
the permit or license desired, the location to be used, and fee to be paid; in addition each application shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of the officials in issuing of the permit or license applied for. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-2: FORMS AND SIGNATURES:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the city clerk, and each license or permit issued shall
bear the signatures of the mayor and city clerk. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where the ordinances of the city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the clerk shall refer such license to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such
receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days
after receiving the application or a copy thereof. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-4: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
All annual fees and charges shall be paid in advance at the time application is made to the city clerk. The term of each license shall run from July 1
through June 30 of the following year. When an application for an annual license is made after the expiration of six (6) months of the current license year,
the license for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of one-half (1/2) the annual fee. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-5: LICENSE TERMS:
All general business annual licenses shall terminate on June 30, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The city clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a statement of the time expiration of the license held by the licensee, three (3) weeks prior to the date of
such expiration. Provided that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to
obtain a new license, or a renewal, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating without a license. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-6: TRANSFER; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A. A general business license issued may be transferred by the original licensee provided that written notice thereof is given to the city clerk ten (10) days
before the transfer is made, but no more than one transfer of any license shall be made within any license year. Provided that it shall be unlawful to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 45/403
transfer any transient business or liquor license and any attempted transfer of such a license shall have no effect.
B. The location of any licensed business or occupation, may be changed provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, provided that the
building and zoning requirements of the ordinances are complied with. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No licenses shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit for any thing, or act, shall be issued if the premises and building to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any
business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-8: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for the
business at all times. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-9: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-10: INSPECTIONS:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for, or in connection with, the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the business to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purposes of making such inspection any officer or employee
of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
B. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city
who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspections, or who interferes with such officer or employee while
in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made
upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection is desired at the time it is sought to make the
inspection. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
3-4-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2004-16, 4-26-2004)
Chapter 5
RAFFLES
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered
to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in taxsupported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would
be cared for by the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such
pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as
a result of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code, being 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2, conducted by an organization
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 46/403
licensed under this chapter in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of the persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general
public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-2: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conduct or operation of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than raffles as
provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a raffle, or sell chances for a raffle, in the City without first having obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such licenses shall be issued pursuant and subject to the provisions of the Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act1. Licenses shall be issued only to
bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, education or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have
been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five
(5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the City Clerk, in consultation
with the Mayor and City Council, determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-4: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
A. Class A; General Raffle License: A general raffle license shall permit an organization the ability to conduct a raffle that may include multiple drawings to
award prizes, but all drawings must occur on the same day and at the same location and within the confines of the same raffle event.
B. Class B; Financial Hardship Raffle License: A Class B raffle license allows a not-for-profit fund raising organization or group, organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial hardship assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial hardship as a result of an
injury, disability, accident, or disaster, to conduct one raffle event for that purpose.
C. Class C; Annual Raffle License: An annual raffle license permits an organization to regularly conduct raffles as defined herein within twelve (12)
consecutive calendar months. Such license shall permit no more than fifty two (52) raffle events per year. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a raffle license shall be made on forms provided by the City at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the sale of any raffle chances. Such
applications shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant.
B. Authorized representative of the applicant.
C. Date of incorporation, where applicable.
D. Names and addresses of officers and directors.
E. The area or areas within the City in which raffle chances, tickets, and the like will be sold or issued.
F. The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
G. The maximum price which may be charged for each chance issued or sold.
H. The time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 47/403
I. A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of the
organization.
J. A statement that the applicant agrees to comply with all laws of the State, the United States, and the City in the conduct of the raffle. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-
2018)
3-5-6: FEE:
A license shall be issued when the requirements of this chapter have been met and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) has been paid to the City and
received by the City Clerk. A license authorizes the licensee to conduct one raffle. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-7: ISSUANCE, DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of an application for a license, the City Clerk or designee shall either issue a license or advise the
applicant in writing of the reason for denial of a license. No such license shall be issued except as authorized under the Act. The City Clerk shall give
notice to the Mayor and City Council not less than forty eight (48) hours before the license becomes effective. Within such forty eight (48) hour period, the
Mayor or any member of the City Council may, through notice to the City Clerk, cause this issuance to be stayed. In such case the matter will be formally
presented to the City Council at its next regular meeting for decision. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-8: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Each license is valid for one or one series of raffles (in the case of lightening and Queen of Hearts or similar raffles) only.
B. No more than six (6) raffle licenses shall be issued to any person in any calendar year.
C. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed two million five hundred thousand
dollars ($2,500,000.00). The maximum retail value of each prize by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed two million five hundred thousand
dollars ($2,500,000.00). The City Council may authorize a higher aggregate retail value and/or retail value of a single prize upon written request of the
applicant.
D. The maximum duration during which chances may be issued or sold shall be twelve (12) months prior to the drawing. The drawing shall be held at the
time and location as set forth in the license. The City Council may authorize a longer duration upon written request of the applicant.
E. Each licensee shall keep records as required under the Act.
F. The conduct of raffles within the City is subject to applicable restrictions and conditions as set forth in the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
G. In no event shall the price of each raffle chance issued or sold exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
H. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle.
I. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
J. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conduct of raffles without the permission of a parent or guardian. A person under
the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
K. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only at the location(s) as set forth in the license, but when specified location(s) are properties open to the public,
prior approval must be obtained from the City Clerk. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-9: RAFFLE MANAGER; BOND:
All operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The raffle manager shall give
a fidelity bond in an amount not less than the anticipated gross receipts for the raffle. The bond shall be in favor of the organization and conditioned upon
the raffle manager's honesty and the performance of his/her duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the City not
less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation, provided, the City Clerk may waive this bonding requirement when, due to the nature, past experience or
competence of the organization involved, the City Clerk determines that such bond would be unnecessarily burdensome. The City Clerk shall give notice
of such waiver to the Mayor and City Council not less than forty eight (48) hours before the license becomes effective. Within such forty eight (48) hour
period, the Mayor or any member of the City Council may, through notice to the City Clerk, cause this waiver to be stayed. In such case the matter will be
formally presented to the City Council at its next regular meeting for decision. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-10: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 48/403
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
2. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license thereof issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
3. Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
B. Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership and to the City its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from the raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this section. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
3-5-11: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 shall constitute a violation and any such person
found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 2018-7,
1-22-2018)
3-5-12: MISCELLANEOUS:
In the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions or this chapter and any other chapter of this Code, the terms and provisions hereof permitting
and regulating raffles within the City shall control. (Ord. 2018-7, 1-22-2018)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC DANCES
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; COUNCIL POWERS:
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a dance hall within the City limits without first obtaining a license therefor. (Ord. 1972-
11; amd. 1989 Code)
The City Council shall have the power to issue such licenses and to revoke the same for good cause shown. (Ord. 1972-11; amd. Ord. 1976-7, 5-10-1976)
3-6-2: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
A license to operate or maintain a dance hall may be issued by the City Council to any citizen, firm or corporation of the State, who:
A. Submits a written application for a license, which application shall state, and the applicant shall state under oath:
1. The name, address and residence of the applicant and the length of time he has lived at that residence;
2. The place of birth of the applicant and if the applicant is a naturalized citizen, the time and place of such naturalization;
3. That the applicant has never been convicted of a felony;
4. The location of the place or building where the applicant intends to operate or maintain the dance hall.
B. Established:
1. That he is a person of good moral character; and
2. That the place or building where the dance hall is to be operated or maintained reasonably conforms to all laws and health and fire regulations
applicable thereto, and is properly ventilated and supplied with separate and sufficient toilet arrangements for each sex, and is a safe and proper
place or building for a public dance hall. (Ord. 1972-11)
3-6-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable on or before May 1 of each year. (Ord. 1972-11; amd. Ord. 1976-7, 5-10-76)
3-6-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 49/403
The City Council may cause to be made a thorough investigation to determine the fitness of the applicant and the truth of the statements made in and
accompanying the application, but its decision on an application to issue or renew a license shall be rendered within thirty (30) days after the application is
received. (Ord. 1972-11; 1989 Code)
3-6-5: TERM OF LICENSE, RENEWAL:
The license term shall be from May 1 to April 30 of the next year and may be renewed for periods of one year upon written application being made. (Ord.
1972-11; amd. Ord. 1976-7, 5-10-76)
3-6-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All dance halls subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall be open to the public only during the hours which taverns are permitted to be open under the
regulations of the liquor regulations, as may be amended from time to time1.
3-6-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE, REISSUANCE:
The Mayor of the City may revoke the license of any licensee:
A. Who knowingly permits any person under sixteen (16) years of age to be present in or to frequent such dance hall, unless accompanied by his parent or
legal guardian or proper escort, male or female.
B. When the dance hall is operated and maintained unreasonably and needlessly disturbs the peace of the neighborhood.
C. When disorderly or immoral practices are permitted.
D. When circumstances happen or become known to the City Council which, had they happened or been known at the time of the application for the
license, would have legally justified the City Council in refusing the license.
E. When such dance hall is opened or remains open outside the hours designated by the City Council.
F. When the licensee violates any of the rules and regulations issued by the City Council.
When any license is revoked by the City Council, it shall not issue a license to operate a dance hall on such premises until after a period of three (3)
months have elapsed.
3-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who makes a false statement concerning any material fact in submitting an application for a
license or for a renewal of a license in any hearing concerning the revocation thereof, shall be punished for each offense by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1972-11)
Chapter 7
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
3-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, rent, exhibit or operate any merchandise vending machine, pinball machine, music box or juke box, video
games, coin-operated pool table or other coin-operated amusement devices within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained a license for
the same from the City Clerk; provided, however, no license shall be required to operate a penny peanut, candy or gum machine or a penny scales.
3-7-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license to lease, rent, exhibit and operate said merchandise vending machine, pinball machines, music boxes and juke boxes, video
games, coin-operated pool table or other coin-operated amusement devices shall be made to the City Clerk. Said applications shall state definitely the
number of and kind of machines to be licensed; the location of each machine to be licensed; and, if available, the serial number of each machine for which
a license is requested. (Ord. 1948-4)
3-7-3: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for each machine shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per year starting May 1, 1993. (Ord. 1993-14, 4-30-93)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 50/403
3-7-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses granted shall expire on May 1 of the year following the date of their issuance.
3-7-5: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued shall contain the name of the licensee, the time covered by the same, a full description of themachines for which the license is
granted, and shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, and attested by the Seal of the City. Every person holding a license shall,
upon demand, exhibit the same to any City officer.
3-7-6: NONASSIGNABILITY; TRANSFER:
No license issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be assignable or transferable. (Ord., 7-1-46)
3-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, in the discretion of the court. (Ord., 7-1-46; 1989 Code)
Chapter 8
HOTEL TAX
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
HOTEL: Every building, buildings, or structure, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place in which the public may, for
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping, housekeeping accommodations, lodging, lodging and food, or apartments, or suites, or other
accommodations offered to the public for rental on a daily basis. The term includes inns, hotels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses,
motels, apartment houses, and bed and breakfast establishments.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy any room or other hotel living accommodations, as "hotel" is defined herein,
for thirty (30) consecutive days or more in such hotel, or a person who works and lives in the same hotel. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
3-8-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of three percent (3%) of the gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting of a hotel or motel room
within the city for each twenty four (24) hour period, or any portion thereof, for which a daily room charge is made; provided, however, that a tax shall not
be levied or imposed upon any person who shall be a permanent resident.
If any hotel operator collects an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such operator for the hotel tax liability measured by receipts
which are not subject to hotel tax, or if any hotel operator, in collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to reimburse such operator for
hotel tax liability measured by receipts which are subject to tax under this act, collects more from the customer than is the operator's hotel tax liability in the
transaction, then customer shall have a legal right to claim a refund of such amount from such operator. However, if such amount is not refunded to the
customerfor any reason, the hotel operator is liable to pay such amount to the city.
Persons subject to any tax imposed by this chapter may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with state tax imposed under "the hotel operators' occupation tax act".
The tax herein levied and imposed shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the operator to pay the amount of
the tax to the treasurer of the city under procedures prescribed by the treasurer or as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
3-8-3: RECORD KEEPING:
Every operator shall keep separate books or records of his business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under this chapter
separately from his transactions not taxable hereunder. If any such operator fails to keep such separate books or records, he shall be liable to tax at the
rate designated in section 3-8-2 of this chapter upon the entire proceeds from his hotel.
Such records shall show every occupancy and all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and the tax payable thereon in such form as required by regulation
prescribed by the state of Illinois or by the treasurer of the city of Plano, or as provided in this chapter, but shall in all instances conform to accepted
accounting practices.
Such records shall be available for inspection and examination for any proper purpose at any reasonable time upon demand by the treasurer or a duly
authorized agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period of five (5) years unless the treasurer shall prescribe a shorter period of time.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the treasurer or the duly authorized deputy or representative of the treasurer in the
discharge of the duties of the treasurer. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 51/403
3-8-4: CITY TAX RETURNS:
Every operator shall file with the city treasurer, a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon on forms prescribed by the treasurer
and consistent with returns required under the Illinois hotel operators' occupation tax act. The return shall be due on or before the due date of the Illinois
hotel operators' occupation tax return required to be filed with the Illinois department of revenue. A separate return shall be filed for each place of business
within the city regardless of ownership. A copy of the Illinois state hotel operators' occupation tax return shall be provided to the city treasurer.
The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall commence on May 1, 2002. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax payments shall be in
accordance with the filing requirements imposed on the taxpayer by the Illinois department of revenue. At the time of filing such tax returns, the operator
shall pay the full amount of all tax due hereunder.
If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one percent (1%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the date of
delinquency shall be added and collected. In addition, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against
any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee who shall fail to collect and remit the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2007-2, 1-22-2007)
3-8-5: FAILURE TO PAY, ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes or penalty herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon request of the treasurer or the mayor, bring or
cause to be brought, an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the city shall be entitled to
recover, in said action all delinquent taxes, interest in penalties thereon, and the costs of such collection including all attorney fees incurred in such
collection action. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
3-8-6: PAYMENT TO THE CITY:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city, and shall
be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the city. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
3-8-7: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to engage in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city
without a certificate of registration issued by the Illinois department of revenue. A copy of the said certificate of registration shall be provided to the
treasurer not later than the filing due date of the first return required to be filed with the city. (Ord. 2007-2, 1-22-2007)
3-8-8: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision of
this chapter, in addition to any and all other penalties provided herein, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundredfifty
dollars ($250.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2002-1, 1-28-2002)
Chapter 9
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. The phrases "video gaming terminal", "licensed establishment", "licensed fraternal establishment", "licensed veterans establishment", and "licensed
truck stop establishment" shall have the meanings set forth in the Illinois video gaming act1.
B. "Licensee" shall mean and include all of the establishments defined in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
3-9-2: IMPOSITION OF ANNUAL FEE:
Commencing upon adoption of this chapter, an annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is hereby imposed upon each video gaming terminal operated by
a licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans establishment, or licensed truck stop establishment within the city in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq. (the "act"). The fee paid for each video gaming
terminal shall be for the fiscal year May 1 through April 30, and any fee paid during a fiscal year shall apply until the end of the fiscal year in which paid.
Any continuing operation of a video gaming terminal shall require the payment of a new annual fee on or before May 1 of each year for the ensuing fiscal
year. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Every licensee shall make application to the city clerk's office for a permit, and shall pay the annual fee for each video gaming terminal operated. The
application shall designate the name of the licensee, its liquor license number, the location of the licensed establishment operating the video gaming
terminal, the number of video gaming terminals operated at that location, and shall include a copy of the license issued by the state of Illinois for the
operation of the video gaming terminal(s). No permit shall be issued to any person whose video gaming terminal is not licensed by the state of Illinois for
the location for which the permit is sought. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 52/403
3-9-4: LIMITATIONS UPON PLACEMENT:
A. Except as to "licensed truck stop establishment", no video gaming terminal permit shall be issued to, and no video gaming terminal shall be placed or
operated from within, a location that does not also have issued to it a current license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail by the drink for
consumption on the premises.
B. Notwithstanding any greater limit which may from time to time be established by the Illinois legislature, no more than five (5) video gaming terminals
shall be allowed, nor permits be issued therefor, under this chapter for each licensee at any one location. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
3-9-5: PLAY BY MINORS PROHIBITED; PENALTIES:
A. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be permitted to use or play a video gaming terminal, and any licensee who shall suffer or permit
a person under the age of twenty one (21) years to use or play a video gaming terminal shall be subject to fine or have his or her licenses issued under
this chapter suspended or revoked, after hearing before the mayor acting pursuant to the procedures applicable to hearings held pursuant to the
provisions of chapter 2 of this title and the hearing provisions of the Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
3-9-6: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter by operation of a video gaming terminal without having obtained the permit and paid
the annual fee therefor, or by operating a video gaming terminal in violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of a petty offense, and shall be
fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense, and the license or licenses shall be subject to suspension or
revocation as herein provided. Each day that a video gaming terminal is operated in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2014-13, 4-14-2014)
3-9-7: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
Each licensee shall permit the inspection of the books and records of the licensee pertaining to and reflecting operation of each video gaming terminal of
the licensee at the request of any law enforcement officer of the city or the state of Illinois at all reasonable times. (Ord. 2014-13, 4-14-2014)
Chapter 10
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE REGULATIONS
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
3-10-2: AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to provide cable service or video service shall not use the public rights of way for the
installation or construction of facilities for the provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or video service until it has obtained either: a)
a state issued authorization from the commission to offer or provide cable or video service under section 401 of the cable and video competition law of
20071; or b) a cable franchise from the city under section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code2. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
3-10-3: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE CUSTOMER PROTECTION REGULATIONS:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
3-10-4: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 53/403
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
3-10-5: PENALTIES:
The city does hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the cable and video customer protection law, as
incorporated by reference in this chapter, or any applicable rights and obligations of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, as enumerated in
this chapter, a provider of cable service or video service shall be subject to monetary penalties which shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law and shall not represent the city's exclusive remedy for any material
breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a service provider to comply with service quality and other applicable standards, rights and
obligations specified in any provision of the law.
B. The city shall give the service provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from
the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section.
D. The city council hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the mayor.
E. Any decision of the mayor to levy penalties may be appealed to the city council, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material breach and
penalties levied therefor within twenty one (21) days following receipt of the service provider's request for an appeal. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
3-10-6: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s). Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation. The service provider is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to
request the credit. (Ord. 2017-8, 1-23-2017)
Chapter 11
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED MASSAGE SCHOOL: A facility which meets the minimum standards for training and curriculum as determined by the state of Illinois,
department of financial and professional regulation.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The person authorized by the city council to inspect property for conformance with building codes.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons, other than the massage therapists, who render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from
the permittee, and who have no physical contact with the customers or clients.
LICENSEE: The operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft
parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in the definition of the term "massage" in this section.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person licensed per 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57, who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of
massage.
PERSON: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form of character.
PUBLIC BATHHOUSE: Any place, including a private club or organization, wherein any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership engages in,
conducts or carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, the business of giving or furnishing Russian, Finnish, Swedish, hot air, vapor,
electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, salt, Japanese, sauna, fomentation or electric baths or baths of any kind whatever, excluding ordinary tub baths
where an attendant is not required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 54/403
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-
25-2016)
3-11-2: OPERATOR TO MAINTAIN REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of all persons employed as massage therapists and their license numbers. Such
register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-3: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
A. No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the building inspector reveals that the establishment complies
with each of the following minimum requirements:
1. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the applicable building code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with applicable plumbing code.
a. For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules and rooms containing bathtubs, there shall be a waterproof floor covering, which will be carried up all walls
to a height of at least six inches (6"). The walls of all toilet rooms and rooms containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six feet (6') with a
smooth, nonabsorbent finish surface of cement, tile, or similar material.
b. Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings approved by the building inspector.
c. Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: Dry heat
rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.)
d. A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
2. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or
patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. All toilet
rooms shall be equipped with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet rooms. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex
accommodated therein.
3. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories or
washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels or hot air dryers.
4. All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an
area of not less than one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area, or shall be provided with approved artificial light and a mechanical operating ventilating
system. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half (1/2) of the total required window area shall be operable. To allow for
adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms, and areas provided for patrons' use not served directly by a required window, skylight, or mechanical system
of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the floor to ceiling height of the area
in which they are located.
5. All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of applicable electrical code. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-4: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances, apparatus, and personnel, shall be kept clean and appliances and apparatus shall be
operated in a sanitary condition.
B. All employees shall be clean and shall wear suitable clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. Provisions of a
separate dressing room for each sex must be available for each employee and for each customer. Such lockers shall be equipped with a key lock or
number combination locking device. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
C. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any massage establishment unless such establishment is
provided with automatic laundry facilities for such laundry and drying. Covered receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper
towels.
D. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use.
E. If the massage establishment is in any building used for residential or sleeping purposes, any room in which the services enumerated in the definition of
the term "massage" (section 3-11-1 of this chapter) are provided, is to be used for massage and shall not be used for residential or sleeping purposes.
F. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is
available other than those services as described in the definition of the term "massage", nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of
such advertising that any service is available other than those as described in the definition of the term "massage".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 55/403
G. No service enumerated in the definition of the term "massage" may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage
establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
H. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, clothes or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, or massage
therapist. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-5: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least
eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-6: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation for any location not
specified in his license. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-7: INSPECTION:
The police department of the city shall, upon probable cause to believe that a provision of this chapter has been violated, make an inspection of any
massage establishment in the city. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-8: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter which violated the
provisions of this chapter or which violate any municipal or state law or ordinance, including any offense as set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
6 et seq. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, to place his hand on, to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in
any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any person. It shall be unlawful for any massage therapist, employee or operator to perform, offer
or agree to perform any act which would require touching of the patron's genital area. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-9: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee for the massage establishment, or the employer of any persons purporting to act as massage therapists, to
ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist shall first have obtained a valid state massage therapist license. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-10: EXCEPTIONS FROM CHAPTER REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the state, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to barbers or
cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the
state. This chapter shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the state, or to a licensed nurse
acting under the direct prescription and direction of any physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath licensed by the state. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-11: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any
way, or acting as a massage therapist, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or who in conjunction with the massage establishment
gives or administers, or practices the giving or administering of a massage without first obtaining a massage establishment license and paying a license
fee to do so from the city, or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-12: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the
city, the operation of a massage establishment, without first having obtained a massage establishment license from the mayor with the consent of the city
council. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-13: FILING AND FEE PROVISIONS:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form provided by
such city clerk and pay a filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall not be refundable. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-14: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 56/403
A. The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the proposed
place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address of each applicant.
B. In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, any applicant for a massage establishment license shall furnish the following information:
1. The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.
2. Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
3. The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
4. Two (2) portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2").
5. Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
6. The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this city or another city or state
under a license, has had such license removed or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action
of suspension or revocation.
7. All criminal convictions except minor traffic violations.
8. The applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the applicant will have no physical contact with his customer or clients he need
not possess such diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and
work of massage is taught.
9. Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the
application.
10. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deny to the mayor, with the consent of the city council, the right to require the fingerprints
and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained in this section be construed to deny the right of such mayor, with the
consent of the city council, to confirm the height and weight of the applicant.
11. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the
names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each stockholder holding stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of
the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-15: CORPORATE APPLICANT; EXEMPTION:
A. The provisions of subsections 3-11-14B1, B2, B3, B4 and B7 of this chapter, relating to requirements for corporation applicants shall not apply to any of
the following:
1. A corporation, the stock of which is listed on a stock exchange in the state or the city of New York, state of New York.
2. A bank, trust company, financial institution or title company to which application is made or to whom a license is issued in a fiduciary capacity.
3. A corporation which is required by law to file periodic reports with the securities and exchange commission. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-16: OPERATOR OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT; EXCEPTION:
A diploma from a recognized school will not be required of the operator of a massage establishment or for any employee where such operator or employee
does not give a massage. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-17: VERIFICATION OF APPLICATION:
Every application for a license under this chapter shall be verified as provided in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-605 for the verification of pleadings.
(Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-18: LICENSE ISSUANCE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
A. The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall issue a license within fourteen (14) days following the completed application therefor unless the
mayor, with the consent of the city council, finds that:
1. The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the building, health, city planning, and fire codes of the city.
2. The applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been convicted
of any of the following offenses or convicted of any offense outside the state that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed
within the state: an offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony. The mayor, with the consent
of the city council, may issue a license to any person convicted of any of the crimes described in this subsection if the mayor, with the consent of the
city council, finds that such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application, and the applicant has had no subsequent
felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 57/403
3. The applicant for a massage establishment license, if previously conducted a massage establishment within a municipality, engaged in, or any of the
applicant's employed masseurs or masseuses engaged in, any of the unlawful activities. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-19: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, after a hearing, for good
cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a massage therapist, is
engaged in any conduct which violated any state or local laws or ordinances at licensee's place of business, and the licensee has actual or constructive
knowledge of such violations or the licensee shall have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or in any case, where the licensee refuses to
permit any duly authorized police officer of the city to inspect the premises or the operations therein, after a hearing before the administrative/health and
safety committee, after seven (7) days' notice in writing of the time, date, and place of such hearing has been mailed to the licensee wherein evidence of
such cause for revocation or suspension shall be heard. (Ord. 2017-7, 1-23-2017)
3-11-20: SALE OR TRANSFER:
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the death or
incapacity of the licensee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the
license. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-21: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every person to whom or for whom a massage establishment license shall have been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall display such
license in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the license may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. (Ord. 2016-
16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-22: FEES:
A. Every licensee who conducts or assists in conducting or permitting any massage establishment shall pay to the city clerk a license fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) annually, payable in advance.
B. The license fee prescribed in this section is due and payable upon receipt of the license and on the anniversary date each year thereafter. (Ord. 2016-
16, 4-25-2016)
3-11-23: ZONING:
Massage establishments shall be allowed as permitted uses in the B-3 general business district, B-4 business/wholesale district, and B-5 service business
district. (Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
Chapter 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
Chapter 13
PAWNBROKER AND RESALE DEALERS
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED IDENTIFICATION: Any one of the following validly issued and unexpired forms of identification, which includes a photograph of the person: a)
a United States passport, b) a state driver's license, c) a state issued identification card, d) a military identification card, or e) a United States permanent
resident card.
AUDIO-VIDEO EQUIPMENT: Items which include any stereo, speaker, radio, video recorder, video camera, camera, television, tape or disk player, MP3
player or satellite signal device.
INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE ARTICLES: Articles that are individually identifiable by a serial number; or other applied numbers, letters, characters or
markings; or other unique features that serve to distinguish it from any other similar article and can be used to establish ownership of the article.
PAWNBROKER: Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of
selling the same back at a stipulated price, or who publicly displays at his or her place of business the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote the
pawnbroker business, or who publicly displays a sign which indicates, in substance, a business on the premises which "loans money for personal property,
or deposit or pledge". The business of a pawnbroker shall not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 58/403
PERSON: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust or organization; or the
manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
PRECIOUS METALS: Any item containing gold (chemical symbol Au), silver (chemical symbol Ag), platinum (chemical symbol Pt), palladium (chemical
symbol Pd), or rhodium (chemical symbol Rh) or any combination of gold, silver, platinum, palladium, or rhodium, but not including items containing any
chemical or any automotive, photographic, electrical, medical or dental materials, or electronic parts, except for those containing precious metals.
RESALE DEALER: Any individual, firm, corporation or partnership engaged in the business of operating a business for profit which buys, sells, possesses
on consignment for sale or trades jewelry, stamps, audio-video equipment or any precious metals which may have been previously owned by a consumer;
or which derives more than thirty five percent (35%) of its gross receipts from the sale, consignment for sale, pledge or trade of any goods, wares or
merchandise which have previously been owned by a consumer, including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances, clothing, automobile accessories,
books or metals, whether in bulk or manufactured state.
A. The term "resale dealer" shall include, but not be limited to, businesses commonly known as swapshop operators, cash for gold operators, stamp
dealers, coin dealers and jewelers that purchase and resell items from persons other than dealers possessing a federal employee identification
number and suppliers and engage in disassembling for purposes other than appraisals, melting, or otherwise altering jewelry. The term "resale
dealer" shall not include pawnbrokers, providers of commercial mobile services as defined in 47 USC 332(d) or their authorized dealers, or retail
merchants that do not purchase previously owned items directly from the public at the retail location.
B. The fact that any business does any of the following acts shall be prima facie proof that such business is a resale dealer:
1. Advertises in any fashion that it buys or sells used items. Such advertisements shall include, but not be limited to, media advertisements, websites,
telephone listings, and signs whether on the exterior or interior of the business.
2. Devotes a significant segment or section of the business premises to the purchase or sale of used items.
USED: Any goods, wares or merchandise which have previously been owned by a consumer, including, but not limited to, jewelry, stamps, coins, audiovideo
equipment, or any precious metals, furniture, appliances, clothing, automobile accessories, books or metals, whether in bulk or manufactured state.
(Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person, either as owner, manager, lessee, officer or agent, or in any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated as a pawnbroker or resale
dealership without first having obtained a license from the city to do so. The requisite fee shall accompany all original or renewal applications. Each
license shall commence on January 1 and shall terminate on December 31 next following the date of issuance. Failure or neglect to pay the requisite
license fee in a timely manner shall be cause for denial of issuance or nonrenewal or revocation as the case may be.
B. It shall also not be lawful for an individual or business entity to conduct business in the city using the word "pawn", "pawnshop" or "pawnbroker" in
connection with a business or to transact business in the city in a manner which has a substantial likelihood of misleading the public by implying that
the business is a pawnshop, without first obtaining a license from the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-3: RESALE DEALER EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter for resale dealers:
A. Residential garage sales.
B. Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been active and in continuous
existence for at least one year prior to the holding of the sale, or which are exempt from taxation under section 501(c) of the internal revenue code.
C. Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the state, including automobile dealers, used parts dealers and automotive parts
recyclers.
D. Consumer shows or exhibitions of collectibles other than a show or convention that offers to buy secondhand jewelry from attendees.
E. Sales by auctioneers.
F. Sales by pawnbrokers holding a license pursuant to this chapter.
G. Sales of recyclable metal by a recyclable metal dealer.
H. Sales of recyclable materials by a scavenger.
I. Sales or trades of used books between a customer and owner of a used bookstore.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 59/403
J. Sales by providers of commercial mobile services as defined in 47 USC 332(d) or their authorized dealers. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-4: NUMBER OF LICENSES TO BE ISSUED:
The number of pawnbroker licenses shall not exceed two (2) in number and the number of resale shop licenses shall not exceed ten (10) in number. (Ord.
2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-5: APPLICATION:
An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in writing under oath to the city clerk on a form prescribed by the city clerk. All
references to the city clerk in this chapter shall be deemed to include the city clerk or his or her authorized designee. Each application shall include, but not
be limited to, the following information:
A. The name of the individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or association applying for a license.
B. The residence, phone number, date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant or partners; or, if a corporation or association or limited liability
company, the residence, phone number and driver's license number of the officers and all shareholders or members owning more than five percent
(5%) of the outstanding shares of stock, or more than a five percent (5%) ownership interest in the limited liability company.
C. The location for which the license is requested.
D. Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or members have been convicted of any criminal offense or ordinance violation (other
than traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions with date and prosecuting jurisdiction.
E. Such information as required by the chief of police in order to conduct a criminal history background investigation on the applicant, its partners, officers
or listed shareholders or members owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock or ownership interest in a limited liability
company.
F. Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or members have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the city or
any other jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of used property revoked for cause, and, if so, list the date of revocation and jurisdiction.
G. A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in the application, and the
disposition of such application. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-6: FEES:
The applicant for a pawnbroker or resale dealer license required by this chapter shall pay the city clerk at the time of filing an application a license fee of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) per calendar year or part thereof. Should the license be denied, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord.
2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the city clerk shall cause a copy thereof to be sent to the chief of police who shall report
back to the city clerk in thirty (30) days whether the applicant is in accordance with applicable city codes. The investigation by the chief of police shall
include, but not be limited to, conducting a criminal history background investigation on the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or
members owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of stock or ownership interest in a limited liability company. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-
2015)
3-13-8: BOND PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the city a license and permit bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
approved by the city attorney, with the city as obligee, conditioned for the faithful and due performance of the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the
state concerning the operation of the licensed business, and the payment of all fines and penalties by reason of the violation thereof. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-
2015)
3-13-9: ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of the report from the chief of police, the city clerk shall issue the license requested under this chapter unless it is determined that:
A. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18).
B. The location requested is not in a permanent structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 60/403
C. The applicant plans to operate as an itinerant merchant as that term is defined in section 3-3-1 of this title.
D. The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or members have been convicted of or have pled guilty to any offense related to theft,
burglary, or purchasing or receiving stolen items under the laws of this state, city or any other jurisdiction within the past ten (10) years, or have
forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer for charges for such offenses during such time.
E. The location requested and structure to be used would not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the Plano zoning ordinance.
F. The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or members have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the city or any other
jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of used property which was revoked for cause.
G. The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders or members have knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for a license required by this chapter or any investigation into any application.
H. The application has not been properly completed and/or the licensing fee required in this chapter has not been paid.
I. An investigation reveals that the applicant has falsified information on the application.
J. There is an outstanding code violation on the proposed premises, unless the applicant can provide satisfactory evidence that the condition will be
corrected within a reasonable time, and the conduct of the business pending the correction of such condition will not endanger the public health, safety
or welfare.
K. Failure to comply with other provisions of this chapter or applicable requirements of law.
L. There is no license currently available. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-10: POSTING:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times during the period for which it is effective, be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the principal entrance to the premises for which the license is issued. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-11: TRANSFER:
A. No license issued under this chapter may be transferred to any other person.
B. No corporate or limited liability company licensee shall permit any transfer of its stock or membership which would vest in aggregate more than five
percent (5%) of the stock or membership interests outstanding in such corporation or limited liability company in any shareholder or member unless
such shareholder or member has been certified by the city clerk as meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall carry on any business required to be licensed under this chapter except at the location designated on the license.
Should the resale dealer wish to change the location, application shall be made to the city clerk for such change in writing. The city clerk shall approve the
change of location unless the new location would be contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the city or any other applicable
requirements of law. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-13: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No pawnbroker/resale dealer shall purchase, accept or take or receive in pawn any goods, wares, articles or things whatsoever or resale dealer shall
purchase any goods, wares, articles or things whatsoever, from any person before the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after the hour of nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-14: PROHIBITED PURCHASES:
No pawnbroker/resale dealer under this chapter shall purchase, accept or take or receive in pawn any goods, wares, articles, or things or resale dealer
under this chapter shall purchase or accept any goods, wares, articles, or things, under any of the following circumstances:
A. Where the seller is less than the age of eighteen (18).
B. Where the seller is intoxicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 61/403
C. Where the seller fails to present at least one form of approved identification that contains the seller's full legal name, residence address, phone number,
and a photograph, as required in this chapter.
D. Where the article to be purchased had an original manufacturer's serial number at the time it was new, but no longer legibly exhibits such number.
E. Where the seller is known to be a thief or has been convicted of theft, burglary, robbery or possession of stolen property. A law enforcement officer may
provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker. When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been pawned,
such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the money advanced by the pawnbroker thereon or any costs or charges of
any kind which the pawnbroker may have placed upon the same. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-15: PURCHASING, SELLING WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall deal in, or buy or sell, or display in his shop, any pistol, revolver, derringer, bowie knife, dirk or other deadly weapon
of like character, capable of being secreted upon the person unless the licensee also possesses a valid and current license for such deadly weapon as
provided by state and federal law. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-16: PAWNBROKER SALES AND REDEMPTIONS REGULATED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or collect a greater benefit or percentage upon money advanced, and for the use and forbearance
thereof, than the rate of three percent (3%) per month. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to conflict with the law pertaining to usury, and
the person receiving money so advanced may hold such monies to pay any fees in addition to interest as herein provided.
B. Each pawnbroker, when making a loan, must disclose, in printed form on the pawn contract, the following information to the persons receiving the loan:
1. The amount of money advanced, which must be designated as the amount financed;
2. The maturity date of the pawn, which must be at least thirty (30) days after the date of the pawn;
3. The total pawn interest and the total service charge payable on the maturity date, and the total of both which must be designated as the finance
charge;
4. The total of payments that must be paid to redeem the pledged goods on the maturity date, which must be designated as the total of payments; and
5. The annual percentage rate, computed according to the regulations adopted by the board of governors of the federal reserve system under the
federal truth in lending act.
C. Each pawnbroker may contract for and receive a monthly finance charge, including interest and fees, not to exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the loan amount, as
set forth herein, for appraising, investigating title, storing and insuring the collateral, closing the loan, making daily reports to local law enforcement
officers including enhanced computerized reporting, complying with regulatory requirements and for other expenses and losses of every nature
whatsoever and for all other services. Such fees, when made and collected, shall not be deemed interest for any purpose of law.
D. If the pawner or a pledger fails to repay the loan during the period specified on the pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall automatically extend a grace
period of thirty (30) days from the default date on the loan during which the pawnbroker shall not dispose of or sell the personal property pledged. The
parties may agree to extend or renew a loan upon terms agreed upon by the parties, provided the terms comply with the requirements of this chapter.
E. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each advancement or each loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a
memorandum or note, signed by him or her, containing an identifying pledge number and the substance of the entry required to be made in the
pawnbroker's record book required by this chapter, and no charge shall be made or received by any pawnbroker, loan broker or keeper of a loan office
for any such entry, memorandum or note.
F. Every pawnbroker shall for each article pledged attach thereto a tag with the pledge number, the time when said pledge was obtained and the amount of
said pledge.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or pledge any property to a pawnbroker that is not owned by the person selling or pledging such property.
(Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-17: RECORDS OF PURCHASES:
Throughout the term of the license, every pawnbroker and resale dealer shall report/upload to LeadsOnline, or the city's current electronic reporting
system, each day before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, the below listed information for each and every transaction conducted during each day
they were open for business. All information shall be recorded in the English language.
A transaction shall consist of all articles brought into a pawnbroker or resale dealer for sale, barter, or trade, by an individual (pawner/seller) at the same
time and date, and includes the sale of non-junk/scrap articles by a pawnbroker or resale dealer to another person. Articles brought into a pawnbroker or
resale dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade or pawn, at different times on the same date by the same person shall be considered
as separate transactions, regardless of how short the difference in time is between those transactions. Separate transactions, either from the same person
or different persons, shall not be combined and reported collectively.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 62/403
Non-junk/scrap articles purchased by a pawnbroker from another business shall not be considered to be transactions for the purposes of this section, and
are exempt from the reporting requirements of this section, and are also exempt from the waiting period.
A. Transactions involving individually identifiable articles.
1. Purchases/receipts by licensees. Each individually identifiable article brought into a pawnbroker or resale dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for
sale, barter or trade during a single transaction shall be itemized separately. Licensees shall not lump such articles together, but must provide a
complete and thorough description of each item to include the following:
a. Type of article.
b. Brand name/make/manufacturer (if applicable).
c. Model number (if applicable).
d. Serial number (if applicable).
e. Color/finish.
f. Any other identifying marks, writing, engraving, etc.
2. A digital photograph(s) shall be taken of each individually identifiable article, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification of the article. The
digital photograph(s) shall capture any identifying numbers, marks, writing, engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing characteristics.
3. A photographic or scanned image of a photo ID card of the pawner/seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The photo
ID must be a currently valid (not expired) driver's license or state identification card issued by the Illinois secretary of state, and must include the
seller's first and last name, current address, date of birth, and physical descriptors. If the seller is selling on behalf of a company or business, the
name, address, and telephone number of such company or business shall also be recorded/reported.
4. The date and time of the transaction.
5. A signed statement of the person from whom the property was obtained that he or she is over eighteen (18) years of age and the legal owner of
same, clear of all attachments and with the legal right to sell.
B. Transactions involving nonindividually identifiable articles.
1. Nonindividually identifiable articles may be recorded or reported in bulk, but must specify the weight, type and form of the bulk material.
2. Each different type and form of nonindividually identifiable articles brought into a pawnbroker or resale dealer by an individual for sale, barter or trade
during a transaction shall be associated with the person who brought the material in.
3. A photographic or scanned image of a photo ID card of the pawner/seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The photo
ID must be a currently valid (not expired) driver's license or state identification card issued by the Illinois secretary of state, and must include the
seller's first and last name, current address, date of birth, and physical descriptors. If the seller is selling on behalf of a company or business, the
name, address, and telephone number of such company or business shall also be recorded/reported.
4. A digital photograph or, if the licensee has a video system, video segment of each individual type and form of bulk material purchased by the
licensee shall be linked to the record of that transaction in LeadsOnline or the city's current electronic reporting system.
5. The date and time of the transaction.
6. A signed statement of the person from whom the property was obtained that he or she is over eighteen (18) years of age and the legal owner of
same, clear of all attachments and with the legal right to sell.
C. Paper money shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
D. In the event the electronic reporting system malfunctions or is otherwise not operational, the licensee shall, at all times during such malfunction or
nonoperation, be required to keep written records of any and all transactions made during the period of malfunction or nonoperation, to include all
information required by this section. These written records shall be reported/uploaded to LeadsOnline, or the city's current electronic reporting system,
as soon as practicable after the electronic reporting system is functional. No such written records shall be erased, mutilated or changed. Written
records shall be open and available for review upon request by any police officer during regular business hours. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-18: REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. The police department shall enter into a contract for service and maintain its contract for service with LeadsOnline, or a similar entity as designated by
the chief of police, in order to enhance its investigative services to protect pawnbrokers and resale dealers and members of the general public. In the
event of a change to its electronic reporting system, the city will notify all impacted licensees of the change within a reasonable time prior to such
change.
B. Every pawnbroker and resale dealer shall operate and maintain a computer system with internet access and photographic or video capability sufficient
for the electronic reporting requirements described in this chapter. Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the licensee shall not
exempt the licensee from the recording/reporting requirements outlined in this chapter. The licensee shall immediately notify the police department of
any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such resolved as soon as practicable. Failure by the licensee to resolve any failure or malfunction of
equipment in a reasonable amount of time will lead to license revocation proceedings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 63/403
C. No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall be required to furnish such description of any new property purchased by the pawnbroker or resale dealer from
manufacturers, other retailers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or of any goods purchased at open sale, or from a
bankrupt stock. Such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase and shall at all times during the
pawnbroker or resale dealer's business hours be open to the inspection of members of the city's police department. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-19: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every pawnbroker or resale dealer under this chapter and every person employed by him or it in the conduct of business shall admit to any and every part
of the premises designated in the license, during the resale dealer's business hours, any police officer of the city to examine compliance with the city's
electronic reporting system required in section 3-13-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-20: WAITING PERIOD:
A. No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall expose for sale, sell, trade, barter, melt, crush/compact, destroy, or otherwise dispose of any individually
identifiable article within ten (10) days of the time of purchasing or receiving the same.
B. No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall expose for sale, sell, trade, barter, melt, crush/compact, destroy, or otherwise dispose of any nonindividually
identifiable jewelry or other nonindividually identifiable articles, except paper money, within seven (7) days of the time of purchasing or receiving the
same.
C. All items subject to this section shall be stored at the location in which they were purchased during the waiting period. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-21: REMOVAL OF IDENTIFYING MARKS PROHIBITED:
No pawnbroker or resale dealer shall remove, alter or obliterate any manufacturer's make, model or serial number, personal identification number, or
identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property that was purchased or received by the pawnbroker or resale dealer. (Ord. 2015-
12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-22: VIDEO CAMERA SURVEILLANCE REQUIRED:
Each pawnbroker and resale dealer shall be required to install, operate and maintain a video camera surveillance system capable of recording clear and
unobstructed photographic representations of the pawnbroker or resale dealer's customers and shall retain the videotape recordings produced therefrom
for at least thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-23: INVENTORY SYSTEM:
Every pawnbroker and resale dealer shall maintain an inventory system of all property purchased or received in such a manner that members of the city's
police department making an inspection pursuant to this chapter can readily ascertain the identity of such property and readily locate such property on the
licensed premises. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-24: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Revocation/Suspension Of License: In addition to any other penalty which may be authorized by this chapter or other city ordinances, a license may be
suspended or revoked for:
1. Failure of the pawnbroker or resale dealer licensee, its officers, agents or employees to comply with any provision of this chapter, any other
applicable ordinances, the laws of the state, federal laws or other applicable legal requirements;
2. Finding that the pawnbroker or resale dealer licensee, its partners, officers or shareholders or members have been convicted of any offense set forth
in subsection 3-13-9D of this chapter; or
3. Finding that the pawnbroker or resale dealer licensee, its partners, officers or shareholders or members have knowingly furnished false or
misleading information or withheld relevant information on any application for a license required by this chapter or any investigation on any
application.
4. The pawnbroker or resale dealer shall be responsible for the acts of its agents, servants and employees in the operation of the business.
B. Written Order: If the mayor has reason to believe that any continued operation of the premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community,
the mayor may, upon issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice of hearing, order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.
C. Notice And Hearing: No license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the mayor with a five (5) business day written notice to
the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 64/403
D. Order Of Revocation Or Suspension: The mayor shall, within five (5) business days after such hearing, if the mayor determines after such hearing that
the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or order of suspension and shall
serve a copy of such order within five (5) days thereafter upon such licensee. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-25: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense. Any
person convicted of an offense under this chapter, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the city, shall be punished by a fine in
an amount of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, plus reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city and/or the mayor,
together with reasonable costs, including court reporter fees, incurred at the hearing.
B. Any person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he shall be punished accordingly.
C. The levy and/or payment of any penalty or fine provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of the power of the city to suspend, revoke or to
refuse to renew a license or to seek injunctive relief to enjoin violations of this chapter or other applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
3-13-26: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, cause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall or any reason to be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said judgment shall not effect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this
chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person or
circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this chapter would have been adopted had such
constitutional or invalid provisions, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not been included. (Ord. 2015-12, 4-13-2015)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
4-1-1: ADOPTION:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the 2015 international building code, including appendix chapters B, C, and G, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and
is hereby adopted as the building code of the city of Plano, state of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 4-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016)
4-1-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section 101.1: Insert: city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois.
Section 101.2.1: Insert: Appendices B, C, and G are adopted herein.
Section 103.1: Delete in its entirety. (Building department already created by ordinance.)
Section 105.2: Delete items under "Building" 1, 2, 6, & 8.
Section 903.2.8: Add: Exemption: a) Residential construction regulated by the international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings.
Section 1612.3: Insert: "city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois" and "February 4, 2009".
(Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016)
4-1-3: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the building code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016)
4-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 65/403
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the 2015 international building code are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the 2015 international building code to a
particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 2
MECHANICAL CODE
4-2-1: ADOPTION:
Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the international mechanical code, 2015 edition, including appendix chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, and is
hereby adopted as the code of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city of Plano, and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international mechanical
code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-11, 4-11-2016)
4-2-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: "city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois".
Section 101.2.1: Adopt appendix A.
Section 103.1: Delete in its entirety. (Building department already created by ordinance.)
Section 106.5.2: In the second line, delete the language after the word "the" and insert: "building permit fee ordinance and schedule in effect and as
amended from time to time."
Section 106.5.3: Delete in its entirety.
Section 108.5: At the first (amount) insert the words "fifty ($50.00) dollars", at the second (amount) insert the words "five hundred ($500.00) dollars". At the
end of the paragraph, add the words "for each day a violation continues."
(Ord. 2016-11, 4-11-2016)
4-2-3: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the international mechanical code, 2015 edition, hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The
city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 2016-11, 4-11-2016)
4-2-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the international mechanical code, 2015 edition, are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the international mechanical code, 2015
edition, to a particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or
structure not specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-11, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 66/403
4-3-1: ADOPTION:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the 2011 national electrical code (NFPA 70), as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the electrical
code of the city of Plano, state of Illinois; for the fabrication, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, and repair of all structures serviced by
electricity; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-9, 4-11-2016)
4-3-2: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the electrical code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2016-9, 4-11-2016)
4-3-3: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the 2011 national electrical code are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the 2011 national electrical code to a
particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-9, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL CODE
4-4-1: ADOPTION:
Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, 2015 edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, E, F, G, H, J, and M,
as published by the International Code Council, and is hereby adopted as the code of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and twofamily
dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in height in the city of Plano, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings,
2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-7, 4-11-2016)
4-4-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1: Insert "city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois".
Section R102.5: Adopt/insert "appendices A, B, C, E, F, G, H, J, and M, are adopted herein".
Section R103.1: Delete in its entirety. (Building department already created by ordinance.)
Section R105.2: Under "Building" delete items 1, 2, 5, and 10.
Table R301.2 (1): Insert the following:
Ground
Snow Load
Wind Design
Seismic Design
Category
Speed
(mph)
Topographic
Effects
Special
Wind Region
Wind-Borne
Debris Zone
25 115 No No No B
Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Temp.
Ice Barrier
Underlayment
Required
Flood
Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Weathering Temp
Frost
Line Depth Termite
Severe 42" Moderate 0 deg Yes FIRM 2/4/09 2000 47.5 deg
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 67/403
Section R313.1: Delete in its entirety.
Section R313.2: Delete in its entirety.
P2603.5.1: Insert "48" (inches) in the third and fifth lines.
(Ord. 2016-7, 4-11-2016)
4-4-3: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the residential code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal
right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares
that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 2016-7, 4-11-2016)
4-4-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, 2015 edition, are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the international residential code for oneand
two-family dwellings, 2015 edition, to a particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to
any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-7, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 5
BUILDING FEES1
4-5-1: GENERAL:
It is the intent of the city to promote safety and integrity in all buildings and structures in the city. (Ord. 1992-10, 5-26-1992)
4-5-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
Structures constructed and/or installed, including remodeling and renovation involving structural modification and/or integrity and all remodeling and
renovation involving plumbing installation and modification and/or installation of electrical services or modifications thereto, in all zoning districts within the
municipal boundaries of the city shall require a building permit. Structures shall include all buildings and dwellings, both public and private, and all fences,
decks, porches, accessory buildings (including garages, sheds, pools, and the like). (Ord. 1992-10, 5-26-1992)
4-5-3: DRAWINGS TO BE CERTIFIED:
All drawings submitted for review (with the exception of drawings for single-family residences) must carry the certifying stamp of a state of Illinois
registered architect or engineer. Uncertified drawings must undergo a complete BOCA review with costs to be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 1992-10, 5-26-
1992)
4-5-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
The schedule of fees hereinafter set forth, based upon the gross square footage under roof (including basements and garages) and the required number
of building inspections for the type of construction proposed, shall be paid to the city clerk prior to the issuance of any building permit. (Ord. 2006-13, 2-27-
2006)
A. The basic building permit fees shall be calculated as follows:
All residential, including alterations and remodeling (all groups), and all accessory structures $ 0.26 per square foot
Commercial/industrial and business, including alterations and remodeling (all groups), and all accessory structures 0.18 per square foot
Decks and swimming pools 50.00
Fences and sheds 35.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 68/403
Roofing/reroofing 35.00
Minimum building permit fee 35.00
(Ord. 2006-13, 2-27-2006; amd. Ord. 2009-22, 8-24-2009)
B. The foregoing building permit fees shall be in addition to any other fees otherwise imposed by this code, such as building inspection fees, plumbing
inspections and related fees.
C. The basic building permit fees imposed by this section shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%) for building permits issued to not for profit organizations,
associations or corporations, such as churches, schools, and veterans' organizations, recognized as not for profit under the internal revenue code.
(Ord. 2006-13, 2-27-2006)
4-5-5: BUILDING INSPECTION FEES:
Standard inspection fees shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) per inspection and the number of inspections shall be determined at the building application
review. Additional inspections shall be charged at the same thirty five dollar ($35.00) per inspection rate. Zoning inspection fees for pools, decks, fences
and sheds shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2001-8, 5-29-2001)
A. Exception: Where any building permit fee exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) based on the square foot computation alone, inspection fees are
waived. (Ord. 2003-39, 8-25-2003)
4-5-6: PLUMBING INSPECTION FEES:
Standard fees shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) per inspection and shall be determined at the time of building application review. Additional inspections
shall be charged at the same thirty five dollar ($35.00) per inspection rate. Fees for multiple-family, industrial and commercial buildings will be seventeen
dollars ($17.00) per drain, per inspection. (Ord. 2001-8, 5-29-2001)
4-5-7: ADDITIONAL INSPECTION FEES:
Wherever in the discretion of the building and zoning administrator/inspector or the plumbing inspector, additional or extra inspections shall become
necessary because of faulty, incorrect, or substandard workmanship, or because of the complexity of the project, the particular contractor concerned, or
the owner of said premises, if there is no contractor, shall pay in advance to the city clerk the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for each such additional or
extra inspection. (Ord. 1992-10, 5-26-1992; amd. Ord. 2006-13, 2-27-2006)
4-5-8: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, FEES PAID:
No final occupancy permit shall be issued until all fees hereunder are paid in full. (Ord. 1992-10, 5-26-1992)
Chapter 6
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
4-6-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE:
Certain documents, three (3) copies each of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the international fire code (including appendix chapters E, F, and G), 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and
NFPA 101, designated as the life safety code, 2006 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association be and are hereby adopted as the
codes of the city of Plano, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices and from the conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises in the city of Plano, and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses and operations; and each and all regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such international fire code, 2006 edition, published by the International Code Council, and NFPA 101, designated as the life
safety code as published by the National Fire Protection Association on file in the office of the city of Plano are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009)
4-6-2: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009)
4-6-3: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Chapter 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 69/403
Paragraph
101.1:
Insert: City of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois
Paragraph
103.3:
Add paragraph 103.3.1 as follows:
" 103.3.1. The code official of the city of Plano hereby appoints the fire chief of the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district as deputy
code official with the responsibility for the implementation, administration and enforcement of this code."
Paragraph
105.7:
Delete in its entirety and insert: The code official of the city of Plano authorizes the fire chief of the Little Rock - Fox fire protection
district to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.12 and to charge appropriate fees for
review and inspections as set forth in the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district's fire prevention ordinance, #2003-01 and as
amended from time to time.
Paragraph
109.3:
At line 6 insert: "Petty" and at line 8 insert the words: "not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) per offense." Delete the remainder of this sentence.
Paragraph
111.4:
Insert: At the first (amount) insert the words: "Fifty dollars ($50.00)", at the second (amount) insert the words: "five hundred dollars
($500.00)". At the end of the paragraph, add the words: "For each day a violation continues."
Chapter 3,
Section
307:
Delete in its entirety.
Chapter 5,
Paragraph
506.1:
Delete in its entirety and insert: "All new construction in use groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S, R1, R2, and R4 and existing construction in
these use groups when determined by the code official are required to install a key box in an accessible location. The key box shall
be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain access without forcible entry."
(Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009)
Section
508.1:
In the third line after the word, "premises" delete the remainder of the paragraph and insert: "whose structures, which due to its use
group, building area, or construction type, as determined by the international building code, 2015 edition, is required to install an
automatic sprinkler system."
Chapter 9,
Section
901:
After paragraph 901.1, insert new paragraph 901.1.A:
901.1.A. Fire Protection System Required: Effective from this date, in all use groups and construction types an automatic fire
protection system shall be required when the gross building area exceeds twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, or unless section
903 of this code, or table 503 of the 2015 international building code requires an automatic fire protection system at a smaller area.
(Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009; amd. Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016)
Chapter
33,
Paragraph
3301.1.A:
Insert new paragraph after 3301.1:
3301.1.A. Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Is Prohibited. The
storage of explosive and blasting agents is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city of Plano, except with special permit
issued by the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district.
Chapter
33,
Paragraph
3301.1.B:
Add new paragraph after paragraph 3301.1.A.:
3301.1.B. Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which The Sales, Manufacturing, And Storage Of Fireworks Is Prohibited.
The manufacturing, sale, handling, use or storage of fireworks is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city of Plano, except
with special permit issued by the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district.
Chapter
33,
Paragraph
3309.1:
Add the following new paragraph:
3309.1. Establishment Of Motor Vehicle Routes For Vehicles Transporting Explosives Or Blasting Agents. Vehicles
transporting explosives or blasting agents are hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the city of Plano, with the following
exceptions:
a) Route 34, (South Street)
b) Burlington Northern Railroad
Chapter
34,
Paragraph
3404.1.A:
Insert new paragraph after 3404.1:
3404.1.A. Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which The Storage Of Flammable Liquids In Outside, Above Ground
Tanks, Is Prohibited. The storage of flammable liquids in outside, above ground tanks is prohibited within the corporate limit of the
city of Plano, except with special permit issued by the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district.
Chapter
37,
Paragraph
3701.3:
Add new paragraph 3701.3 after paragraph 3701.2:
3701.3. Establishment Of Motor Vehicle Routes For Vehicles Transporting Hazardous Chemicals Or Other Highly Toxic And
Toxic Materials. Vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous materials are prohibited within the corporate limits
of the city of Plano, with the following exceptions:
a) Route 34 (South Street)
b) Burlington Northern Railroad
c) Eldamain Road.
Chapter
38,
Paragraph
3801.1.A:
Add new paragraph after paragraph 3801.1:
3801.1.A. Establishment Of Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is To Be Restricted. The above
ground storage of five hundred (500) gallons total of all tanks is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city of Plano, except with
special permit issued by the Little Rock - Fox fire protection district.
(Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 70/403
4-6-4: AMENDMENTS TO LIFE SAFETY CODE:
The following sections or paragraphs of the life safety code are hereby deleted: Section or paragraphs numbered 24.3.5, 24.3.5.1 and 24.3.5.2, setting
forth certain "extinguishment requirements". (Ord. 2009-8, 2-23-2009)
4-6-5: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in section 4-6-2 of this chapter,
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009; amd. Ord. 2009-8, 2-23-
2009)
4-6-6: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of 2006 international fire code and 2006 life safety code are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of 2006 international fire code and 2006 life
safety code to a particular property, building or any other structure specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2009-4, 1-26-2009; amd. Ord. 2009-8, 2-23-
2009)
Chapter 7
PLUMBING CODE
4-7-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODES:
The state plumbing code of the state of Illinois, and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Illinois department of public health, be and the
same is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city of Plano. In addition thereto, the city hereby adopts the following international plumbing code,
2015 edition, as the plumbing code of the city of Plano. In the event of conflict between the state plumbing code and the international plumbing code, 2015
edition, the standards set forth in the state plumbing code of the state of Illinois shall prevail and shall be followed and enforced. (Ord. 2016-8, 4-11-2016)
4-7-2: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE:
Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the international plumbing code, 2015 edition, including appendix chapters B, C and D, as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the code of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city of Plano, and providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international plumbing
code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-8, 4-11-2016)
4-7-3: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: "city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois".
Section 103.1: Delete in its entirety. (Building department already created by ordinance.)
Section 106.6.2: In the second line, delete the language after the word "the" and insert: "building permit fee ordinance and schedule in effect and as
amended from time to time."
Section 106.6.3: Delete in its entirety.
Section 108.4: In the seventh line insert the word "petty". In the eighth line insert the words "not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars per offense," and delete the remainder of the sentence.
Section 108.5: At the first (amount) insert the words "fifty ($50.00) dollars", at the second (amount) insert the words "five hundred ($500.00) dollars". At the
end of the paragraph, add the words "for each day a violation continues."
Section 109.2, 109.2.1, 109.2.2, 109.2.3, 109.2.4, 109.2.5, 109.2.6: Delete in their entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 71/403
Section 305.4.1: Insert "48" inches in the third and fifth lines.
Section 903.1: Insert "12" inches in the second line.
(Ord. 2016-8, 4-11-2016)
4-7-4: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the international plumbing code, 2015 edition, hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby superseded;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The
city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 2016-8, 4-11-2016)
4-7-5: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the international plumbing code, 2015 edition, are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the international plumbing code, 2015
edition, to a particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or
structure not specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-8, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 8
MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
4-8-1: ADOPTION OF MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
In the construction, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement to, and the use and maintenance of buildings in the city of
Plano the following minimum construction standards shall apply. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-2: KEY:
Commercial and residential (C/R), commercial only (C), residential only (R). (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-3: FOUNDATIONS (C/R):
A. Foundations and footings will be designed in accordance with the 2015 international building code or 2015 international residential code, whichever is
applicable. Unless soil borings are submitted proving otherwise, load bearing value of soils will be assumed to be two thousand (2,000) pounds per
square foot. (Ord. 2003-39, 8-25-2003; amd. Ord. 2016-6, 4-11-2016; Ord. 2016-7, 4-11-2016)
4-8-4: FINISHES (C/R):
Minimum five-eighths inch (5/8") gypsum board, fire rated at furnace rooms and garages. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-5: FIRE PREVENTION (C/R):
A. One hour rated separation between attached garage and dwelling unit. One hour rated door with closer between garage and dwelling unit. Six inch (6")
gas curb between garage and dwelling unit (or garage floor 6 inches lower).
B. Fire stop under stairs, accessible areas under stairs finished in five-eighths inch (5/8") fire rated gypsum board.
C. Prefabricated wood floor trusses (I-joists) protected by five-eighths inch (5/8") fire rated gypsum board, rated dropped ceiling or automatic sprinkler
system. If installed over a crawl space a smoke detector and a one hour rated opening must be provided. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-6: ACCESS (R):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 72/403
A. Maximum riser height shall not exceed seven and three-fourths inch (73/4"), minimum tread depth shall not be less than ten inches (10").
B. Minimum attic or crawl space access must not be less than twenty two inches by thirty inches (22" x 30"). Attic access must not be located in a closet.
(Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-7: FIREPLACES (R):
A. Hearth Construction: Hearths to be constructed of fire resistant materials, to include brick or stone masonry, and ceramic tile.
B. Minimum Hearth Extension: Fireplace opening six (6) square feet or less: minimum eight inch (8") extension on each side, minimum sixteen inches
(16") in front. Fireplace opening larger than eight (8) square feet: minimum twelve inch (12") extension on each side, minimum twenty inches (20") in
front.
C. Prefabricated Fireplace Air Supply: Prefabricated fireplaces must have fresh air supply direct to exterior of dwelling.
D. Chases Of Prefabricated Fireplace: Prefabricated fireplace chases shall be lined with minimum of one layer of five-eighths inch (5/8") gypsum board.
(Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-8: MECHANICAL SYSTEMS (C/R):
Hot and cold supplies to be in sheet metal ductwork. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-9: ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS (C/R):
A. All GFI locations per latest national electrical code.
B. 110-volt, interconnected smoke detectors with battery backup, are required in each sleeping room, outside of sleeping area, on each level of dwelling
unit within ten feet (10') of main heating unit.
C. All new construction or additions over five hundred (500) square feet shall have all wiring in metallic conduit. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-10: PLUMBING SYSTEMS (R):
A. PVC piping is not acceptable for supply piping, may be used for waste and vent.
B. New water services to be minimum one inch (1") type L copper inside, type K copper, outside.
C. Sump pumps and roof downspouts are to splash within five feet (5') of building or directly connected to storm sewer. Connection to sanitary sewer is
strictly prohibited. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-11: GENERAL (C/R):
A. Construction fencing, minimum four feet (4') tall, of bright orange or other readily visible color shall be placed around all open excavations.
B. Three (3) sets of construction documents shall be submitted with building permit application. One set of construction documents, stamped approved by
the city, shall be kept on the job site and be available for use by city personnel.
C. Construction documents as submitted for residential dwellings shall include light and vent schedule, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems, and
site plan depicting all construction in relation to setbacks, easements, streets and utilities.
D. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of these regulations establishing minimum construction standards and other building codes or
regulations of the city, the provisions hereof shall prevail. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
4-8-12: EXTERIOR INSULATION FINISH SYSTEMS (C/R):
Any exterior insulation finish system (EIFS) used on any portion of residential construction shall be tested by an EIFS inspection service. A report and
signed certification verifying inspection and compliance with construction requirements shall be submitted prior to occupancy being granted. Commercial
construction shall require a similar report and certification signed and sealed by the design professional for the project attesting to required inspection and
compliance with construction requirements. (Ord. 2002-29, 8-26-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 73/403
4-8-13: CONSTRUCTION RESTRICTIONS (C/R):
A. Use Of Streets: The use of streets for storage of materials in the process of being installed into the construction or alteration of a structure is strictly
prohibited without the written consent of the superintendent of streets and the chief of police. It shall be the duty of the person doing said construction
or alteration to do the same with the proper care for safety of persons and property. Said person shall provide and maintain such warnings, barricades,
and lights wherever necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic.
B. Cleanliness Of Streets: It is strictly prohibited for any person conducting the construction or alteration of any structure, or the construction or alteration of
any engineering project, including, but not limited to, street or sidewalk construction, utility work, grading or landscaping, to leave an accumulation of
dirt, mud, construction material or debris on any city street. Streets are to be left broom clean at the end of the workday.
C. Night Operations Restricted: No exterior construction or alteration operations shall be performed after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. or before seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. (prevailing time) Monday through Saturday and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. or before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (prevailing time) on Sunday.
1. Exception: Homeowners performing construction or alterations on their own property, as long as said operations are not accompanied by or cause
excessive noise. (Ord. 2003-39, 8-25-2003)
4-8-14: EXTERIOR FINISHES (R):
A. Developers/builders of residential structures are required to offer multiple choices of exterior finishes for the front elevation of new homes for
prospective homeowners to choose from. Acceptable materials include, but are not limited to:
1. Horizontal cedar or redwood siding.
2. Vertically or diagonally oriented wood siding products.
3. Clay masonry, stone or synthetic stone products.
4. Portland cement based stucco.
5. "Hardie board" or other cement fiber siding panels.
6. Vinyl siding.
B. EIFS systems may not be used on residential structures. (Ord. 2017-40, 12-11-2017)
Chapter 9
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-9-1: ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Illinois, being marked and designated as the
international property maintenance code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as hereafter amended from time to time, be
and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city of Plano in the state of Illinois; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, and
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 4-9-2
of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-5, 2-14-2011)
4-9-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Plano, Illinois.
Section 103.2. Insert: The code official shall be the director of building, planning, and zoning of the city of Plano.
Section 103.5. Fees to be determined and established at a later date by amendment to this chapter.
Section 106.2.1. Add:
"Subsequent Investigation Of Compliance:
Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any notice of violation, the building inspector, or any police officer or other inspector of the
city, shall investigate to determine whether or not such violation has been abated."
Section 106.4. Insert at end of paragraph:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 74/403
"Any owner or occupant found guilty of a violation of this code shall be fined no less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense, and
each day that the violation continues after due notice thereof has been served shall be deemed a separate offense."
Section 107.1. Insert at end of paragraph:
"Notice shall be directed to the owner of record of the property, as shown in the records of the recorder of deeds of Kendall County, Illinois, or to the
occupant of said property, or to both, which said notice shall describe the violation and shall, in addition to any other information required by section
107.2, establish a reasonable time limit for the abatement of the violation thereof by such owner or occupant, which time shall be not less than seven
(7) days nor more than thirty (30) days after service of such notice."
Section 107.1.1. Add:
"Complaints By Citizens:
Any citizen of the city who observes a violation of this code may file his affidavit setting forth in detail the violation, its location and the name of the
owner and occupant of the property (if known) on which such violation is alleged, and may file such affidavit with the building inspector of the city,
who shall make an investigation of such charge, and if such violation exists, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the property as provided
herein."
Section 111.2. Substitute, for all of the language of sections 111.2, 111.2.1, 111.2.2, 111.2.3, 111.2.4, and 111.2.5, the following:
"The board of appeals shall be the city of Plano plan commission/zoning board of appeals".
Section 111.6. Substitute, for all of the language of sections 111.6, 111.6.1, and 111.6.2, the following:
"111.6 Board Decision: The board of appeals shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of 2/3rds of the
members of the board of appeals present and voting at the hearing. All actions taken by the board of appeals are considered final unless the
appellant files, in writing, within seven calendar days after the action of the board of appeals, an appeal to the city council of the city of Plano. Said
appeal will first be directed to the building and zoning committee of the city council where at the committee's earliest convenience the appeal will be
considered. The building and zoning committee will then forward its recommendation to the city council. The city council shall modify or reverse the
decision of the board of appeals only by a concurring vote of 2/3rds of the corporate authorities. The decision of the city council is final, save any
remedies that may be found in the appropriate court, and in accordance with section 111.7."
Paragraph 112.4: After the words "liable to a fine" delete all following words and insert "in accordance with section 106.4."
Chapter 1. Insert:
Section 113: Lien For Unpaid Charges:
113.1 Lien For Unpaid Charges: Charges incurred by the city for the abatement of any violations under this code shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for more than thirty (30) days, after it has been rendered, the city clerk may file with the recorder
of deeds of Kendall County a statement of lien claim. The statement shall obtain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs
incurred and the date the violation was abated, and the notice that the city claims a lien for such account. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises if his address is known; provided, however that failure of the clerk to record such lien claim or mail such notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in the following subsection.
113.2 Foreclosure Of Lien:
113.2.1. Property subject to a lien for unpaid expenses for the abatement of a nuisance shall be sold for nonpayment of same and the proceeds
of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall
be maintained in the name of the city.
113.2.2. The city attorney is authorized to institute such proceedings, in the name of the city and any court having jurisdiction over such matter,
against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
Section 302.4. After the words "in excess of", insert:
"eight inches (8")".
(Ord. 2011-5, 2-14-2011)
Amend by adding thereto the following additional paragraph:
"Parkways: The owner of property abutting any public street, alleyway, road or other right of way shall maintain the area between the edge of the
pavement or curb and the property line, commonly known as the parkway, and shall not allow the growth of weeds on said parkways in excess of
eight (8") inches in violation of this code."
(Ord. 2017-6, 1-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 75/403
Section 303.14. Insert:
"From April 1 to November 1".
Section 308.2.1. Insert at the end of the sub-paragraph:
"The owner shall provide arrangements for rubbish to be collected at a frequency as necessary to conform to paragraph 308.1 of this code, but not
less than one time per week."
Paragraph 404.4.1: After the words "shall contain at least 70 square feet" add the words, "for a single occupant and an additional 50 square feet for each
additional occupant."
Paragraph 404.5: After the word, "occupants" add the following, "nor more permitted by the minimum area requirements of table 404.5."
Insert table 404.5 as follows:
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Area In Square Feet
Space 1-2 Occupants 3-5 Occupants 6+ Occupants
Living room No requirement 120 150
Dining room No requirement 80 100
Kitchen 50 50 60
Bedrooms Shall comply with paragraph 404.4.1
Section 602.3. Insert:
"October 1 through April 30".
Section 602.4. Insert:
"October 1 through April 30".
(Ord. 2011-5, 2-14-2011)
Chapter 10
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
4-10-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's jurisdiction, which
will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights of way and the city as a
whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the public ways and
property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located inrights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 76/403
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by
the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city rights of way. Utilities that are
not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may
provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions,
and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its
rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of Plano.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The city code of the city of Plano.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 77/403
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her designee, who is also the city engineer.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee, who is also the director of public works.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material,or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the city engineer/director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 4-10-4 and 4-10-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 78/403
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than
those of the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2)
sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 4-10-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2008-2,
1-28-2008)
4-10-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the city engineer/director of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person,
and evidence of insurance as required in section 4-10-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right of
way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the city engineer/director of public works and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Nopermit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right
of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 79/403
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance
with this section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules,and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 4-10-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 4-10-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 4-10-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No application fee isrequired to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city
engineer/director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city engineer/director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
city engineer/director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the city engineer/director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city engineer/director of public works, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 80/403
(30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city engineer/director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of
way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the city engineer/director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
construction, or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 4-10-4 of this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the cityan application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility
that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be
for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawingsor plans to the city within ninety (90) days after the completion of
the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved
in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in
accordance with section 4-10-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1
and A2 of this section.
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 81/403
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, andumbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the city.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and
furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the
subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-
28-2008)
4-10-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform
or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the
city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city. Any surety bond orletter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a
minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the city engineer/director of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 82/403
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city engineer/director of public works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawnfrom the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss
or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this
chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the
city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be
infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issuedpursuant to this chapter stating
the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city,
the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the city
within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 83/403
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new ownerfails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2008-2,
1-28-2008)
4-10-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city engineer/director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the city engineer/director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 4-10-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the city. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 84/403
1. No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city engineer/director of public works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures,power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from theinstallation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 85/403
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are locatedunderground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service ascompared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-
2008)
4-10-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
engineer/director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in
advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are
open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it
will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city engineer/director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 86/403
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the engineer/director of public works, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore
new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the city engineer/director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 4-10-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer/director of public works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 87/403
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methodswhich compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the city engineer/director of public
works. With the approval of the city engineer/director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation
free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the city engineer/director of
public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way
and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the city.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of
the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the city engineer/director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are those set forth in this title.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records
available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by JULIE, a utility
shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement withthe city as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 88/403
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would
leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city
engineer/director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined thatsuch removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit,
the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or
removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90) days.
Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city engineer/director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances
and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be madeusing materials and methods approved by the city engineer/director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended
by the city engineer/director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the city and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 89/403
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city engineer/director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writingto the city engineer/director
of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The city engineer/director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city engineer/director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city engineer/director of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city
engineer/director of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such
order, requirement, decision or determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utilityshall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility
that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2008-2, 1-28-2008)
4-10-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-
2, 1-28-2008)
Chapter 11
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 90/403
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed torecover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the city.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion
of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can
reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenuesreceived
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 (d) by the holder to thecity for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 91/403
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the city.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first
day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance codified herein by the holder. The ordinance codified herein shall be
sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to
the city.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the city in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city in addition to the fee
imposed pursuant to section 4-11-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee for PEG access support in the city.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 4-11-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city,including any tax that is or
may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 92/403
A. Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit
of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its
jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an
accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
4-11-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this city pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-14, 2-11-2008)
Chapter 12
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
4-12-1: ADOPTION:
Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, being marked and
designated as the international energy conservation code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, and is hereby adopted as the
code of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, for regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient
mechanical, lighting and power systems in the city of Plano, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international energy conservation code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code
Council, on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-10, 4-11-2016)
4-12-2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section C101.1: Insert: "city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois"
(Ord. 2016-10, 4-11-2016)
4-12-3: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter or in the international energy conservation code, 2015 edition, hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 2016-10, 4-11-
2016)
4-12-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of the international energy conservation code, 2015 edition, are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or of the international energy conservation
code, 2015 edition, to a particular property, building or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,
building or structure not specifically included in said ruling. (Ord. 2016-10, 4-11-2016)
Chapter 13
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
4-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 93/403
A. This chapter is intended to promote wind energy use within the city of Plano, while preserving and protecting the health, safety and welfare of property
owners and residents.
B. The regulations of this chapter shall govern and control the site design, erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation
and removal of small wind energy systems in the city of Plano.
C. The regulations of this chapter shall be in addition to provisions of the city of Plano's adopted codes, federal aviation administration requirements and
all applicable federal and state statutes.
D. Power generated by a small wind energy system shall be primarily for the use of the property owner, on the property where the system is located. It is
not the intent of this chapter to promote the operation of small wind energy systems in the city of Plano for profit by outside utility companies or other
third parties. Small wind energy systems, however, may be connected to the power grid in accordance with applicable rules and regulations. (Ord.
2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES): Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers electrical energy from the wind, also referred to as a
wind turbine. Systems are comprised of wind turbines, support structures, and associated electric components. Systems shall be of a maximum rated
generation capacity of not more than ten kilowatts (10 kW). (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Building Permit: A building permit shall be required to locate, erect or modify any SWES in the city of Plano.
B. Submissions Required: Permit applicant shall submit the following with the permit application:
1. Scaled site plan showing location and height of proposed SWES and all structures, including overhead utility lines, within a two hundred foot (200')
radius of the proposed SWES.
2. Current copy of the SWES manufacturer's specifications and warranties.
3. Engineering drawings and calculations, sealed by a state of Illinois licensed structural engineer.
4. Other technical documents as necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
C. SWES Design: The safety of the SWES design shall be certified by a state of Illinois licensed professional engineer. Included in the certification shall be
statement that the SWES is equipped with manual and overspeed control to limit the rotation of blades to a speed below the design limits of the
system.
D. Conformance With Electrical Code: All electrical compartments, storage facilities, conduits, and interconnections with utility companies, shall conform to
the adopted electrical code of the city of Plano, and all applicable federal, state and city codes.
E. Grid Connection: Grid connected SWES shall demonstrate compliance with all utility company requirements.
F. Height: The maximum permissible height of an SWES shall not exceed more than ten feet (10') above the maximum permissible height of the zoning
district. Height shall be measured from grade to the nacelle of the turbine or center of the fan blade radius. On vertically oriented blades heights shall
be measured from grade to top of the fan blade(s).
G. Wind: All SWES shall be designed to withstand wind velocities of at least one hundred (100) miles per hour and an impact pressure of forty (40) pounds
per square foot.
H. Monopole Units:
1. All monopole units shall be designed to prevent climbing by unauthorized individuals. Protection methods may include fences with locking gates or
fixed climbing apparatus at least twelve feet (12') above the ground.
2. All monopole units shall be embedded in an engineered concrete foundation.
3. A visible warning sign stating "High Voltage" shall be placed at the base of monopole units. The letters on the sign shall be no less than six inches
(6") high.
4. The lowest point of a blade on a monopole unit shall be at least twenty feet (20') above grade.
I. Permit Fee: Small wind energy systems (SWES) shall be subject to a one hundred twenty five dollar ($125.00) building permit fee. Permit fee is payable
at the time of application. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-4: LOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 94/403
A. All SWES shall be set back a minimum of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the permissible height from all property lines and overhead utility lines.
B. Monopole SWES shall be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the principal structure on a parcel.
C. No SWES shall be located in front of the building setback line in any zoning district or in front of the principal structure on any parcel.
D. When an SWES is located in a parking lot, it must be placed in landscaped area no less than five hundred (500) square feet in area.
E. No more than one SWES is permitted per zoning lot.
F. Roof mounted SWES shall be mounted upon the rear face of a sloped roof or to the side or rear facade of a flat roof. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-5: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Colors and surface treatment of SWES and their support structures shall be white or earth tone, flat finished and nonreflective. Unfinished, galvanized,
plain aluminum or stainless steel is not permitted.
B. SWES shall not use any lights unless required by the federal aviation administration. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-6: ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE:
A. SWES shall be designed not to cause electromagnetic degradation of performance of other electromagnetic radiators or receptors.
B. All SWES shall utilize nonmetallic rotor blades unless the applicant can supply documentation from an accredited testing laboratory certifying that the
metallic rotor blades proposed will not cause electromagnetic interference.
C. The city of Plano reserves the right to revoke the building permit for any SWES whenever electromagnetic interference from that system is proven to be
evident. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-7: NOISE:
A. The noise emanating from any installed SWES as measured at the property line shall not exceed a maximum of fifty decibels (50 dB) at any time. (Ord.
2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-8: MAINTENANCE AND ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
A. All SWES shall be readily accessible for inspection at all times.
B. All SWES shall be maintained and kept in good working order. Systems that are abandoned or out of service for a continuous six (6) month period shall
be dismantled and completely removed from the property within thirty (30) days of abandonment or being taken out of service. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-
2013)
4-13-9: INSURANCE:
A. Applicants for an SWES permit shall demonstrate that they hold liability insurance for their SWES. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
4-13-10: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate an SWES that is not in compliance with this chapter or any condition contained in the
building permit issued for the SWES. (Ord. 2013-20, 8-12-2013)
Title 5
ZONING
Chapter 1
ZONING PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 95/403
5-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title, including the Zoning District Map made a part hereof, shall be know cited and referred to as the PLANO ZONING ORDINANCE.
5-1-2: PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people;
B. To divide the City into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing and other specified uses;
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and manufacturing areas within the City and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas;
D. To provide adequate light, solar benefit, privacy and convenience of access to property;
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light, solar
benefit, air and to protect the public health;
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein;
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
I. To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of,existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of
motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use
and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
M. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City;
N. To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable
development in each district; and
O. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.
5-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this Zoning Title shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals
and welfare.
B. Conflicting Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Zoning Title upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Title or other law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
C. Existing Agreements: This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement; provided, that where the
regulations of this Title are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the requirements of this Title shall govern.
5-1-4: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 96/403
A. Changes in Structures or Uses: Except as may otherwise be provided in Chapter 9 of this Title, Nonconforming Buildings,Structures and Uses, all
buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Title which are applicable to the zoning
districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
B. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses: Any lawful building, structure or use existing at the effective date hereof may be continued, even though
such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions of this Title for the district in which it is located, and whenever a district shall be
changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9, Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and
Uses.
C. Building Permits: When a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and
provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may
be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further may, upon completion, be
occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Title,
Nonconforming Buildings Structures and Uses. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
5-2-1: GENERAL:
In the construction of this Title, the rules and definitions contained in this Chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
5-2-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", "parcel"; the word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to
buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrase "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
5-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Title shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE: A. An "accessory building or use" is one which:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building principal use.
2. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served.
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served.
B. An "accessory use" includes, but is notlimited to, the following:
1. A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse.
2. A garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
3. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
4. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
5. Incinerators incidental to residential use. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
6. (Rep. by Ord. 2002-2, 1-28-2002)
7. (Rep. by Ord. 2002-2, 1-28-2002)
8. Swimming pool, private, for use by the occupant and his guests.
9. Off street motor car parking areas, and loading and unloading facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 97/403
10. Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this title.
11. Carports.
12. Public utilities: telephone, electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
13. Satellite television antenna and satellite dishes as regulated under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1987-15, 8-10-1987)
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which has not been subdivided by metes and bounds or platted.
ALLEY: A public way, not more than thirty feet (30') wide, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed orused for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping
unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) motor vehicles using production line methods.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair and painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified
under "Automobile Repair, Major".
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease for operation of
automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and including minor accessories and the services of automobiles; but not including
major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where production line methods are not used. When the dispensing sale or offering for sale
of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not
include sale or storage of automobiles or trailers (new or used).
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles, not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and
are not being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof; and including the
commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.
BASEMENT: A story, partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the established curb level or above the average
level of the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An owner-occupied residence providing overnight accommodations available to the general public for
compensation. Bed and breakfast establishmentsshall not include hotels, motels, boarding houses, lodging rooms, or food service establishments as
defined in this Chapter. A bed and breakfast establishment shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. Shall have no more than five (5) guest rooms for rent.
B. Shall be in operation for at least six (6) nights in a six (6) month period.
C. Shall maintain a guest register which shall be available at all times for inspection.
D. Shall be located in a single-family detached dwelling, not an accessory building or garage.
E. Shall satisfy all requirements of the Kendall County Health Department and the City of Plano Building Department and shall be in complete
compliance with all City zoning ordinances and building codes prior to the issuance of occupancy permits.
F. In addition to the parking requirements for a single-family detached dwelling, the bed and breakfast establishment shall provide one additional space
for each guest room. The off-street parking for a bed and breakfast establishment shall not be located in any required yard, but it shall be screened
from adjacent properties by a landscape screen of at least fifty percent (50%) opacity.
G. Only one sign shall be permitted for each bed and breakfast establishment. The maximum size of such sign shall be four (4) square feet per sign
face.
H. Each guest room may have its own private bath. No guest room shall have any kitchen facilities.
I. Guest room shall mean sleeping room intended to serve no more than two (2) adult transient guests per night.
J. Accommodations shall be provided in guest rooms only. The length of stay in a bed and breakfast establishment shall be a maximum of one week.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 98/403
K. Any application for a special use shall include, in addition to all other documents required for a special use application, floor plans drawn to scale
accurately showing theguest rooms in relation to the rest of the single-family detached dwelling.
L. Every bed and breakfast establishment shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in the Illinois Bed and Breakfast
Act. (Ord. 1999-3, 1-25-1999)
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court or other public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways or corporated boundary lines of municipalities.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a motel or restaurant where meals are provided for compensation to four (4) or more persons, but not more
than twelve (12), who are not members of the keepers' family. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
BUILDABLE ACREAGE: The total acreage of the property minus the following:
A. Wetlands and land that is generally inundated with water (under ponds, lakes, creeks, etc.),
B. All of the floodway and floodway fringe within the 100-year floodplain, as shown on the official FEMA maps,
C. Land within the right of way or easement of an existing or proposed roadway,
D. Land within an existing permanent easement prohibiting development (including utilities, drainage, access and pipelines),
E. Land with slopes exceeding twenty five percent (25%), or soils and subsurface geology subject to slumping shall also be subtracted from the total
acreage when determining a property's buildable acreage. (Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a building lot after the minimum yard requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on allsides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers and other similar structures, are not considered as buildings.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and the
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building. (See end of this chapter for diagram.)
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building and zoning administrator/inspector of the city or his duly authorized representative.
BUILDING LINE: A line or lines, including the building setback line, on the horizontal surface of a lot, parallel to the front, side and rear lot lines, and
located at a distance prescribed by the yard regulations of this title beyond which no portion of a building may extend except as provided by this title. (See
end of this chapter for diagram.)
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the regulations of this title prescribing the use, required yards, coverage, height
and setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot and minimum required usable open space for the district in which such building
is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line of a distance from it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this title. (See end of
this chapter for diagram.)
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it is, or where it isintended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of
exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the centerlines of the streets, to other walls of the same buildings and to other buildings or structures, and to all
open spaces relating to the building or structure.
BUS LOT: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger uses or motor coaches.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or
where services are offered for compensation.
CARPORT: An automobile shelter with two (2) or more sides open.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 99/403
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
CHILD: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any person, group of persons, agency, association or organization which arranges for or cares for children unrelated to the
operator of the facility, apart from the parents in any facility. Childcare facilities may be established for profit or not for profit. A childcare facility shall be
subject to such special use conditions as to the number of children, the hours of operation and such other restrictions as may be imposed pursuant to the
special use permit issued by the city council. (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991)
CITY: The city of Plano.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Plano.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by two (2) or more licensed
physicians or dentists and their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues which owns, hires or leases a building
or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such
premises, provided that adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall
be allowed in conjunction with the operation of a dining room for the purpose of serving food andmeals, though such beverages may be served in a
separate room or rooms, and provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable local, federal, and state laws, and county
ordinances. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Any motorized or towed contrivance whose primary purpose is to perform work of a commercial or business nature and not
intended for basic transportation. This includes, but is not limited to, tractor trailers, delivery trucks, dump trucks, and excavation equipment of any type,
and trailers used to transport any of the above. (Ord. 2006-40, 5-8-2006)
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located;
and
B. Is designed or intended for a permitted or conditional use as allowed in the district in which it is located.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2) or more
sides by such building or buildings.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building shall be considered the "curb level". (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for more than eight (8) children in
a family home, or for more than three (3) children in a facility other than a family home. A daycare center shall be subject to such special use conditions as
to the number of children, the hours of operation and such other restrictions as may be imposed pursuant to the special use permit issued by the city
council. (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991)
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels". (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
DECK: See definition of Porch, Open (Open Porch). (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991)
DENSITY, GROSS: A ratio of the total number of dwelling units on a site, divided by the total acreage of the site, to include streets, schools, parks, etc.
Expressed as dwelling units per acre.
DENSITY, NET: A ratio of the total number of dwelling units on a site, divided by the number of acres used exclusively for a residential type acreage not to
include schools, parks, streets, etc. Expressed as dwelling units per acre.
DISPLACEMENT (EARTH): The amplitude or intensity of an earthborn vibration (earth) measured in inches. The displacement or amplitude is one-half
(1/2) the total earth movement.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the unincorporated portion of the city for which the use regulations are uniform.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, or part thereof, in which are provided facilities where serving or consuming commodities or both are
intended to occur primarily in patrons' automobiles parked on the premises.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging
houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling joined to two (2) other dwellings by party walls or vertical cavity walls and aboveground, physically unifying horizontal
structural elements.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, designed or altered for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of
each other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 100/403
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by party wall or vertical cavity wall and above ground, physically unifying
horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family, plus not more than
four (4) lodgers, for living or sleeping purposes, and which includes complete kitchen facilities permanently installed.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the
principal room.
EQUIVALENT OPACITY: The shade on the Ringelmann Chart that most closely corresponds to the density of smoke, other than black or gray.
ERECT: The act of placing or affixing a component of a structure upon the ground or upon another such component.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A separate place of business having the following three (3) characteristics:
A. The ownership and management of all operations conducted within such establishment is separate and distinct from the ownership and
management of operations conducted within other establishments on the same or adjacent zoning lots.
B. Direct public access to such business establishment is separate and distinct from direct access to any other business establishment.
C. There is not direct public access from within such establishment to any other such establishment.
When adjacent places of business lack one of the aforesaid characteristics with respect to one another, they shall then be considered as a single
"business establishment" for the purpose of this Title.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use which incorporates the fundamentals for fallout protection--shielding mass, ventilation, and space to
live--and which is constructed of such materials, in such a manner, as to afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who need not be
related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household, but not including clubs, sororities, fraternities or other similar
organizations.
FENCE: A structure, including gates, or tree or shrub hedge which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence which has over its entirety at least fifty percent (50%) of the surface area in open space asviewed at right angles from the fence;
except that the required open space in louver-type fences may be viewed from any angle.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
FLOOD CREST ELEVATION: The elevation of the highest flood level that has been or may be subsequently designated by the City Planning Consultant
and/or City Engineer. The flood crest elevation designated by the City Planning Consultant and/or City Engineer shall be based upon a storm water
drainage map showing flood crest elevations of appropriate locations as approved by the City Council.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: That continuous area adjacent to a stream or stream bed, or any storm water retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is
equal to or lower than the flood crest elevation, including also land having an elevation higher than flood crest elevation but less than ten (10) acres in area
and surrounded by land in a flood plain area or an area of such elevations secured by land fill projecting into a flood plain area.
Any point shall be deemed to be within the flood plain area if it falls below the elevation of a high-water mark, as the elevation of the mark is projected in
horizontal directions perpendicular to the flow of the stream and thence to intersections at an equal elevation with the land on either side of the stream.
Any point between the aforedescribed projections of any two (2) high-water marks shall be deemed within the flood plain area if it is at an elevation equal
to or lower than similar projections of the interpolated flood crest elevation. The interpolated flood crest elevation is the calculated elevation of the flood
crest at the center line of the stream between two (2) known flood crests of the nearest upstream and downstream high-water marks; and the difference in
elevation between the flood crest at this location and at either of the high-water mark projections is directly proportional to the difference in stream center
line distance between the two (2) high-water mark projections.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including also the basement floor of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center lines of walls separating two (2)buildings. The "floor areas" shall also
include the horizontal areas on each floor devoted to:
A. Elevator shafts and stairwells.
B. Mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either open or enclosed, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers.
C. Habitable attic space as permitted by theBuilding Code of the City.
D. Interior balconies and mezzanines.
E. Enclosed porches.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 101/403
F. Accessory uses.
The "floor area" of structures used for bulk storage of materials, i.e., grain elevators and petroleum tanks, shall also be included in the "floor area"
and such "floor area" shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures with one floor for each ten feet (10') of structure height and if
such structure measures less than ten feet (10') but not less than five feet (5') over such floor height intervals, it shall be construed to have an
additional floor. The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a
cellar floor shall not be included in the "floor area".
Floor area", when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street parking spaces and off-street loading spaces for any use, shall be the sum of
the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building, excluding areas used for accessory off-street parking facilities and the horizontal areas
to the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal dimension shall
be taken from the exterior of the walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area
ratio as designated for each district when multiplied by the lot area in square feet shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the building or
buildings on the lot. (See end of Chapter for Diagram)
FLOOR AREA, USABLE: Any floor area within outside walls of a residential building exclusive of areas in cellars, basements, unfinished attics, garages,
open porches and accessory buildings, but including any area "roughed in" but not completed which is designed and intended for human occupancy.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination, equivalent to the illumination at all points which are one foot distant from a uniform point source of one
candlepower.
FOOT-LAMBERT: A unit of brightness, usually of a reflecting surface. A diffusion surface of uniform brightness reflectingor emitting the equivalent of the
light from one candle at one foot distant over one square has a brightness of one foot-lambert.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
FUEL BULK STATION: A place where crude petroleum, gasoline, naphtha, benzine, benzol, kerosene or other flammable liquid which has a flash point at
or below two hundred degrees (200o) Fahrenheit (closed cup tester) is stored for wholesale purposes, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is
more than eight thousand (8,000) gallons, regardless of whether the fuel is stored above the ground, underground or in mobile tank cars or trucks.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of three (3) or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches used in public
transportations, excluding school buses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger
vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive
vehicles is carried on; provided, that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the
premises; except, that all the space in a garage of one or two (2) car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not be used for more than one
commercial vehicle and the load capacity of such vehicle shall not exceed five (5) tons.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed and/or stored for compensation.
GRADE: The established grade of the street or sidewalk. Where no such grade has been established, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at
the property line. Where no sidewalks exist, the grade shall be the average elevation of the street adjacent to the property line. Except in cases of unusual
topographic conditions, as determined by the building inspector, grade shall be the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining the
exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at highest ground grade, adjacent to building, from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls, but excluding open porches or terraces, and garages or carports.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, rooming house, boarding house, hotel, apartment hotel or
motel accommodation as his domicile andplace of permanent residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain entirely within a residential building, or when permitted by this title,
within a structure that is accessory to a residential building.
In all residence districts, any customary home occupation shall be permitted provided that:
A. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family residing in the dwelling and when such home occupation is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
B. It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory building or require internal or external alteration, or involve construction features or use of
equipment not customary in a dwelling, and the entrance to the space devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not more
than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of a story including also a cellar of the dwelling is devoted to such home occupation.
C. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for any use other than a
dwelling, except one nameplate, no more than one square foot in area which contains only the name of the occupant of the dwelling and the home
occupation conducted therein and is attached to the dwelling and not illuminated, shall be permitted.
D. It is conducted by only a member of the family residing on the premises, plus only one additional person, whether or not a member of such family.
E. No mechanical equipment is used, except such as is customarily used for purely domestic or household purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 102/403
F. No stock in trade is kept or sold, including also such as are made on the premises, or services rendered on the premises that require receipt or
delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than U.S. letter carrier mail service or the passenger automobile of the person conducting the
home occupation. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
G. (Rep. by Ord. 2003-28, 6-23-2003)
H. All provisions of section 5-3-12 of this title are complied with.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care, for not
less than twenty four (24) hours in any week, of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal
physical conditions. The term "hospital" as used in this title does not apply to institutions operating solely for the treatment of insane persons, drug addicts,
liquor addicts or other types of cases necessitating restraint of patients, and the term "hospital" shall not be used for convalescent, nursing, shelter or
boarding homes.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A building containing dwelling units or individual guest rooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor
service may be provided, but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
HOTEL, MOTEL, INN or AUTO COURT: An establishment containing lodging accommodations designed for use by transients, travelers or temporary
guests. Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises, telephone and secretarial or desk service, restaurants,
cocktail lounges, meeting rooms and ancillary retail uses provided access to such uses are from the exterior of the principal use.
HOUSEHOLDER: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee thereof.
IMPACT NOISE: A short duration sound such as those from a forging hammer or punch press.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: A material which will not ignite nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five (5) minutes to a temperature of one
thousand two hundred degrees (1200o) Fahrenheit.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a not-for-profit corporation wholly for public or private use.
JUNK YARD: An open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled
or handled including auto, farm implements and machinery, and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a
completely enclosed building.
JUNKER: An automobile, truck or other motor vehicle which has been damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power and will
require major repairs before being made usable, or such a vehicle which does not comply with State or County laws or ordinances for vehicles.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs, cats and other household domestic animals, over four
(4) months of age, are kept for sale, or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for compensation.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing assembly or packaging of products
is not included within this definition.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self-service types washing, drying, dry-cleaning and ironing facilities, providing that:
A. Not more than four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on the premises; and
B. No pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LOADING and UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An open, hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for
the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Such space shall not
be less than ten feet in width, thirty five feet in length and fourteen feet in height (10' x 35' x 14'), exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.
LODGING or ROOMING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous
arrangement, but not open to the public or overnight guests.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees (135o) or less. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot measured with the lot boundaries. (See end of this Chapter for
Diagram)
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public or private streets; for a corner lot thefront shall be the narrowest side
edge of the lot fronting on a street; provided, that the owner may orient his building toward either street.
LOT INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except, that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 103/403
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and more remote from the front lot line. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT LINE, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision or a parcel of land described by deed and where both the map and the deed were recorded in the
office of the Recorder.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not. (See end of this Chapter for
Diagram)
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street lines
shall be deemed front lot lines. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundaries, or the minimum distance between the side lot
lines within the buildable area. (See end of this Chapter for Diagram)
LOT, ZONING: A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which are or may be occupied by a use, building or buildings, including the yards and
open spaces required by this Title.
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, goods or products.
MARQUEE or CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way and is designed
and intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.
MOBILE HOME: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which contains cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross area of
two hundred twenty (220) square feet or more.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot, parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for accommodating two (2) or more mobile homes, provided each mobile
home contains a kitchen flush toilet and shower or bath; and such park shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously for more than
one month, whether or not a charge is made. It shall not include a sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes or other trailers are parked
for the purpose of inspection or sale; except mobile homes located on a site in the mobile home park which are occupied or vacant for not more than
ninety (90) days after occupancy may be sold or offered for sale.
MOTELS, MOTOR LODGES, TOURIST COURTS: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping and living units, designed for
or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts,
motels or motor lodges, but not including mobile homes.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building in which freight brought to said building by motor truck is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and
interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semi- trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by use or lawfully established at the effective date hereof which does not
conform after the effective date hereof with the use regulations of this Title.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon
the psychological, social or economic well-being of human beings.
NURSERY SCHOOL or DAY NURSERY: An institution providing care for three (3) or more children under the age of seven (7) years for periods of more
than four (4) hours but not exceeding twenty four (24) hours.
NURSING HOME or REST HOME: A home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not
including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.
OBSTRUCTION: An obstacle, impediment or hindrance.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound-level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals. (American Standard for Sound-Level Meters/A.S.A.-No. 224.3-
1944)
ODOR THRESHOLD: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will produce an olfactory response in a human being. Odor thresholds shall be
determined in accordance with ASTM Method D 1391-57, "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method)".
ODOROUS MATTER: Any material that produces an olfactory response among human beings.
OFFICE: A place, such as a building room or suite, in which services, clerical work, professional duties or the like are carried out.
OPEN SALES LOT: Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling new or secondhand passenger cars or trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft, monuments, etc., and for the storing of same prior to sale.
PARCEL DELIVERY STATION: A building in which commodities, sold at retail within the area and packaged by the retailer, are assembled and routed for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 104/403
delivery to retail customers located within the area.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard-surface area, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation
to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than one hundred ninety (190) square feet (nine and one-half
feet by twenty feet [91/2' x 20']), exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile
or commercial vehicle under one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in ordischarged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric
pressure and temperature.
PARTY WALL: An interior wall of adjoining structures extending from its footing to the underside of the roof, and which separates and is in common use by
such adjoining structures. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
PATIO: A concrete or stone platform level on earth without frost line protection or roofing or vertical structural components. (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-91)
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the City.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or more principal
buildings and which is at least four (4) acres in area, except for planned developments operated by a municipal corporation which shall be at least two (2)
acres in area, and planned manufacturing developments which shall be at least ten (10) acres in area.
PORCH: A roofed over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-
1979)
PORCH, ENCLOSED (ENCLOSED PORCH): A potentially habitable addition to the main structure projecting or extending out from the wall or walls of a
main structure and integrated by roof into the main structure containing wall framing and foundation extending below frost line and providing shelter by
means of roof, walls, windows and/or screens.
PORCH, OPEN (OPEN PORCH): A nonhabitable structure projecting out from and/or extending out from the wall or walls or the floor of a main structure,
open to the weather, without roof, having open flooring aboveground and supported by piers (sometimes commonly referred to as a "deck"). An open
porch does not contain doors or windows. (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991)
PREFERRED FREQUENCIES: A set of octave bands described by the band center frequency and standardized by the American Standards Association
in ASA standard N.S1.6-1960, "preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements".
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area, including, but not limited to, the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches,
waterways, parkways and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department duly authorized to furnish, under public regulation, to the public, electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, sewers, transportation or water.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including depot loading platforms, station, train
sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, water towers, etc. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES: Any motorized or towed contrivance whose primary purpose is recreational activities, and not intended for basic
transportation. This includes, but is not limited to, camping trailers, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, jet skis, two (2), three (3), and four (4) wheel off
road motorized vehicles, and trailers used to transport any of the above. (Ord. 2006-40, 5-8-2006)
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESIDENCE: The act or condition of residing or dwelling in a place.
REST HOME: See definition of Nursing Home Or Rest Home.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where meals are provided for compensation, including a cafe, cafeteria,
coffee shop, lunch room, drive-in stand, tearoom and dining room, and including the serving of alcoholic beverages when served with and incidental to the
serving of meals, where permitted by local option.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart which is described in the "U.S. Bureau Of Mines Information Circular 6888", and on which are illustrated graduated
shades of grey for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of smoke emission.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the travel of motor vehicles.
RUNWAY: A strip or area of pavement used exclusively for the landing and taking off of aircraft, or for the movement of vehicles incidental to such use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 105/403
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA AND SATELLITE DISHES: An accessory structure whose purpose is to receive communications, electromagnetic
waves or other signals from satellites and other extraterrestrial sources. (Ord. 1987-15, 8-10-1987)
SCHOOL: Elementary, high or college, public or private, or nonprofit junior college, college or university, other than trade and business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses and school bus garages, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers and employees.
SETBACK, ESTABLISHED: When forty percent (40%) or more of the lots fronting on one side of a street within a block are improved, the existing setbacks
of such improved lots shall be the "established setback" for determining the depth of the required front yards for the remainder of the lots along such street
frontage, as regulated in this title.
SETBACK LINE, BUILDING: See definition of Building Setback Line.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure,
tree, rock or other object or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, persons, institutions, organization or business.
However, a sign shall not include any display or official court or public office notices nor shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. A sign shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building unless the context shall be exposed
to view from a street. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises on which such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon
the premises where such a sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD: A sign attached to the exterior of a church or located elsewhere on the church premises, used to indicate the
services or activities of the church and including its name, if desired.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such is in
use. Any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: A sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in
no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying
outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A structure, building wall or other outdoor surface used to display and identify the name of the individual, business, profession,
organization or institution occupying the premises upon which it is located.
SMOKE: Small gasborne particles other than water that form a visible plume in the air.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this
chart, Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by the time in
minutes during which it is observed, and the various products are added together to give the total number of "smoke units" observed during the total period
under observation.
SOUND-LEVEL METER: An electronic instrument which includes a microphone, an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise and sound
pressure levels in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete octave
bands.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: The intensity of a sound measured in decibels mathematically described as twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten
(10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar.
SPECIAL USE: Any use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted herein, subject to the provisions of Section 5-12-7 of this Title.
STABLE, LIVERY: Any building, other than a private stable, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of horses and horsedrawn
livery or both.
STABLE, PRIVATE: Any building, which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used
for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling.
STABLE, PUBLIC (Riding or Boarding Stable): A building and grounds which are designed, arranged, used or intended to beused for the storage,
boarding, breeding of horses including accessory uses which may include riding and horsemanship instructions and the hire of riding horses.
STACKING REQUIREMENTS: For the purpose of this Title, stacking requirements are the number of cars that must be accommodated in a reservoir
space while awaiting ingress or egress to specified business or service establishments.
STAND, ROADSIDE: A structure for the display and sale of only agricultural products which are produced on the premises.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above, then the
space between the floor and ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an additional story
for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: A half-story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior
walls are not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of each story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half-story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of this Title. In the
case of multiple-family dwellings three (3) or more stories in height, a half-story shall be counted as a story.
STREET: A way other than an alley which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 106/403
STREET LINE: A line separating an abutting lot, piece or parcel from a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure
such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises, but not including restaurants where the principal business is
serving food. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
TEMPORARY LIGHTWEIGHT STRUCTURES: Any structure with open sides or comprised of a flexible wall and/or roof skin, over a lightweight framing
system, without a solid foundation. A prime criteria for determining what is a temporary lightweight structure shall be said structure's ability to be erected or
taken down within a twenty four (24) hour period. Temporary lightweight structures can include, but are not limited to: tents of all types, sun shades other
than umbrellas, carports, vendor's stands, sales booths and gazebos. (Ord. 2006-49, 6-26-2006)
TERRACE, OPEN: A level and rather narrow plane or platform which, for the purpose of this title, is located and adjacent to one or more faces of the
principal structure and which is constructed not more than four feet (4') in height above the average level of the adjoining ground. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
TITLE: Reference to title herein shall be construed to be the city of Plano zoning ordinance. (1989 Code)
TOURIST COURTS, MOTOR LODGES: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed, with garage
attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motor lodges or other similar type uses.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
TOURIST PARK: A parcel or tract of land containing facilities for locating two (2) or more travel trailers or mobile homes, and for use only by transients
remaining less than three (3) months, whether or not a charge is made. An open sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied trailers are parked for the
purpose of inspection or sale is not included in a tourist park.
TOXIC MATERIALS: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-29-1979)
TRAILER: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof, for lodging or dwelling purposes or for use as an accessory
building or structure in theconduct of a business, trade or occupation and which may be used for a conveyance on streets and highways by its own or
other motive power, whether or not defined under Illinois law as requiring licensing as a recreational vehicle, recreational trailer, or otherwise. (Ord. 1986-
12, 6-23-1986)
TRAILER CAMP OR PARK: Any premises occupied by or designed to accommodate two (2) or more automobile house trailers or mobile homes, or the
parking of two (2) or more trailers for business or storage purposes. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-29-1979)
TRAILER, CAMPING: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling purposes which does not contain built in sanitary facilities and has a gross
floor area of less than one hundred thirty (130) square feet, whether or not defined under Illinois law as requiring licensing as a recreational vehicle,
recreational trailer, or otherwise. (Ord. 1986-12, 6-23-1986)
TRAILER, HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: Any "trailer" as defined herein used for residential purposes. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-29-1979)
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which may contain cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross
floor area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet or more but less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet, whether or not defined under Illinois law as
requiring licensing as a recreational vehicle, recreational trailer, or otherwise. (Ord. 1986-12, 6-23-1986)
TRUCK PARKING AREA OR YARD: Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks, trailers, tractors, and including commercial
vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons in capacity.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Ground area of a lot, landscaping and recreational facilities may qualify as usable open space provided that it is an area
unobstructed from the ground to the sky and which:
A. Is not devoted to public or private roadways or driveways, and off street parking and loading;
B. Is accessible and available only to occupants of dwelling units on the premises, except balconies;
C. Is not covered by building; except not more than five percent (5%) of the required open space may be recreational facilities enclosed within a
building for the use of occupants of the dwelling units on the premises;
D. Has not less than ten feet (10') at itsnarrowest dimension between either a lot line and an area not qualifying as usable open space; and
E. Is developed, landscaped and maintained suitably for pedestrian, recreational and leisure use.
USE: The purpose for which land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use that has unusual operational, physical or other characteristic uses in a district, but which is a use that complements and is
otherwise, or can be made, compatible with the intended overall development within a district. Compliance with special standards not necessarily
applicable to other permitted or conditional uses in the district shall be required as regulated in this title.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto and which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 107/403
conforms with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements as existing at the effective date hereof for the structure or land that is being
examined.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of Nonconforming Use.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations and when applicable, performance standards of this title for the district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the customer.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at designated frequency, cycles per second.
YARD: An open area on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and the front yard line. (See end of this chapter for diagram.)
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot linealong which the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the
required depth or width of the applicable yard. A building, structure, or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the "yard line" and such
adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstructions in yards as are set forth in this title.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line and the rear yard line. (See end of this chapter for diagram.)
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line, side yard line and side lot line. (See end of this chapter for diagram.)
YARD, SIDE; ADJOINING A STREET: A yard which is bounded by the front lot line, side yard adjoining a street line and rear lot line.
ZONE: A "district", as defined in this section.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: See title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
5-3-1: USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Use: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be erected, raised,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified in the district in which it is located.
B. Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be located;
except, that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be
permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the city.
C. Maintenance Of Yards, Courts And Other Open Spaces: The maintenance of yards, courts and other open space and minimum lot area legally required
for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in
existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of
ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
D. Division Of Zoning Lots: No zoning lot improved with a building or buildings shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots and no portion of
any zoning lot which is improved with a building or buildings shall be sold, unless all zoning lots resulting from each division or sale and improved with
a building or buildings shall not be less conforming to all bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
E. Location Of Required Open Space: All locations of required open spaces or yards or courts and other open space allocated to a building or dwelling
group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group, except as otherwise permitted in planned development and planned
open spaces.
F. Required Yards For Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date hereof shall subsequently be
reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this title for equivalent new construction, except as
provided in section 5-9-7 of this title.
G. Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards: The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
1. In All Required Yards: In all required yards, the following shall be permitted: (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
a. Open terraces not over four feet (4') above the average level of the adjoining ground, decks and open porches but not including a permanently
roofed over terrace or porch; (Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991)
b. Awnings and canopies; steps, four feet (4') or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 108/403
c. Chimneys, projecting twenty four inches (24") or less into the yard;
d. Recreational and laundry drying equipment (rear yard only);
e. Arbors and trellises; and
f. Flagpoles.
2. In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or
less into the required yard.
3. In Rear Yards:
a. Enclosed, attached, or detached off-street parking spaces.
b. Open off-street parking spaces.
c. Accessory shed, tool rooms, and similar buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage.
d. Balconies, breezeways and open porches, one-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the required yards, overhanging eaves and
gutters projecting three feet (3') or less into the required yard. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
e. In Any Residence District: For all lots platted prior to the effective date of this amendment, no accessory building shall be nearer than five feet (5')
to the side and rear lot line nor nearer than five feet (5') to any principal building on an adjoining lot; for all lots platted after the effective date of this
amendment, no accessory building shall be nearer than ten feet (10') to the side and rear lot line nor nearer than ten feet (10') to any principal
building on an adjoining lot. (Ord. 1992-24, 10-26-92)
4. In Side Yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the required yard for a distance not exceeding forty percent (40%) of the required yard
width, but in no case exceeding thirty inches (30"). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
5. Fences:
a. General Fence Provisions: A fence is defined by Municipal Code as a structure and requires a building permit.
A fence, including all posts, bases and other structural parts, shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
All fences must be erected so that the finished side of the fence faces outward or away from the lot on which the fence is erected.
Hereinafter, stockade fences will no longer be permitted in any zoning district.
Fences placed, erected or maintained in any easement area must be approved by the Director of Public Works or his designee. A vertical
clearance of four inches (4") must be maintained in any drainage easement. In the event, City shall by its staff or Council determine it necessary to
excavate or have access across the easement premises, the owner shall remove the fence at City's direction and in the event of the failure
thereof, the City may remove the same at the owner's expense and City shall not be required to replace the same.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the property where a fence is erected to maintain the fence in good repair at all times.
If a fence is found to be in a deteriorated condition and/or in need of repair, the Building and Zoning Administrator/ Inspector or his authorized
agent may order the fence to be repaired, replaced or removed depending upon the condition of the fence. Such order shall be in writing. (Ord.
1992-11, 5-26-92)
b. Residential Districts: Fences in residential districts may be erected, placed and maintained in a rear yard or interior side yard to a height not
exceeding six feet four inches (6'4") above the finished grade. (Ord. 1993-22, 8-23-93)
No fence shall be erected, placed or maintained in a front yard setback area except fences of ornamental nature, such as split-rail, wrought iron or
open-spaced picket fence, all of which shall not exceed four feet (4') in height.
No fence shall be located closer than twelve inches (12") to a public sidewalk.
A solid or closed fence may be erected, placed and maintained adjoining or adjacent to paved patios or terrace areas to a maximum height of six
feet (6'), and to a maximum height of eight feet (8') adjoining or adjacent to swimming pools; provided, however, that such fences shall be located
not nearer than five feet (5') to the nearest lot line and shall in no event be located within any required front yard.
c. Business Districts: Open mesh and wrought iron type fences may be erected, placed and maintained in the required front yard and corner side
yard setbacks to a maximum height of six feet (6') except that on corner lots fences shall be no higher than four feet (4') above the centerline grade
of the intersecting streets if located in a portion of a required front yard or side yard situated within a triangle with the two (2) sides paralleling the
abutting streets being no more than twenty feet (20') each from the corner of the lot formed by the intersection of the two (2) street rights of way
abutting the lot.
d. Manufacturing Districts And Commercial Districts (Business): Fences in manufacturing districts may be erected, placed and maintained to protect
storage areas and parking areas. Such fence shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height above finished grade. Open fences adjoining residentially
zoned property shall be screened with berming and/or landscaping.
e. Fences For Public Or Private Utility Facilities And Other Public Uses: Fences for security or screening purposes may be installed on the property
of any public or private utility facilities in any yard in any zoning district to maximum height of ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1992-11, 5-26-1992)
H. Corner Clearance: There shall be no material obstructions to vision on any corner lot between a height of two feet (2') and a height of ten feet (10')
above the finished grade of either street within a forty foot (40') triangle formed by the intersecting street lines. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-2: LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 109/403
A. Lots Or Parcels Of Land Of Record: Any single lot or parcel of land, which was of record (platted) as of June 25, 1979, that does not meet the current
requirements for minimum lot width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that:
1. Said lot has a width of not less than sixty feet (60');
2. Said lot has minimum lot area of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet;
3. No building(s) on any adjoining lot, which lot was in common ownership as of June 25, 1979, encroaches onto the lot in question, and no principal
building on either of the lots is located closer than ten feet (10') to the lot line (for an accessory building 5 feet), thus maintaining a minimum side yard
of ten feet (10') and a minimum rear yard of ten feet (10'), when the rear yard abuts the adjoining lot;
4. The minimum side yard and/or rear yard setbacks for new construction shall be met, provided, however that the minimum building separation
between any building or buildings on adjoining lots and any building or buildings on the lot in question shall be not less than twenty feet (20'); and
5. The city shall have no obligation to extend water or sewer lines to service lots, which, by reason of this section, now qualify for the issuance of
building permits, and the expense of the extension of water or sewer lines to service the lot shall be at the sole cost and expense of the owner. (Ord.
2005-45, 9-12-2005)
5-3-3: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS:
A. Residential Buildings: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, every residential building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land
which abuts upon a public street unless a permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the effective date hereof.
B. Business And Manufacturing Buildings: Access for all business and manufacturing buildings shall be similar to subsection A of this section and shall
also be subject to the full requirements of subsection 5-7A-6B of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-4: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT:
Except in the case of a planned development, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot, nor shall a
principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-5: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Location and Height:
1. Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall not be erected or altered in required yards, courts or other open areas, except those that are herein
permitted as obstructions in yards, courts or other open areas.
2. Except as herein otherwise required for a specific accessory use, detached accessory buildings, as herein permitted as obstructions in required rear
yards, shall:
a. Be not more than one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, whichever is lower;
b. Cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the rear yard; and (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
c. Be located not less than ten feet (10') from a lot line of adjoining lots, except:
(1) On corner lots, not nearer to the rear lot line than the distance of the required side yard for the lot adjoining the rear lot line and not nearer to
the side street line than the distance required for a side yard adjoining a street, or in the case of a reverse corner lot, the required front yard on
such lot adjoining the rear lot line;
(2) On through lots that do not have a rear lot line adjoining a no access strip, not nearer to the rear lot line adjoining a street than the distance
required for a front yard; and (Ord. 1992-24, 10-26-1992)
(3) Provided, however, that for residential lots in the R-5 zoning district platted prior to October 10, 1992, and for lots in the R-6 duplex zoning
district, the ten foot (10') restriction imposed hereunder shall be reduced to five feet (5'). (Ord. 2007-30, 8-27-2007)
3. No detached or attached accessory building hereafter erected or altered shall project nearer to a lot line adjoining a street than the distance
equivalent to the shortest distance between such lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building, except an attached private garage may project
nearer to a lot line adjoining a street. (Ord. 2007-30, 8-27-2007)
B. Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure with a connected water supply shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction
of the principal building to which it is accessory.
C. Use Restrictions: Except as herein permitted for a specific permitted use, accessory buildings or structures shall not be used for the keeping of
livestock, poultry and/or rabbits, whether or not for profit, unless said buildings or structures are located fifty feet (50') from side or rear lot lines and
provided further that there shall be not more than one livestock for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area with a minimum lot area of
one acre. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
D. Satellite Television Antennas And Satellite Dishes:
1. Residential Locations: In residential districts, no satellite television antenna or satellite dish shall be located in any front or side yard nor shall any
such satellite television antenna or satellite dish be attached or located upon or on top of any structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 110/403
2. Business, Office Or Manufacturing Locations: In business, office or manufacturing districts, satellite television antennas or satellite dishes may be
located within side yards and within front yards, provided that such antennas are located in conformance with the setback requirements of the
applicable zoning district; provided, however, that in business, office or manufacturing districts, where there is insufficient yard area, such antenna
may be located on the roof of the business, office or manufacturing structure.
3. Setbacks: All parts of antennas or satellite dishes shall be located at least five feet (5') from any side or rear lot line in residential districts and at least
five feet (5') from any side or rear lot line or front yard setback line in business, office or manufacturing districts. Any antenna or satellite dish installed
on the roof in a business, office or manufacturing district shall be located and installed, as nearly as possible, in the center of the roof.
4. Grade Level And Diameter: In residential districts, satellite dishes shall not be located more than fifteen feet (15') above grade, and shall not exceed
eleven feet (11') in diameter.
5. Application; Permit: In all districts, a building permit shall be obtained prior to the erection or placement of an antenna or satellite dish. The
application for such permit shall contain at a minimum the following information:
a. The name and address of the record owner of the real estate.
b. Street address of the real estate.
c. Site plan (can be hand drawn) showing the proposed placement site with distances from side to side and rear lot lines and in business and
manufacturing districts the distance from side and rear lot lines and in the case of front yard placement, the location of the front yard setback line.
d. Dimensions of the antenna or dish, including height and diameter.
e. Electrical installation specifications.
f. Footing or installation specifications. (Ord. 1987-15, 8-10-1987)
E. Solar Panels (Photovoltaic):
1. Solar panels shall be considered an accessory building and shall be subject to the requirements of such, together with all applicable building codes
and City ordinances. Structurally attached solar panels shall be a permitted accessory use in all districts and subject to administrative review,
approval and permitting.
2. Structurally attached solar panels installed on a building with a sloped roof shall not project vertically above the peak of the roof.
3. Structurally attached solar panels installed on a building with a flat roof shall not project vertically more than five feet (5') above the roof.
4. For all conduit, raceways, enclosures, junction boxes, disconnects, etc., associated with the DC power generation of the system, appropriately sized
weatherproof labeling with "CAUTION SOLAR CIRCUIT" or similar marking no less than ten feet (10') apart and at all terminations is required.
5. Building permits for solar panels shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 2013-14, 6-10-2013)
5-3-6: TENTS, TEMPORARY LIGHTWEIGHT STRUCTURES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES1:
A. Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot, except such small tents as are customarily used for recreational purposes and located
on the same residential zoning lot as a dwelling. (Ord. 2006-48, 6-26-2006)
B. Temporary Lightweight Structures: Use of temporary lightweight structures for religious, amusement and recreation, business or manufacturing
purposes shall be permitted when a permit has been issued for such use by the Building and Zoning Administrator/Inspector. Said permits shall be at a
cost of thirty five dollars ($35.00) and are good for a period not exceeding seven (7) days. Permits may be renewed upon application, for one (1)
additional seven (7) day period.
1. Haunted houses or special amusement buildings as defined by NFPA 101 - the Life Safety Code, 2006 edition, shall comply with all applicable
sections of said Life Safety Code. Submittal of such documentation as required to demonstrate Code compliance shall be a condition of permit
issuance. As a minimum such documentation will include a dimensioned site/floor plan showing exits and exit lighting/signage, fire extinguisher
locations and a description of construction materials. (Ord. 2015-4, 2-23-2015)
2. Temporary lightweight structures are not permitted in the R-6 Duplex, R-6AT Attached Residential, and R-7 General Residence (multi-family) Zoning
Districts, with the exception of small tents (less than 100 square feet in area), which are allowed in the R-6 Duplex District only. (Ord. 2017-35, 8-14-
2017)
C. Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in the open when in the operation of a lawfully established principal use, and may
be stored or parked on a lot containing a dwelling; provided that it shall be located rear of the building setback line on a paved, established driveway or
paved accessory parking space, and no major repair, disassembly or rebuilding operations are conducted thereon. (Ord. 2006-48, 6-26-2006)
5-3-7: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
A. Required Fences And Walls:
1. A six foot (6') high fence or wall shall be constructed along the perimeter of all areas considered by the Plan Commission to be dangerous to the
public health and safety.
2. When required by the Building and Zoning Administrator/Inspector, a six foot (6') high solid masonry wall shall be erected along the property line or
zone boundary line to separate industrial and commercial districts or uses from abutting residential districts as follows:
a. Where the zone boundary is at a rear lot line which is not on a street, the wall shall be on the line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 111/403
b. Where the boundary is a side lot line, the wall shall parallel said side lot line and be reduced to three feet (3') in height in the area set forth as a
required front yard for the abutting residential district. The wall paralleling the front property line shall be set back from said property line not less
than ten feet (10') and the space between the wall and the front property line is to be landscaped and maintained.
c. Where the boundary is a street, the wall shall be set back from the property line a distance of ten feet (10'). The space between the wall and the
property line is to be landscaped and maintained.
d. Where the boundary is an alley, the wall shall be on the property line along the alley.
3. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to set aside or reduce the requirements established for security fencing by either local, State or Federal
law.
B. General Landscape Plan: A general landscaping plan shall be required for all business and manufacturing districts. The full requirements for this plan
shall be as so outlined within subsection 5-7A-6D of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-8: SPECIAL AND PROHIBITED USES:
A. Existing Special Uses: Where a use is classified as a special use under this title and existed as a permitted use on June 25, 1979, it shall be considered
a legal use, without further action of the City Council, the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission.
B. Uses Not Specifically Permitted In Districts: When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to "permitted uses", it shall be assumed that
such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless, by a written decision of the Plan Commission after request by the zoning administrator it is
determined that said use is similar to and not more objectionable than uses listed. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
5-3-9: PUBLIC UTILITY EXEMPTION:
The following public utility uses are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains and valves or other similar
distributing equipment; provided, that the installation and location shall conform with the rules and regulations of applicable administrative authorities. (Ord.
1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-10: WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Use Of Public Systems: Each use hereafter established which requires sewage and water facilities shall be served by public or community sewage and
water systems.
B. Use Of Private Systems: However, such uses hereafter established on lots in areas that are not served with public sewerage or water systems may be
served with individual sewage disposal systems or private wells, provided the city council shall:
1. Find, after receiving the recommendation of the plan commission, that it is impracticable to extend public or community sewer or water lines to serve
the area; and
2. There is an irrevocable commitment by the owner of the lot that connections shall be made to a public or community sewerage or water system not
less than six (6) months after such system has been installed or extended to serve the lot.
C. Installation Of Public And Private Systems:
1. Generally: Installation of individual sewage disposal systems and private wells or community sewerage and water systems shall be in accordance
with standards and specifications set forth in applicable laws in the city2, county and state.
2. Lots Not Of Record, Additional Restriction: A lot that was not a lot of record on the effective date hereof, which is to be used for a single-family
detached dwelling served with an individual sewerage disposal system shall have an area of not less than one acre and a width of not less than one
hundred fifty feet (150'), or a greater area or width if required, to conform with regulations contained in this subsection. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-11: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The performance standards for the M-1 manufacturing district as set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title, noise, smoke, odorous matter, vibration, toxic or
noxious matter, glare or heat, fire and explosive hazards, shall also apply to all residence or business districts. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-12: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. Authorization: Any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted in any dwelling unit.
B. Use Limitations: In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in the district in which a home occupation is located, no home occupation shall be
permitted unless it complies with the following restrictions in all residence districts: (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
1. (Rep. by Ord. 2003-28, 6-23-2003)
2. There shall be no manufacturing or processing of any sort. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 112/403
3. (Rep. by Ord. 2003-28, 6-23-2003)
4. No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted unless sales are conducted entirely by mail or telephone and the business does not
involve the receipt, shipment, delivery or storage of merchandise on or from the premises.
5. There shall be no alteration of the principal residential building which changes the character thereof as a dwelling.
6. No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of one story of a single-family dwelling, nor more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of any
other dwelling unit, shall be devoted to the home occupation.
7. No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used, except such types as are customary for purely domestic, household or hobby purposes.
8. There shall be no storage outside a principal building or accessory structure of equipment or materials used in the home occupation.
9. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building or in a private garage accessory thereto.
C. Permitted Home Occupations: Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations; provided, however, that
each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of Section 5-2-3 of this Title, definition of home occupation and subsection B of this Section:
1. Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors.
2. Music teachers, but regular instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups.
3. Artists, sculptures and authors or composers.
4. Office facilities for architects, engineers, lawyers, insurance agents and members of similar professions.
5. Offices of duly ordained leaders of a religious or spiritual community.
6. Office facilities for real estate and other salesmen, sales representatives and manufacturers representatives, when no retail or wholesale
transactions are conducted on the premises.
7. Homecrafts, such as model-making, rug-weaving, lapidary work and cabinet making; provided, however, that no machinery or equipment shall be
used or employed other than that which would customarily be incidental to residential occupancy. Such machinery or equipment shall include that
which would customarily be employed in connection with a hobby or avocation not conducted for gain or profit.
D. Prohibited Home Occupations: The following uses are prohibited in residential districts:
1. Barber shops and beauty shops, unless specifically permitted by the district regulations.
2. Dancing schools.
3. Funeral homes.
4. Nursery schools and daycare centers.
5. Restaurants.
6. Stables or kennels.
7. Tourist homes and lodging houses, unless specifically permitted by the district regulations.
8. Renting of trailers.
9. Medical or dental offices, clinics or hospitals.
10. Animal kennels or hospitals. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
5-3-13: AIRPORTS AND SURROUNDING TERRITORY:
Airports and surrounding territory are subject to the rules and regulations of the State of Illinois, Department of Aeronautics and to the following:
A. Height of structures in areas surrounding the boundaries of airports having an established approach plan that has been approved by the State of Illinois,
Department of Aeronautics shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in the approach plan.
B. Height of structures in areas ten thousand (10,000) lineal feet beyond the boundaries of airports that do not have an established approach plan shall be
governed by the following:
1. For an airport having the longest runway less than three thousand nine hundred fifty (3,950) lineal feet in length, structures located just beyond the
boundaries of the airport shall not be in excess of fifteen feet (15') in height, and for every two hundred (200) lineal feet of additional distance from
the airport boundaries, the height of structures may be increased by not more than ten feet (10').
2. For an airport having a runway of three thousand nine hundred fifty (3,950) lineal feet or more in length, structures just beyond the boundaries of the
airport shall not be in excess of fifteen feet (15') in height; and for every two hundred (200) lineal feet of additional distance from airport boundaries,
the height of structures may be increased by not more than five feet (5'); and where a runway has been designated as an instrument runway, the
height of structures may be increased by not more than four feet (4') in every two hundred (200) lineal feet of additional distance from airport
boundaries, for the first ten thousand (10,000) lineal feet, and for the area covered in the next forty thousand (40,000) lineal feet, the height of
structures may be increased by not more than five feet (5') in every additional two hundred (200) lineal feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 113/403
C. Structures exceeding the limiting heights shall be considered obstructions to air navigation unless found not to be objectionable after special
aeronautical study. Such structures may be specifically authorized as a variation after public hearing by the zoning board as provided by law. (Ord.
1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-3-14: PROHIBITED STRUCTURES:
A. Construction of any privately owned permanent structure on public open space, including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, waterways, parkways
and streets is prohibited.
1. Where rural (drive-up) mail delivery requires installation of a mailbox adjacent to a public street, the mailbox will be mounted to a temporary structure
of light gauge metal or wood that will break away when struck by a vehicle.
2. Where is it desirable for mailboxes to be grouped for providing mail service to one point, as in a multi-family or a multiple business setting, then a
privately owned permanent structure may be constructed as long as an off roadway approach, in conformance with United States postal service
standards, is provided. (Ord. 2002-28, 8-26-2002)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
5-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED, MINIMUM ACREAGE:
For the purpose and provisions herein, the City is hereby organized into the following ten (10) districts and the minimum area that may constitute a
separate or detached part of any zoning district shall be as follows:
Chapter Of
This Title
Minimum Zoning District
Acres
5 F-1 Flood Plain District _
5A A-1 Agricultural District
6A R-1 One-Family Residence District 10
6B R-2 One-Family Residence District 10
6C R-3 One-Family Residence District 5
6D R-4 One-Family Residence District 4
6E R-5 General Residence District 3
6F R-6 Duplex Residence District 2
6G R-7 General Residence District 1
7A B-1 Office District 1
7B B-2 Limited Business District 1
7C B-3 General Business District 2
7D B-4 Business/Wholesale District 2
7E B-5 Service Business District 2
8A M-1 Limited Manufacturing District 10
8B M-2 General Manufacturing District 10
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79; amd. Ord. 1991-9, 3-25-91)
5-4-2: ZONING MAPS:
The boundaries of the zoning districts designated in Section 5-4-1 above are hereby established as shown on the maps entitled "Zoning Map: The City of
Plano", dated June 25, 1979, which maps are made a part of this Zoning Title by reference and shall have the same force and effect as if the Zoning Map,
together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described in this Zoning Title.
5-4-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements or the boundary lines of sections, quarter sections,
divisions of sections tracts or lots, or such lines extended or otherwise indicated.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such
strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the center line of the street or highway, and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 114/403
length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimension shown on the maps from section, quarter sections or division lines, or center lines of streets,
highways or railroad rights of way unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be
within the less restricted district; provided, that this construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than twenty
five feet (25').
5-4-4: ZONING OF STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WATERWAYS AND RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY:
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways or waterways and railroad rights of way. Where the center line of a street, alley,
public way, waterway or railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
5-4-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
All land which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall automatically be classified in the A-1 Agricultural District, unless another classification is
assigned at the time of annexation. When land is automatically classified in the A-1 Agricultural District pursuant to this Section, the annexation ordinance,
upon passage, shall be referred to the Plan Commission, and the Plan Commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the annexation
ordinance, schedule and hold a public hearing with respect to the zoning classification of the annexed land, pursuant to the provisions ofSection 5-12-9 of
this Title. The Plan Commission shall make findings and recommendations with respect to the appropriate zoning classification or classifications of the
annexed land and transmit the same in writing to the Mayor and the City Council. (Ord. 1991-9, 3-25-91)
Chapter 5
F-1 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
5-5-1: PURPOSE:
This District is created in a flood-prone or flood plain area to protect the public health and to reduce the financial burdens imposed on the City, its
governmental units and its individuals which may result from improper use of lands having excessively high water tables, drainage problems or are subject
to frequent and periodic floods.
5-5-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following are permitted within any flood plain district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other provisions of this Title and/or other
ordinances.
A. Industrial and commercial open type uses, such as loading and unloading areas, parking lots, storage of motor vehicles (new and used) for not more
than twenty four (24) hour periods, and gardens, auxiliary to uses permitted in any adjoining district.
B. Storage yards for equipment and materials in movable containers and not subject to major damage by flood, provided such uses are permitted in an
adjoining district, but not including acids, caustics, flammable liquids, trash, rags, bottles, scrap metal or any other materials commonly referred to as
"junk".
C. Open type public and private recreational facilities such as public parks, forest preserves, golf clubs, golf driving ranges, drive-in theaters, wildlife and
nature preserves, recreational lakes and other similar recreational uses, subject to all other provisions of this Title.
D. Agricultural uses where no buildings are involved, provided such uses are permitted in an adjoining district.
E. Fences shall be open wire fences providing at least seventy percent (70%) open space and also shall comply with all remaining fencing requirements.
F. Residential uses such as drives and parking areas, lawns, gardens and recreation areas.
G. Planned single-family residential developments in unsubdivided areas only, and single-family residences on lots of record prior to the effective date
hereof, subject to the following requirements:
1. All lots are served with a public or central sewerage system approved by the City and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
2. All finished floor including cellars shall be at an elevation of not less than two feet (2') above the high water elevation as recorded in the 1954 flood
along the Fox River, Big Rock Creek, Little Rock Creek and Rob Creek.
3. Area for water retention shall be provided which will provide water retention equal in volume to that displaced by the development.
5-5-3: CONDITIONS OF USE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 115/403
In the F-1 Flood Plain District, the following conditions of use shall pertain:
A. No filling of land shall be permitted except where approved by the City and subject to such conditions as may be stipulated to protect the public interest.
B. The natural drainage grade shall not be substantially altered. No use shall affect the efficiency or restrict the capacity of any floodway.
C. Any structures permitted shall be placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be firmly anchored to prevent
the structure from floating away and thus threatening to further restrict bridge openings and other restricted sections of the stream.
D. Where, in the opinion of the City, topographic data, engineer and other studies are needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed structure
or the effect of the structure on the flow of water, the City may require the applicant to submit data or other studies prepared by competent engineers,
architects or other registered professionals.
E. All uses permitted shall be subject to approval of the City and to such conditions as may be stipulated to protect the public interest.
F. Area for water retention shall be provided which will provide water retention equal in volume to that displaced by the development.
G. Planned single-family residential developments, where permitted, shall contain adequate storm drainage or other facilities capable of protecting the
area from flooding.
H. No basement or other floor shall be constructed below existing ground level.
I. All planned single-family residential developments shall be subject to the final approval of the city council that all foregoing requirements of this chapter
have been complied with.
J. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved unless the main floor elevation of said building or structure
is established with a finished first floor elevation not less than two feet (2') above the highest known flood elevation. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-5-4: SPECIAL USES:
All uses other than those specified in this chapter are permitted only upon application to the building and zoning administrator/inspector and the issuance
of a special permit as provided in section 5-12-7 of this title.
The floodplain district covers floodplain and floodplain fringe areas and the city shall determine whether the proposed special use is located within a
floodplain or floodplain fringe area. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-5-5: FLOODPLAIN FRINGE AREAS:
Areas lying outside of and adjacent to the floodplain districts, as shown on the zoning map and/or other official maps, shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Land may be filled within the floodplain fringe areas, provided such fill shall extend at least twenty five feet (25') beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon.
B. Foundations of all structures shall be designed to withstand flood conditions at the site, and plans shall be so certified by an Illinois registered architect.
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
Chapter 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6A-1: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, as permitted and regulated by section 5-3-5 of this title.
Churches, rectories, and parish houses.
Funeral homes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 116/403
Golf courses, regulation size, but not including par 3 golf courses, commercially operated driving ranges, or miniature golf courses; and provided that no
clubhouse or accessory building shall be nearer than five hundred feet (500') to any dwelling on an adjacent zoning lot.
Home occupation.
Honeybee colonies on lots containing a minimum lot size of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
Off street parking facilities, as required or permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
One-family detached dwellings.
Parks, forest preserves, and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Public utility facilities, as defined in the state act entitled, "an act concerning public utilities".
School: public, denominational, or private, elementary and high, including playgrounds, garages for school buses, and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation.
Signs, as permitted and regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
5-6A-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Agricultural uses.
Airports or aircraft landing fields.
Bed and breakfast establishment.
Cemeteries, including mausoleums in conjunction therewith, if not located within five hundred feet (500') of any dwelling.
Childcare facilities.
Colleges and universities, including dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other accessory buildings and structures when located on the college or
university grounds, but not including business colleges or trade schools when operated for profit.
Daycare centers.
Filling of holes, pits or lowlands with noncombustible material free from refuse and food wastes.
Golf course, including par 3 courses, but excluding miniature golf.
Institutions for the aged and for children.
Philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions.
Planned residential or institutional developments, under single ownership or control, in which incidental business or recreational facilities for the
convenience of the occupants may be furnished. For such developments, the city council may vary the bulk regulations of this title, provided such
variations are consistent with the general purpose and intent of this title and as set forth in section 5-12-7 of this title, and will result in better site planning
and thus be of greater benefit both to the occupants of the development and to the surrounding area.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
Public service uses:
Electric substations and booster stations.
Filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir.
Police and fire station.
Sewage treatment plant.
Telephone exchange.
Radio and television towers, commercial, including stations.
Railroad rights of way and trackage, but not including classification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
Rest homes, nursing homes, hospital and sanatoriums, for human beings only.
Schools, day or nursery, public or private. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 1991-35, 11-25-1991; Ord. 1997-21, 10-27-1997; Ord. 1999-3, 1-25-1999;
Ord. 2002-18, 4-22-2002)
5-6A-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 117/403
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereinafter erected shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two and one-half (21/2)
acres of buildable acreage, and with a width at the established building line not less than two hundred feet (200').
2. All nonresidential principal use buildings, as permitted in this article, shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two and onehalf
(21/2) acres of buildable acreage, and with a width at the established building line of not less than two hundred feet (200'), except municipal
projects and developments.
3. Lot size for special uses shall be specified in the special use permit but shall not be less than five (5) acres of buildable acreage, except municipal
projects and developments. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed the following heights:
1. One-Family Detached Dwellings: Thirty feet (30') and not more than three (3) stories.
2. Churches: Seventy five feet (75') for towers and steeples, but not more than forty five feet (45') for the main structure.
3. Other Nonresidential Permitted Buildings And Structures: Shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') and not more than three (3) stories in height. Parapet
walls, chimneys, cooling towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above the maximum height of thirty five
feet (35'), provided they are constructed in accordance with all other regulations of the city.
4. Special Uses: Maximum height limitations shall be specified with the granting of a special use permit.
D. Yards: No buildings shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than twenty feet (20'); except, where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum
width shall be increased to thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE B. R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6B-1: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Any permitted use in the R-1 one-family residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6B-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 one-family residence district, section 5-6A-2 of this chapter; except, that planned developments may be
considered where the zoning lot proposed for development has a buildable acreage of not less than ten (10) acres. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord.
2002-49, 12-9-2002)
5-6B-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size And Allowable Density:
1. Lots with private wells and private sewage treatment facilities shall be one acre of buildable acreage, with a width at the building line not less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125'). Density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per each acre of buildable acreage.
2. All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this article shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two (2)
acres of buildable acreage, except municipal projects and development.
3. Lot size for special uses shall be specified in the special use permit, but shall not be less than two (2) acres of buildable acreage, except municipal
projects and developments. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: Same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family residence district; except, that one-family
detached dwellings are to be twenty five feet (25') and not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 118/403
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten feet (10'), or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater; except, where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be increased to thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE C. R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6C-1: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Any permitted use in the R-2 one-family residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6C-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 one-family residence district, section 5-6A-2 of this chapter; except, that planned developments may be
considered where the zoning lot proposed for development has a buildable acreage of not less than ten (10) acres. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord.
2002-49, 12-9-2002)
5-6C-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size And Allowable Density:
1. Lots served by either public or central water systems or public sewerage facilities shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a width at the
building line not less than one hundred feet (100'). Density shall not exceed two (2) dwelling units per each acre of buildable acreage.
2. All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this article shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two (2)
acres of buildable acreage, except municipal projects and developments.
3. Lot size for special uses shall be specified in the special use permit, but shall not be less than two (2) acres of buildable acreage, except municipal
projects and developments. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures including accessory building.
C. Maximum Building Height: Same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-2 one-family residence district.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten feet (10') or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater; except, where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be increased to thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE D. R-4 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6D-1: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Any permitted use in the R-3 one-family residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6D-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 one-family residence district, section 5-6A-2 of this chapter; except, that planned developments may be
considered where the zoning lot proposed for development has a buildable acreage of not less than ten (10) acres. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord.
2002-49, 12-9-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 119/403
5-6D-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size And Allowable Density:
1. Lots served by both public sewerage and water facilities shall have an area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet and a width at the
building line of not less than eighty feet (80'). Density shall not exceed three and three-tenths (3.3) dwelling units per each acre of buildable acreage.
2. All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this article shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two (2)
acres of buildable acreage, except municipal projects and developments.
3. Lot size for special uses shall be specified in the special use permit, but shall not be less than two (2) acres of buildable acreage, except municipal
projects and developments. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: Same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-2 one-family residence district.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten feet (10'), or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater; except, where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be increased to thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE E. R-5 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6E-1: USES PERMITTED:
A. Permitted: The following uses are permitted:
Any of the permitted uses in the R-4 residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
B. Exceptions:
Honeybee colonies. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
5-6E-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any of the special uses permitted in the R-4 residence district.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Tourist homes having not more than five (5) rooms for transient guests. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-2, 1-28-2002)
5-6E-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area And Allowable Density:
1. Allowable density based upon the buildable acreage shall not exceed three and six-tenths (3.6) dwelling units per acre of buildable acreage and shall
have an area of not less than nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
2. All nonresidential principal uses permitted in this article shall be located on a lot having an area of buildable acreage of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet and a width of not less than one hundred feet (100') at the building line.
3. Minimum lot size and dimension for special uses shall be specified with the granting of a special use permit, but shall not be less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet of buildable acreage. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Width:
1. For single-family detached dwellings, not less than seventy five feet (75').
2. For single-family detached dwellings on corner lots, not less than eighty feet (80').
C. Lot Coverage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 120/403
1. The same regulations shall apply for one-family detached dwellings as are permitted or required for single-family detached dwellings in the R-4
residence district.
2. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
D. Maximum Building Height:
1. Single-family detached dwellings and permitted nonresidential buildings and structures, shall have the same regulations applied to them as provided
in the R-2 residence district.
2. All other dwelling types, not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories or twenty five feet (25') whichever is lower.
E. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
1. For single-family attached dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
b. Side Yards: Two (2) side yards, each not less than ten feet (10') in width, except a side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than thirty feet (30')
in width.
2. Rear yard: Not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6E-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Water And Sanitary Sewer System For Special Uses: All residential special uses permitted in this district shall be served by an approved central water
and sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE F. R-6 DUPLEX RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6F-1: USES PERMITTED:
A. Permitted: The following uses are permitted:
Any of the permitted uses in the R-5 residence district.
Two-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
B. Exceptions:
Honeybee colonies. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
5-6F-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any of the special uses permitted in the R-5 residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6F-3: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area And Allowable Density:
1. Allowable density based upon the buildable acreage shall not exceed five and eight-tenths (5.8) dwelling units per acre of buildable acreage and
shall have an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet per unit.
2. All nonresidential principal uses permitted in this article shall be located on a lot having an area of buildable acreage of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet and a width of not less than one hundred feet (100') at the building line.
3. Minimum lot size and dimensions for special uses shall be specified with the granting of a special use permit, but shall not be less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet of buildable acreage. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Width:
1. For two-family detached dwellings, not less than ninety feet (90').
2. For two-family detached dwellings on corner lots, not less than one hundred feet (100').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 121/403
C. Lot Coverage:
1. The same regulations shall apply for two-family detached dwellings as are permitted or required for single-family detached dwellings in the R-5
residence district.
2. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by building or structures, including accessory buildings.
D. Maximum Building Height:
1. Two-family detached dwellings and permitted nonresidential buildings and structures shall have the same regulations applied to them as provided in
the R-2 residence district.
2. All other dwelling types, not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories or twenty five feet (25'), whichever is lower.
E. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
1. For two-family dwellings: The same regulations as required in the R-5 residence district for one-family dwellings.
2. For two-family detached dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
b. Side Yards: Two (2) side yards, each not less than ten feet (10') in width, except a side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than thirty feet (30')
in width.
3. Rear yard: Not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6F-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Water And Sanitary Sewer System For Special Uses: All residential special uses permitted in this district shall be served by an approved water and
sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE G. R-7 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6G-1: USES PERMITTED:
A. Permitted: The following uses are permitted:
Any of the permitted uses in the R-6 residence district.
Multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
B. Exceptions:
Honeybee colonies. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
5-6G-2: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any of the special uses permitted in the R-6 residence district. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6G-3: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6G-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area And Allowable Density:
1. All single-family dwellings included in this residence district shall conform to the regulations in the R-5 residence district.
2. All multiple-family structures shall be located on a lot which provides the following minimum land area per dwelling unit:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 122/403
Type Of
Dwelling Unit
Minimum Lot Area Per
Dwelling Unit In Square Feet
4 bedrooms and over 6,600
3 bedrooms 5,700
2 bedrooms 5,000
1 bedroom 4,000
Efficiency 3,300
For the purpose of determining lot area, any room other than a living room, dining room, kitchen or bath shall be counted as a bedroom. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-
25-1979)
3. A lot shall not be less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area, and the allowable density based upon the buildable acreage shall not
exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre of buildable acreage.
4. All nonresidential principal uses permitted in this article shall be located on a lot having an area of buildable acreage of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet and with a width of not less than one hundred feet (100') at the building line.
5. Minimum lot size and dimensions for special uses shall be specified with the granting of a special use permit, but shall not be less than nine
thousand (9,000) square feet of buildable acreage. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Width:
1. For any use permitted in the R-6 residence district, the same regulations shall apply.
2. Multiple-family dwellings, not less than ninety feet (90').
3. Corner lots, not less than one hundred feet (100').
C. Lot Coverage: The same regulations shall apply for one- and two-family detached dwellings that are permitted or required for single-family detached
dwellings in the R-6 residence district.
D. Maximum Building Height:
1. For all dwellings and permitted nonresidential buildings and structures permitted in the R-6 residence district, the same regulations shall apply as
provided in said R-6 residence district.
2. All other dwelling types, not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories or twenty five feet (25'), whichever is lower.
E. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
1. For Dwellings Permitted In R-6 District: For all dwellings permitted in the R-6 residence district, the same regulations as required in said R-6
residence district.
2. For Multiple-Family Dwellings:
a. Front Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
b. Side Yards: Two (2) side yards, each twelve feet (12') in width; or, a side yard of sixty percent (60%) of the building height (whichever is greater),
except a side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than thirty feet (30') in width.
3. Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-6G-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets:
1. Lots With Less Than Two Hundred Twenty Feet Frontage:
a. Access is limited to one combined ingress/egress point.
b. Minimum width to be twenty feet (20') at property line.
c. Maximum width to be thirty two feet (32') at property line.
2. Lots With More Than Two Hundred Twenty Feet Frontage:
a. Access is limited to two (2) combined ingress/egress points.
b. Minimum-maximum widths to be same as subsection A of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 123/403
3. Location: Location to be approved by the city engineer or as directed by the city.
4. Design And Construction: Details of design and construction to meet all city requirements.
5. Curbs And Stormwater Drainage: Entrance curbs and storm drainage provisions shall be required on all street frontages and shall meet the approval
of the city engineer and city standards.
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening:
1. All applications for a building permit requested for new construction shall provide a general landscaping plan.
2. The landscaping plan must show all areas which will contain grass ground cover or other growth and the location of all trees, shrubbery ground
cover and other growth. All areas designated from landscaping must be completed as soon as possible after the completion of any building.
3. Landscaping and/or planting will not be delayed for a period in excess of one year after the completion of any building.
4. Certificates of occupancy may be issued prior to the time the landscaping requirements are completed. If so issued, certificates of occupancy shall
then state:
Landscaping not approved, approval required within one year of the date of this certificate.
5. Minor revisions from the landscaping plan may be made without obtaining prior approval. Amounts and location of land set aside for landscaping
may not be reduced.
6. All provisions of subsection 5-3-7A of this title shall be considered part of this subsection D.
E. Outdoor Storage:
1. All outdoor storage facilities for the building and accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by an architecturally pleasing fence, wall or planting
materials adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public street rights of way.
2. Include and show within the required landscape plan.
F. Water And Sanitary Sewer System For Special Uses: All residential special uses permitted in this district shall be served by an approved central water
and sanitary sewer system.
G. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7,
6-25-1979)
ARTICLE H. R-8 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
(SPECIAL USE)
5-6H-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit development (special use) in the general residence district is intended to encourage the most imaginative and best possible design of
building forms and site planning for tracts of land where unitary plans would best adapt to topographic and other natural features of such site. The
provisions of this article are designed to establish special procedures for approving development plans for planned unit development districts. (Ord. 1993-
6, 4-26-1993)
5-6H-2: PROCEDURE:
All planned unit developments in the R-8 general residence district - planned unit development (special use) shall be processed and approved in
accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993)
5-6H-3: USES PERMITTED:
A. Permitted: The following uses are permitted:
All permitted uses and all special uses in the R-7 general residence district. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
B. Exceptions:
Honeybee colonies. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
5-6H-4: CONDITIONS OF USE, BULK REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 124/403
Except as otherwise modified or amended pursuant to planned unit development (special use) plans and specifications, all of the conditions of use, bulk
regulations, special provisions and performance standards set forth in this chapter, shall apply in the R-8 general residence district - planned unit
development (special use). (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993)
ARTICLE I. R6-AT ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
5-6I-1: PURPOSE:
The attached residential district is intended to provide for a higher density of dwelling units through the utilization of a variety of modern building and
development techniques. Higher densities than exist in detached single-family developments are allowed and various building types can be employed in
achieving the permitted density; these include townhomes and coach homes. It is intended that the resulting developments will be compatible with
homogeneous single-family developments and that this district is located so as to provide a transition between single-family and more intensive multifamily
and/or commercial zoning districts. In order to discourage the creation of a garage dominated streetscape, side loaded garages and off street auto
courts are encouraged. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996)
5-6I-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Single-family attached dwellings _ not more than six (6) units per structure. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996)
5-6I-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any of the special uses permitted in the R-1 residence district. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996)
5-6I-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area And Allowable Density:
1. Allowable density based upon the buildable acreage shall not exceed six (6.0) dwelling units per acre of buildable acreage.
2. Minimum lot area for a townhome development shall be one acre (43,560 square feet) of buildable acreage.
3. All nonresidential or special uses permitted in this article shall be located on a lot having an area of buildable acreage of not less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet and a width of not less than one hundred feet (100') at the building line. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996; amd. Ord. 2002-
49, 12-9-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: All structures shall be not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories or twenty eight feet (28'), whichever is lower.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') shall be required unless adjacent to a single-family detached dwelling, in which case
the single-family detached front yard setback shall apply to the attached units.
2. Separation Distance: The minimum separation distance between structures is as follows:
Side to side: 25 feet
Side to rear: 35 feet
Rear to rear: 50 feet
3. Rear And Side Yards: Where single-family attached units abut another zoning district, a forty foot (40') setback is required.
E. Minimum Square Footage: Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996)
5-6I-5: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title. In addition to the requirements of said
chapter 10, additional guest parking spaces shall be required at the rate of 0.3 spaces per dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 125/403
B. Water And Sanitary Sewer System For Special Uses: All residential special uses permitted in this district shall be served by an approved central water
and sanitary sewer system.
C. Access: All dwelling units shall have direct access to a street or approved private roadway, and all structures shall be so located on each lot so as to
provide safe and convenient access for utilities, fire protection and required off street parking.
D. Site Plan Review: All developments within the R6-AT zoning district shall require site plan review. (Ord. 1996-31, 11-25-1996)
ARTICLE J. R-2A ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
5-6J-1: DENSITY INCENTIVE:
This district shall apply to those developments which, though located in an area designated as estate residential (maximum of 0.5 dwelling units per
buildable acre) on the future land use map contained in city of Plano's comprehensive plan, elect to include the following improvements, to qualify for the
density incentive:
A. At least thirty percent (30%) of the total acreage must be dedicated as public open space.
B. Preservation of natural landforms and existing vegetation, to include woodlands, prairies, and wetlands.
C. Significant use of native vegetation and natural drainage to enhance water quality and reducing storm water runoff.
D. Or alternatively, provision of public recreational amenities, of such scope that it is determined that the minimum requirements of the subdivision control
ordinance are exceeded to the extent that the density incentive is warranted. Such amenities would include golf courses, swimming pools or multisport
complexes, open to and available for use by the general public. (Ord. 2007-50, 11-26-2007)
5-6J-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Accessory uses, as permitted and regulated by section 5-3-5 of this title.
Churches, rectories, and parish houses.
Golf courses, regulation size, but not including commercially operated driving ranges, or miniature golf courses; and provided that no clubhouse or
accessory building shall be nearer than two hundred feet (200') to any dwelling on an adjacent zoning lot.
Home occupation.
Off street parking facilities, as required or permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
One-family detached dwellings.
Parks, forest preserves, and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
School: public, denominational, or private, elementary and high, including playgrounds, garages for school buses, and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Seminaries, convents, monasteries, and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation.
Signs, as permitted and regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction. (Ord. 2007-50, 11-26-2007)
5-6J-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Agricultural uses.
Airports or aircraft landing fields.
Bed and breakfast establishment. (Ord. 2007-50, 11-26-2007)
5-6J-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size And Allowable Density:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 126/403
1. Lots with private wells and private sewage treatment facilities shall be one acre of buildable acreage, with a width at the building line not less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125'). Density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per each forty thousand (40,000) square feet of buildable area.
2. All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted in this article shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than two (2)
acres of buildable acreage, except municipal projects and development.
3. Lot size for special uses shall be specified in the special use permit, but shall not be less than two (2) acres of buildable acreage, except municipal
projects and developments.
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family residence district; except, that one-family
detached dwellings are to be twenty five feet (25') and not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten feet (10'), or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater; except, where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width shall be increased to thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 2007-50, 11-26-2007)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. B-1 OFFICE DISTRICT
5-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The B-1 Office District is intended to provide facilities used primarily to provide office space for services to the residents of the City. Also permitted are
related commercial uses which conform to the pattern of the office district. The permitted uses are associated with low volumes of traffic, both pedestrian
and vehicle, and limited amounts of signs and advertising so as to protect the adjacent and/or surrounding residential districts. This District is to be
normally small in size and is used as a buffer between residential and other commercial zoning classifications. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7A-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
Antique shop.
Advertising agency.
Bank.
Barber shop.
Beauty shop.
Bookkeeping service.
Club, private indoor.
Coffee shop.
Credit union.
Detective agency.
Employment office.
Engineering office.
Gift shop.
Government office.
Income tax service.
Insurance office.
Library.
Manufacturing agent's office.
Medical clinic.
Park.
Professional offices.
Public accountant.
Public, governmental buildings.
Real estate office.
Residential use: As allowed within the R-6 Residence District and as provided in subsection 5-7A-6G of this Article.
Savings and loan association.
Stenographic service.
Stock broker.
Telegraph office.
Ticket office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 127/403
Title company.
Travel agency.
Utility office.
5-7A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following special uses may be allowed:
Apartment hotel.
Business colleges, trade schools and commercial schools.
Colleges, junior colleges, universities, including other accessory buildings and structures.
Institutions for the aged and for children.
Planned developments.
Radio and television towers, commercial, including station.
Rest homes, nursing homes, hospitals, and sanitariums, for human beings only.
Schools, day or nursery, public or private.
Solid waste disposal site, filtration plant, pumping station and electrical sub-stations.
5-7A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-3-5 of this Title.
5-7A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size:
1. Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100').
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') or two (2) stories.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not less than ten feet (10'); except, where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width
shall be increased to twenty feet (20').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
5-7A-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Chapter 10 of this Title.
B. Access to Public Streets:
1. Lots With Less Than Two Hundred Twenty Feet Frontage:
a. Access is limited to one combined ingress/egress point.
b. Minimum width to be twenty feet (20') at property line.
c. Maximum width to be thirty two feet (32') at property line.
2. Lots With More Than Two Hundred Twenty Feet Frontage:
a. Access is limited to two (2) combined ingress/egress points.
b. Minimum-maximum widths to be same as subsection A above.
3. Location: Location to be approved by the City Engineer or as directed by the City.
4. Design and Construction: Details of design and construction to meet all City requirements.
5. Curbs and Storm Water Drainage: Entrance curbs and storm drainage provisions shall be required on all street frontages and shall meet the
approval of the City Engineer and City standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 128/403
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-7-1 of this Chapter.
D. Landscaping and Screening:
1. All applications for a building permit requested for new construction shall provide a general landscaping plan.
2. The landscaping plan must show all areas which will contain grass ground cover or other growth and the location of all trees, shrubbery ground
cover and other growth. All areas designated for landscaping must be completed as soon as possible after the completion of any building.
3. Landscaping and/or planting will not be delayed for a period in excess of one year after the completion of any building.
4. Certificates of occupancy may be issued prior to the time the landscaping requirements are completed. If so issued, certificates of occupancy shall
then state:
"Landscaping not approved, approval required within one year of the date of this certificate".
5. Minor revisions from the landscaping plan may be made without obtaining prior approval. Amounts and location of land set aside for landscaping
may not be reduced.
6. Where commercial uses abut or are across the street from a residential district, adequate landscape screening shall be provided. Five feet (5') high
landscape screening is required except on corner lots, when thirty six inches (36") maximum height screen is limited to thirty feet (30') in both
directions from the corner.
E. Outdoor Storage:
1. All outdoor storage facilities for the building and accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by an architecturally pleasing fence, wall or planting
materials adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public street rights of way.
2. Include and show within the required landscape plan.
F. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in Section 5-8-1 of this Title.
G. Dwelling Units: Dwelling units are a permitted use provided they are located above the first floor and above a permitted business use or off-street
parking. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the ground floor of a business building or in the rear of business establishments on the ground floor.
The land area and density requirements of the R-6 District shall apply to dwelling units constructed in this B-1 District. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
ARTICLE B. B-2 LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT
5-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The B-2 Limited Business District is intended to provide small local shopping facilities used as retail or service establishments to supply convenience
goods or personal services for the neighborhoods. This District encourages shopping areas with planned off-street parking and loading facilities. Also, this
District would normally be located on primary or secondary streets and is relatively small in size to keep in scale with the adjacent residential
neighborhoods.
5-7B-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
All uses permitted in the B-1 District except residential uses.
Antique sales.
Art and school supply stores.
Bakery
Retail.
Processing when prepared for sale on premises only.
Book, stationery stores.
Cafeteria (diner).
Camera, photographic supply shop.
Candy shop.
Church or other place of worship.
Cigar, cigarette and tobacco store.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 129/403
Clothes, pressing and repair.
Club.
Private indoor.
Private outdoor.
Community center.
Dressmaker, seamstress.
Drugstore.
Dry cleaner, but not a central plant serving more than one retail outlet.
Electrical appliance store, repair.
Florist shop.
Food lockers, retail.
Fruit/vegetable market, retail.
Grocery store, supermarket.
Gymnasium.
Health food store.
Hobby shop.
Hospital (general).
Hospital or treatment center.
Household furnishing shop.
Ice cream shop.
Jewelry and watch repair, retail.
Laundry:
Automatic self-service type.
Cleaning and dyeing, retail.
Magazine and newsstand.
Meat market.
Millinery shop.
Mortuary, funeral home.
Newsstand.
Nursery, daycare.
Photography studio.
Playground.
Post office or substation.
Public utility collection office.
Recreation center.
Restaurant, no drive-in types where food is served into motor vehicles.
Shoe and hat repair, for retail sale on premises only.
Substation.
Swimming pool, indoor.
Tailor.
Tennis club, private or daily fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 130/403
Tobacco shop.
Tot-lot. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
All special uses permitted in the B-1 District.
Crematories, in conjunction with a funeral home or mortuary.
Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and above a permitted business use or off-street parking. Dwelling units shall not be
permitted on the ground floor of a business building or in the rear of business establishments on the ground floor. The land area and density requirements
of the R-7 District shall apply to dwelling units.
Massage or similar personal service shop.
Meeting hall, club, lodge, fraternal or religious institution. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 1997-21, 10-27-1997; Ord. 2007-31, 8-27-2007)
5-7B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size:
1. Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100').
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of this area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') or two (2) stories.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') shall be provided at all corner lots and for all lots abutting residential districts. A front
yard of not less than five feet (5') is required elsewhere.
2. Side Yard: No minimum side yard shall be required between buildings within the B-2 district, except where a side yard adjoins a street, a minimum
yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be required.
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
4. Transitional Yard: Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a residential district zone, a yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be required.
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7B-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6B of this chapter.
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-7 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6D of this chapter.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this chapter.
F. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7,
6-25-1979)
ARTICLE C. B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 131/403
5-7C-1: PURPOSE:
The B-3 general business district is intended to provide facilities used as the main shopping area for residents of the city and other nearby subdivisions or
communities and is to permit most types of business/commercial uses, offices and service establishments. The general business district is normally
centrally located with respect to the city and located at major intersections or along a major street or highway. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7C-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
All uses permitted in the B-2 district.
Appliances, sales.
Army/navy surplus sales.
Art gallery, art studio sales.
Auditorium.
Automatic food service.
Automobile accessory store where there is no driveway entrance across the sidewalk.
Automobile and motorcycle accessory and parts store, provided there is no on site repair, machining or service.
Bicycle shop, sales and repair.
Billiard parlor/pool hall.
Blueprint and photostat shop.
Bookbinding.
Bowling alley.
Business machines store.
Carpet and rug stores.
Carryout food service.
Catalog sales office.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing store, all types.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Costume rental shop.
Currency exchanges.
Dance hall.
Department store.
Discount store.
Drapery store.
Dry goods store, retail.
Employment agency, public and private.
Exterminating shops.
Financial institutions.
Floor covering sales.
Furniture sales, new.
Furrier, retail.
Garden supplies/seed stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 132/403
Hardware store.
Health club or gymnasium.
Hotel.
Interior decorating studio/store.
Junior department store.
Leather goods.
Loan offices.
Locksmith.
Luggage stores.
Massage establishments.
Mirror and glazing shop.
Motels.
Motion picture theater.
Music, instrument and record store; repair and retail.
Newspaper publishing office.
Notions store.
Office equipment, supplies and stationery.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores.
Paint/wallpaper store.
Pawnshop.
Personal loan agency.
Pet store, not including animal hospitals.
Physical culture and health services.
Picture frame store.
Radio and television studios, no towers.
Record shop.
Reducing salon, masseur and steam bath.
Schools of dance, music, business or trade.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods.
Stationery.
Tack shop.
Taxidermist.
Theater, indoor only.
Toy store.
Trading stamp store.
Transit and transportation facilities.
Typewriter, sales and repair.
Variety store.
Watch and clock sales and repair.
Wearing apparel store.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 133/403
Weaving and mending, custom. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2006-50, 6-26-2006; Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
5-7C-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
All special uses permitted in the B-2 district.
Furniture sales, used.
Gasoline service station.
Liquor store; packaged liquor, any sale of alcoholic beverages.
Marina. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2007-31, 8-27-2007)
5-7C-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7C-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size:
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100').
B. Lot Coverage: Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') or two (2) stories.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
2. Side Yard: No minimum side yard shall be required between buildings within the B-3 district. Where a side yard adjoins a street, a minimum side
yard of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be required and maintained. (Ord. 1994-19, 7-11-1994)
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
4. Transitional Yard: Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a residential district zone, a yard of not less than thirty feet (30') shall be required. (Ord.
1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7C-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6B of this chapter.
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-7 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6D of this chapter.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this chapter.
F. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7,
6-25-1979)
ARTICLE D. B-4 BUSINESS/WHOLESALE DISTRICT
5-7D-1: PURPOSE:
The B-4 business/wholesale district is intended to provide facilities used for most types of major retailing and service uses, selected wholesale or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 134/403
warehousing uses and small selected limited industrial activities that are normally associated with business/commercial uses. The allowable uses tend to
use large areas, parcels or spaces and serve customers who do not make frequent trips to these areas for purchases. The market area for the
business/wholesale use covers an area larger than the city. This district should be normally located along major highways and also requires adequately
sized parcels of land with large setbacks, open clear viewing and entrances and access points safely located. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7D-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
All uses permitted in the B-3 district.
Agricultural implement sales and service.
Ambulance service.
Animal hospital.
Appliance, service only.
Auction house.
Automobile rental, no service.
Bottled gas dealer.
Bottling and distribution plants, milk or soft drinks.
Building material sales, service.
Business machine repair.
Cartage, express and parcel delivery establishments, not including motor freight terminals.
Casket and casket supplies.
Catering service.
Commercial greenhouse.
Commercial swimming pool.
Contractor office, shop and yard.
Direct selling establishment where products are stored.
Drive-in restaurant.
Electrical equipment sales.
Farm and garden supply store.
Feed, fertilizer and grain sales.
Frozen food locker, wholesale.
Furniture repair and refinishing.
Golf driving range.
Greenhouse.
Heating, air conditioning, sales and service.
Laboratories, research, experimental and testing.
Lumberyard.
Mail order house.
Massage establishments.
Miniature golf.
Nursery.
Orchard.
Packing and crating establishment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 135/403
Parcel delivery station.
Park, commercial recreation.
Photo developing and processing center.
Plumbing supplies and fixture sales, contractor storage yard.
Printing and publishing of newspaper.
Pump sales.
Roadside stand.
Secondhand store and rummage shop.
Skating rink.
Sports arena.
Stadium.
Swimming pool sales and service.
Taxicab stand.
Taxidermist.
Tennis court, indoor.
Tire, battery, accessory dealer.
Tombstone and monument sales.
Towing service.
Upholstery shop.
Utility company maintenance yard.
Utility service yard or garage.
Veterinary clinic.
Water softener service.
Wholesale, jobbing and warehousing establishments. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
5-7D-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
All special uses permitted in the B-3 district.
Amusement park, fairground, circus, coliseum, racetrack and other similar exposition and/or recreational uses.
Boat launching ramp.
Boat rental and storage.
Riding academies and public stables.
Self-storage facility.
Theater, outdoor (drive-in type). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2002-18, 4-22-2002)
5-7D-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7D-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: No lot shall have an area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Lot Coverage: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 136/403
C. Maximum Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') or two (2) stories.
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Side Yards: No minimum side yard shall be required between buildings within the B-4 district; except, where a side yard abuts a street, a yard of not
less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
4. Transitional Yard: Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a residential district zone, a yard of not less than fifty feet (50') shall be required. (Ord.
1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7D-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6B of this chapter.
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6D of this chapter.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this chapter.
F. Outdoor Sales And Service Areas: Outdoor sales and/or service space shall be provided with permanent, durable, dustless surface, and shall be graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water. Plans certified by an Illinois registered architect or engineer are required prior to issuance of a building
permit.
G. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7,
6-25-1979)
ARTICLE E. B-5 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
5-7E-1: PURPOSE:
The B-5 service business district is intended to provide facilities for automotive service uses and associated automotive uses such as drive-ins. This
district is intended to be located only along major highways where large parcels of land will allow for deep setbacks, clear viewing and well located access
points. Frontage roads should be provided, except for hardship situations. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7E-2: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
All uses permitted in the B-4 district.
Automobile accessories store.
Automobile diagnostic center.
Automobile driving instruction.
Automobile sales, service and rental.
Automobile service station.
Boat sales.
Body shop, repair and rebuilding.
Bus passenger station.
Camper sales and rental.
Car wash.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 137/403
Drive-in cleaners.
Drive-in restaurant.
Equipment rental and leasing service.
Garage, bus or truck.
Garage, public or private for autos and small trucks.
General repair shop.
Liquor store; packaged liquor, any sale of alcoholic beverages.
Machinery and equipment sales, construction and agriculture.
Massage establishments.
Motor vehicle dealer.
Motorcycles sales and service.
Painting.
Public service or municipal garage.
Recreational vehicle sales and service.
Rentals, auto, truck and camper.
Taxicab garage, taxicab stand.
Tire, battery and accessory dealer.
Tire repair shop.
Trailer rental.
Trailer sales.
Truck rental.
Truck sales and service.
Undercoating service.
Used car lot.
Veterinary clinic. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2007-31, 8-27-2007; Ord. 2016-16, 4-25-2016)
5-7E-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
All special uses permitted in the B-4 district.
Medical marijuana dispensary.
Mobile home sales. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2014-46, 11-10-2014)
5-7E-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7E-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size:
1. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100').
B. Lot Coverage: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the zoning lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.
C. Maximum Building Height: No building structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a maximum height of twenty five feet (25') or two (2) stories.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 138/403
D. Yards: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement: (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1996-10, 6-10-1996)
2. Side Yards: No minimum side yard shall be required between buildings within the B-5 district; except, where a side yard abuts a street, a yard of not
less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided.
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
4. Transitional Yard: Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a residential district zone, a yard of not less than one hundred feet (100') shall be
required. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-7E-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6B of this chapter.
C. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-7 of this title and subsection 5-7A-6D of this chapter.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this chapter.
F. Outdoor Sales And Service Areas: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7D-6F of this chapter.
G. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in section 5-8-1 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7,
6-25-1979)
ARTICLE F. B-6 BUSINESS DISTRICT _ PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (SPECIAL
USE)
5-7F-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit development (special use) in the business district is intended to encourage the most imaginative and best possible design of building forms
and site planning for tracts of land where unitary plans would best adapt to topographic and other natural features of such site. The provisions of this
article are designed to establish special procedures for approving development plans for planned unit development districts. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993)
5-7F-2: PROCEDURE:
All planned unit developments in the B-6 general business district _ planned unit development (special use) shall be processed and approved in
accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993)
5-7F-3: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
All permitted uses and all special uses in the B-5 service business district. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993; amd. Ord. 2002-49, 12-9-2002)
5-7F-4: CONDITIONS OF USE, BULK REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise modified or amended pursuant to planned unit development (special use) plans and specifications, all of the conditions of use, bulk
regulations, special provisions and performance standards set forth in this chapter, business districts zoning, shall apply in the B-6 general business
district planned unit development (special use). (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-1993)
Chapter 8
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
5-8-1: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 139/403
A. Compliance With Provisions: Any use established in a manufacturing district after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use lawfully established on the effective date hereof
shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance standards established for the district in which such use is
located.
B. Regulation Of Performance Standards: All performance standards shall be governed by the current State and/or Federal Environmental Protection
Agency Regulations and the Occupational Safety Health Act (OSHA). Also, the performance standards shall be governed by the current Fire Protection
District Guidelines and Requirements as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, and any other local governing regulations.
C. Storage Of Hazardous Materials: When hazardous liquids and gases and also toxic matter are allowed to be stored under this Title, then the Fire
District shall be advised in writing as to the conditions, materials and manufacturer's recommendations with regard to firefighting. (Ord. 1979-9, 6-25-
1979)
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
5-8A-1: USES PERMITTED:
The following uses are permitted:
A. Manufacturing type uses:
Advertising displays.
Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
Art needlework and handweaving.
Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning and body and fender repairing, when done within the confines of a structure.
Awnings, venetian blinds.
Bakeries.
Beverages, nonalcoholic; bottling and distributing.
Blacksmith shop.
Books, hand binding and tooling.
Bottling works.
Brushes and brooms.
Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment of public agencies, or public
utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature.
Cameras and other photographic equipment and supplies.
Canning and preserving.
Canvas and canvas products.
Carpet and rug cleaning.
Carting, express hauling or storage yards.
Ceramic products such as pottery and small glazed tile.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments when employing facilities for handling more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds of dry goods per
day.
Clothing.
Contractor or construction shops, such as:
Air conditioning.
Building.
Cement.
Electrical.
Heating and ventilating.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 140/403
Masonry.
Painting.
Plumbing.
Refrigeration.
Roofing.
Cosmetics and toiletries.
Creameries and dairies.
Drugs.
Electrical appliances such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters and television receivers and home movie equipment, but not including electrical
machinery.
Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly such as wire and cable assembly switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries.
Food products, processing and combining of, baking, boiling, canning, cooking, dehydrating, freezing, frying, grinding, mixing and pressing.
Fur goods, not including tanning and dyeing.
Glass products, from previously manufactured glass.
Hosiery.
House trailers, manufacture.
Ice, dry and natural.
Ink mixing and packing and inked ribbons.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research, experimental and testing, provided there is no danger from fire or explosion nor of offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or other objectionable influences.
Laundries.
Leather products, including shoes and machine belting, but not including tanning and dyeing.
Luggage.
Machine shops for tool, die and pattern making.
Meat products.
Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rustproofing and heat treatment.
Metal stamping and extrusion of small products such as costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons and kitchen utensils.
Musical instruments.
Orthopedic and medical appliances such as artificial limbs, braces, supports and stretchers.
Paper products, small; such as envelopes and stationery, bags, paper boxes, tubes and wallpaper printing.
Perfumes and cosmetics.
Pharmaceutical products.
Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw materials.
Precision instruments such as optical, medical and drafting.
Printing and newspaper publishing including engraving and photoengraving.
Products from finished materials; plastic, bone, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, paper, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, precious and semiprecious stones,
rubber, shell or yarn.
Repair of household or office machinery or equipment.
Rubber products, small, and synthetic treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic processing), such as washers, gloves, footwear, bathing
caps and atomizers.
Signs.
Silverware, plate and sterling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 141/403
Soap and detergents, packaging only.
Soldering and welding.
Sporting and athletic equipment such as balls, baskets, cues, gloves, bats, rackets and rods.
Statuary, mannequins, figurines and religious and church art goods, excluding foundry operations.
Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements and other similar equipment on an open lot.
Storage of household goods.
Textiles; spinning, weaving, manufacturing, dyeing, printing, knit goods, yarn, thread and cordage, but not including textile bleaching.
Tool and die shops.
Tools and hardware such as bolts, nuts and screws, doorknobs, drills, hand tools and cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, nonferrous metal
castings and plumbing appliances.
Toys.
Truck, truck-tractor, truck-trailer, car trailer or bus storage yard, when all equipment is in operable condition, but not including a truck or motor freight
terminal.
B. Wholesaling and warehousing uses:
Local cartage express facilities (but not including motor freight terminals).
C. Public and community service uses:
Bus terminals, bus garages, bus lots, street railway terminals or streetcar houses.
Electric substations.
Fire stations.
Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community centers.
Parks and recreation areas.
Police stations.
Public utility electric substations and distribution centers, gas regulation centers and underground gas holder stations.
Sewage treatment plants.
Telephone exchanges.
Water filtration plants.
Water pumping stations.
Water reservoirs.
D. Miscellaneous uses:
Accessory uses.
Radio and television towers. (Ord. 2016-18, 4-25-2016)
5-8A-2: CONDITIONS OF PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:
A. Performance Standards:
1. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance
standards set forth in section 5-8-1 of this chapter.
2. Uses established after the effective date hereof shall conform fully to the performance standards set forth in section 5-8-1 of this chapter for the
district.
B. Enclosure Of Use, Screening Requirements: All business, production, servicing and processing shall take place within completely enclosed buildings
unless otherwise specified. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district, all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 142/403
and storage located elsewhere in this district may be open to the sky but shall be enclosed by solid walls or fences (including solid doors or gates
thereto) at least eight feet (8') high, but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage and suitably landscaped.
However, open off street loading facilities and open off street parking of motor vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity may be unenclosed
throughout the district, except for such screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
C. Nonconforming Uses: Uses established on the effective date hereof and by the provisions continued herein are rendered nonconforming, shall be
permitted to continue, subject to the regulations of chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-5 business district.
Airport or aircraft landing fields.
Auction houses.
Motor freight terminals.
Slaughtering; poultry, rabbits, livestock.
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas.
Theaters, outdoor drive-in. (Ord. 2016-18, 4-25-2016)
5-8A-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
B. Yards:
1. Front Yard: A twenty five foot (25') front yard is required, except for a corner lot or a lot which abuts upon an R district or upon an alley separating
this district from an R district. A corner lot shall provide a front yard setback of not less than fifty feet (50').
2. Side Yards: Two (2) side yards. Each side yard shall be not less in width than ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but not less than fifteen feet (15') in
width, except a side yard adjoining a street which shall be not less than thirty feet (30') wide.
3. Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'), except when a rear lot line adjoins a railroad right of way, including also spur or team track right of
way, a rear yard need not be provided.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not more than eight-tenths (0.8). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8A-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 and subsection 5-7A-6B of this title.
C. Signs: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-3-7 and subsection 5-7A-6D of this title.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this title.
F. Performance Standards: All in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-8-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
ARTICLE B. M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
5-8B-1: USES PERMITTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 143/403
The following uses are permitted:
Any use permitted in the M-1 district.
Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products which conforms to the performance standards
established for this district.
Cement block manufacture.
Fuel sales, no retail sales and no gas station uses.
Fuel sales with storage of fuel oils, gasoline and other flammable products limited to one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) gallons per tank, with the
total storage on a zoning lot not to exceed five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons.
Indoor shooting range (designed and constructed in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the National Rifle Association "Range Source Book"), and
firearms related retail sales.
Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oil in tanks each of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or less capacity, but only after the locations and protective
measures have been approved by local governing officials. (Ord. 2016-18, 4-25-2016)
5-8B-2: CONDITIONS OF PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:
A. Performance Standards: All production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the
performance standards set forth in section 5-8-1 of this chapter.
B. Enclosure Of Use, Screening Requirements: Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district, all business, production, servicing, processing
and storage shall take place or be within completely enclosed buildings; except, that storage of materials or products may be open to the sky, provided
that storage area is enclosed with a solid wall or fence, as required within this title, or as additionally required by the zoning administrator.
However, within such one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district, off street loading facilities and off street parking of motor vehicles under one
and one-half (11/2) ton capacity may be unenclosed, except for such screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the provisions
of chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8B-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the M-1 district.
Asphalt plant.
Cultivation of cannabis ("a cultivation center") as authorized by and regulated under the Illinois compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act1.
Fortune tellers, card readers, psychics and similar establishments, subject to the special provisions set forth in subsection 5-8B-6G of this article.
Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, provided they are contained within completely enclosed buildings or screened by a solid wall or uniformly
painted solid fence at least twelve feet (12') high.
Pollution control facilities as contemplated by and defined in title 8, chapter 7 of this code.
Railroad repair shops, maintenance buildings and switching yards.
Sanitary landfill.
Sexually oriented businesses as defined in section 5-17-3 of this title.
Stone and gravel quarries and crushing, grading, washing and loading equipment and structures, provided the land is redeveloped by the owner in
accordance with a plan of redevelopment approved with the granting of the special use permit and is accompanied by a bond in the amount of the
estimated cost of redevelopment.
Tattoo parlors, body piercing, and similar establishments, subject to the special provisions set forth in subsection 5-8B-6G of this article. (Ord. 2016-18, 4-
25-2016)
5-8B-4: ACCESSORY USES:
All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 144/403
A. Lot Coverage: Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
B. Yards: All yard areas shall be the same as required in the M-1 limited manufacturing district, subsection 5-8A-5B of this chapter.
C. Floor Area Ratio: Not more than eighty five-hundredths (0.85). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-8B-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
B. Access To Public Streets: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in section 5-3-3 of this title.
C. Signs: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in chapter 14 of this title.
D. Landscaping And Screening: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in section 5-3-7 and subsection 5-7A-6D of this title.
E. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this title.
F. Performance Standards: All in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in section 5-8-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
G. Tattoo Parlors, Fortune Tellers, And Similar Establishments: In addition to all other special provisions, site and structure requirements, and other
regulations of this district, the following shall apply to the establishment and maintenance of a tattoo parlor, body piercing and similar establishment,
fortune tellers, card readers, psychics and similar establishments:
1. Setback Requirements: No tattoo parlor, body piercing and similar establishment, fortune teller, card reader, psychic and similar establishment shall
be located within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of any other tattoo parlor, body piercing or similar establishment, fortune teller, card reader, psychic
or similar establishment, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park, including any linear recreational
area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious worship, nor within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of a lot used for
residential purposes.
2. Restrictions On Use: All tattoo or similar parlors or body piercing establishments, and fortune teller, card reader, psychic and similar establishment
shall be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building. No such business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation from
outside the building of the act of tattooing or similar acts, body piercing, fortune telling, card reading or psychic ritual, or the display of any image,
material, or other advertising of such business, whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or any other means.
3. Signage: No tattoo or similar parlors or body piercing establishments, and fortune teller, card reader, psychic and similar establishment shall
advertise by way of billboard, sign boards or sign, within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park, including
any linear recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious worship.
4. Other Regulations: The restrictions set forth in this subsection G shall supersede any other restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of
any ordinance as applied to tattoo or similar parlors, body piercing establishment, and fortune teller, card reader, psychic and similar establishment, if
the terms of the restrictions are in conflict.
5. Amortization: If at the time this subsection G becomes effective, any tattoo or similar parlor or body piercing establishment, fortune teller, card
reader, psychic and similar establishment, exists in a location not permitted by this subsection G or is otherwise not in compliance with this
subsection G, then said establishment shall constitute a legal nonconforming use. However, notwithstanding any other ordinance or section of any
ordinance to the contrary, said use shall come into compliance with the requirements of this subsection G within one year of the effective date of this
subsection G. No tattoo or similar parlor or body piercing establishment, fortune teller, card reader, psychic and similar establishment shall constitute
a legal nonconforming use after one year after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2003-35, 8-11-2003)
ARTICLE C. M-3 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT - PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT (SPECIAL USE)
5-8C-1: PURPOSE:
Planned Unit Development (Special Use) in the General Manufacturing District is intended to encourage the most imaginative and best possible design of
building forms and site planning for tracts of land where unitary plans would best adapt to topographic and other natural features of such site. The
provisions of this Article are designed to establish special procedures for approving development plans for Planned Unit Development districts. (Ord. 1993-
6, 4-26-93)
5-8C-2: PROCEDURE:
All Planned Unit Developments in the M-3 General Manufacturing District Planned Unit Development (Special Use) shall be processed and approved in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 11 of this Title. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-93)
5-8C-3: USES PERMITTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 145/403
The following uses are permitted:
All permitted uses and all special uses in the M-2 General Manufacturing District and the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District. (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-93)
5-8C-4: CONDITIONS OF USE, BULK REGULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise modified or amended pursuant to Planned Unit Development (Special Use) plans and specifications, all of the conditions of use, bulk
regulations and performance standards set forth in Article A and Article B of Chapter 8, M-1 Limited Manufacturing District and M-2 General Manufacturing
District shall apply in the M-3 General Manufacturing District Planned Unit Development (Special Use). (Ord. 1993-6, 4-26-93)
Chapter 9
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
5-9-1: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Any lawfully established use of a building or land that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be
a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
B. Any legal nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use provided there are no physical changes other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
C. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started
within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully
established building.
5-9-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
A. Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a conforming use, such premises
shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been originally designed and constructed for the
prior nonconforming use.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or
whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or
abandoned, be re-established, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district.
C. Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment, and shall
not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
D. A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of this Title now in effect shall be discontinued.
5-9-3: TIME PERIOD FOR TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
The period of time during which the following nonconforming uses of buildings, structures or land may continue or remain shall be limited from the effective
date hereof or amendment hereto, which causes the use to be nonconforming. Every such nonconforming use shall be completely removed from the
premises at the expiration of the period of time specified below:
A. Any nonconforming use of a building or structure having an assessed valuation not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be removed after
two (2) years.
B. All nonconforming advertising devices, such as pennants, flags, movable signs or portable outdoor displays, in any business district shall be removed
after two (2) years.
C. Any nonconforming signs and any and all billboards and outdoor advertising structures shall be removed after ten (10) years.
D. Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved, or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such use,
or where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building, shall be removed after a period of two (2) years.
E. Any nonconforming house trailers shall be removed after a period of ten (10) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 146/403
F. In all residence districts, any use lawfully existing at the effective date hereof, but permitted only in the B-4 and B-5 Districts or the Manufacturing
Districts, and which use is located in a building, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a residential accessory purpose, shall be
entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease operation in accordance with the following amortization schedule:
Descriptions of Use Amortization Period
Uses permitted in the B-4 and B-5 Districts. Fifteen (15) years from effective date hereof.
Uses permitted only in the Manufacturing Districts. Eight (8) years after the effective date hereof.
5-9-4: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
A. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
B. No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law.
2. When the alterations will actually result in elimination of the nonconforming use.
3. When a building is in a residential district containing residential nonconforming uses, it may be altered in any way to improve livability; provided, no
structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
5-9-5: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
A. A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use and is made to conform to
all the regulations of the district in which it is located, except as provided in Section 5-9-7 of this Chapter.
B. No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use, except as provided in Section 5-9-7 of this Chapter.
C. No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries
of the zoning lot as it existed on the effective date hereof, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or on some parcel of land, except as
provided in Section 5-9-7 of this Chapter.
D. A building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards, floor area ratio or any other element of bulk, shall not be altered or expanded in
any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in which it is located,
except as provided in Section 5-9-7 of this Chapter.
5-9-6: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fiftypercent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based upon
prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at
the time of such partial destruction. In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of six (6) months
from the date of damage or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.
5-9-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Whenever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, but is nonconforming
only in the particular manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 5-9-3 and 5-9-4 of this
Chapter.
A. In any residence district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be altered
in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
B. In any residence district where a use permitted in the B-1 District occupies ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a corner lot.
C. In any business or manufacturing district where the use is less distant from a residence district than that specified in the regulations for the district in
which it is located.
D. In any district where an established building, structure or use is nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the following:
1. Floor area ratio;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 147/403
2. Lot area per dwelling unit;
3. Yards; front, side, rear or transitional;
4. Off-street parking and loading;
5. Lot area;
6. Building height;
7. Gross floor area. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
Chapter 10
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
5-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public roads, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put.
5-10-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
A. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this Title shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading facilities shall
be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date hereof, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to
completion, parking and loading facilities as required hereunder need not be provided.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area seating
capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall
be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
However, no building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof shall be required to provide such
additional parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregateincrease in units of measurement shall equal not less than fifteen percent (15%)
of the units of measurement existing upon the effective date hereof, in which event parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided
for the total increase.
B. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required
for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading facilities are
mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the
parking and loading provisions of this Title.
5-10-3: GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING PROVISIONS:
A. Existing Parking and Loading Facilities Accessory: Off-street parking or loading which are located on the same lot as the building or use served and
which were in existence on the effective date hereof or were provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if
already less than, shall not further be reduced below, the requirements of this Title for a similar new building or use.
B. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities: Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided, that all regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and operation
of such facilities are adhered to.
C. Damage or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use, as restricted by Chapter 9 of this Title, which is in existence on
the effective date hereof, which subsequent hereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished
or repaired, off-street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored
or continued in operation. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by
this Title for equivalent new uses in construction.
D. Control of Off-Site Parking Facilities: Where required parking facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served
by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which
the parking facilities are necessary. No such off-site parking facilities shall be authorized and no zoning certificate shall be issued where the plans call
for the parking facilities other than on the same zoning lot until theBoard of Zoning appeals has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made
findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and the site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the
off site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use or building.
E. Submission Of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit, or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this title. (Ord.
1979-7, 6-25-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 148/403
5-10-4: PARKING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
5-10-4-1: USE OF PARKING FACILITIES:
Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and development in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of this section shall
be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guests
of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the parking and storage of
commercial vehicles exceeding two (2) ton capacity or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of
business or manufacturing establishments. (Ord. 2006-39, 5-8-2006)
5-10-4-2: JOINT PARKING FACILITIES:
Off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning district in which separate
parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted; provided, that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum
of the separate requirements for each use. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-10-4-3: SIZE AND NUMBER OF SPACES:
A. Size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least eighteen feet (18') in length, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
B. Number Of Spaces:
1. Computation: When determination of the number of off streetparking spaces required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
2. Maximum Number Of Open Accessory Spaces: The total number of accessory parking spaces, open to the sky, provided for one-family or two-family
dwellings shall not exceed that required by this title for such use or for any equivalent new use by more than fifty percent (50%) or four (4) spaces,
per zoning lot, whichever number is greater. Multiple-family dwellings shall not exceed that required by this title by more than fifty percent (50%).
(Ord. 2006-39, 5-8-2006)
5-10-4-4: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS:
Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of
vehicular access to such parking space, unless the parking facilities are serviced by a parking attendant. All off street parking facilities shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. No driveway across public
property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-10-4-5: LOCATIONS:
A. In Yards: Off street parking spaces may be located in any yards and then only on established, concrete or bituminous concrete paved parking areas or
drives. Parking on lawns or landscaped areas of any yard is strictly prohibited.
1. Parking spaces along city streets, either within the paved roadway (between curbs) or unpaved parkway are not allowed to be used in meeting the
required number of off street parking facilities in any residential zoning district.
B. Accessory Parking Facilities: The location of off street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances
specified shall be walking distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served:
1. For Uses In A Residence District: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces
accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or directly across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the use
served, but in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such use.
2. For Uses In Business And Manufacturing Districts: Allrequired parking spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the use served, except for
spaces accessory to dwelling units (except those located in a transient hotel) which shall be within three hundred feet (300') of the use served.
However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or manufacturing district shall be located in a residence district, unless authorized by
the board of appeals in accordance with this title. (Ord. 2006-39, 5-8-2006)
5-10-4-6: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residence district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be
open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a special use.
B. Surfacing: All open off street parking areas shall be improved with at least a pavement meeting state of Illinois A-3 or equivalent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 149/403
C. Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each side
adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge not
less than five feet (5') nor more than seven feet (7') in height. Landscaping requirements under the business section of this title shall also apply where
required.
D. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public highways in such a way as
not to create a nuisance.
E. Signs: Directional and regulatory signs only are permitted on parking areas.
F. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind or sale of gasoline and motor oil shall be permitted in conjunction with accessory off street
parking facilities provided in a residence district. (Ord. 2006-39, 5-8-2006)
5-10-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For the following uses, accessory off street parking spaces shall be provided as required hereunder. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall
be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 1979, 6-25-1979)
A.
Residential uses, as follows:
Apartment hotel 1 parking space for each lodging room. Maximum 50 percent additional open
spaces.
Hotels, transient 1 parking space for each dwelling unit, and 1 parking space for each lodging
room.
Lodging houses 1 parking space for each lodging room, plus 1 space for the owner or manager.
Multiple-family dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Maximum 50 percent additional open
spaces.
One-family dwellings and duplex dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Maximum of 4 additional open spaces.
Private clubs and lodges (with sleeping facilities for guests) 1 parking space for each lodging room plus parking spaces equal in number to
10 percent of the capacity in persons (exclusive of lodging room capacity of
such club or lodge).
Tourist courts, tourist homes, motels and motor hotels 1 parking space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
(Ord. 2006-39, 5-8-2006)
B.
Retail and service uses, as follows:
Automobile laundry 20 parking spaces for each wash rack, plus 1 additional space for each 4
employees.
Bowling alleys 3 parking spaces for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be
required herein for affiliated uses, bars, restaurants and the like.
Establishments dispensing food, beverages for consumption
on the premises
1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products
1 parking space for each employee, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle used
in the conduct of the enterprise.
Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or
furniture repair shops
1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales 1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
Offices; business, professional and government 1 parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 150/403
Retail stores and banks 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. Drive-in banks shall
provide 3 parking spaces per teller window.
Theaters (indoor) 1 parking space for each 3 seats.
Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors 12 parking spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus 1 parking space for each
funeral vehicle kept on the premises, and 1 parking space for each employee.
Warehouses and storage buildings 1 parking space for each employee, plus 1 space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the enterprise.
Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and
storage buildings other than accessory)
1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
(Ord. 1979, 6-25-1979)
C.
Community service uses, as follows:
Church, school, college and other institutional auditoriums 1 parking space for each 6 seats. Adequate space shall also be provided for
buses used in connection with the activities of the institutions, and all loading
and unloading of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
Colleges, universities and business, professional and trade
schools
1 parking space for each employee and 1 parking space for each 4 students,
based on the maximum number of students attending classes on the premises
at any 1 time during any 24 hour period.
Health centers, government operated 3 parking spaces for each staff and visiting doctor.
Hospitals 1 parking space for each 2 hospital beds, plus 1 parking space for each 2
employees (other than staff doctors), plus 1 parking space for each doctor
assigned to the staff.
Libraries, art galleries, and museums; public or private 4 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Exception: No specific number of parking spaces shall be required for the
following designated areas: That part of Plano bounded on the south by the
Burlington-Santa Fe Railroad right of way, on the east by James Street, on the
north by North Street, and on the west by West Street. Provisions for parking
shall be considered at the time of site plan review as required by this zoning
ordinance.
Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community
centers
1 parking space for each employee, plus spaces adequate in number, as
determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the visiting public.
Public utility and public service uses 1 parking space for each employee, plus spaces adequate in number as
determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the public.
Schools; nursery, elementary and high
1 parking space for each employee, plus space adequate in number, as
determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the public.
(Ord. 1979, 6-25-1979; amd. Ord. 2000-9, 3-27-2000)
D.
Places of assembly, as follows:
Stadiums, arenas, auditoriums, (other than church, college or
institutional school), convention halls, dance halls, exhibition
halls, skating rinks and other similar places of assembly
Parking spaces equal in number to 25 percent of the capacity in persons shall
be provided.
E.
Miscellaneous uses, as follows:
Airports or aircraft landing fields, heliports; convents and
monasteries; crematories and mausoleums; outdoor
amusement establishments (fairgrounds, permanent carnivals,
kiddie parks and other similar amusement centers); penal and
correctional institutions; rectories and parish house; and
swimming pools
Parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number, as determined by the
zoning administrator, to serve persons employed or residing on the premises as
well as the visiting public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 151/403
Fraternities, sororities and dormitories 1 parking space for each 5 active members, plus 1 parking space for each
employee.
Institutions for the care of the insane and feeble minded 1 parking space for each staff doctor, plus space adequate in number, as
determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the visiting public.
Mixed uses When 2 or more uses are located on the same zoning lot or within the same
building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the separate
requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space or portion
thereof shall serve as a required space for more than 1 use unless otherwise
authorized by the board of appeals in accordance with chapter 12 of this title.
Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests)
Parking spaces equal in number to 20 percent of the capacity in persons shall
be provided.
Rest homes or nursing homes 1 parking space for each 4 beds, plus 1 parking space for each employee, and
1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
Sanitariums, convalescent homes or institutions for the aged or
for children
1 parking space for each 4 beds, plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees
(other than staff doctors), plus 1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the
staff.
Other uses For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking requirements, parking
spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for the most similar
listed use, or as determined by the zoning administrator.
(Ord. 1979, 6-25-1979)
5-10-6: OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) ton capacity
shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls, or any combination thereof, not
less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the nearest point of intersection of any
two (2) streets.
B. Number And Size:
1. Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least twenty five feet (25') in length exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
2. For special uses other than prescribed hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such use, as determined by the zoning
administrator, shall be provided.
C. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements.
D. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with not
less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all weather dustless material.
E. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residence or business districts.
F. Separate Loading Berths: Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any
off street parkingfacilities or portions thereof.
G. Receiving Facilities: Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the
same lot which is accessible by motor vehicles. (Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-1979)
5-10-7: SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
For the uses listed in the following table, off-street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area of building or portions hereof devoted to
such uses in the amounts shown herein.
LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Required Number
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 152/403
Use Gross Floor Area In
Square Feet
And Minimum
Horizontal
Dimensions Of
Berths
A. Hospitals, sanitariums and other institutional uses 10,000 to 200,000 1 - (10' x 25')
B. Hotels, clubs and lodges, except as set forth in subsection E For each additional
200,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - additional
(10' x 25')
C. Hotels clubs and lodges, when containing any of the following: retail shops, convention halls,
auditoriums, exhibitions halls, or business or professional offices (other than accessory)
10,000 to 20,000
20,000 to 150,000
For each additional
150,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - (10' x 50')
1 - additional
(10' x 50')
D. Retail Stores 5,000 to 10,000 1 - (10' x 25')
E. Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises 10,000 to 20,000
20,000 to 25,000
25,000 to 40,000
1 - (10' x 25')
2 - (10' x 25'
each)
2 - (10' x 50'
each)
F. Motor vehicle and machinery sales 40,000 to 100,000 3 - (10' x 50'
each)
G. Wholesale establishments, (but not including warehouse and storage buildings other than
accessory)
For each additional
200,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - additional
(10' x 50')
H. Auditoriums, convention halls, exhibition halls, sports arenas, stadiums 10,000 to 20,000
20,000 to 100,000
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - (10' x 50')
I. Bowling Alleys For each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - additional
(10' x 50')
J. Banks and offices; business, professional and governmental 10,000 to 100,000
For each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof to 500,000
For each additional
500,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - additional
(10' x 25')
1 - additional
(10' x 25')
K. Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products
5,000 to 10,000
10,000 to 40,000
40,000 to 100,000
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - (10' x 50')
1 - (10' x 50'
each)
L. Warehouses and storage buildings For each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - additional
(10' x 50')
M. Theaters 8,000 to 25,000
For each additional
50,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - additional
(10' x 25')
N. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors 8,000 to 100,000
For each additional
100,000 or fraction
thereof
1 - (10' x 25')
1 - additional
(10' x 25')
(Ord. 1979-7, 6-25-79)
Chapter 11
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
5-11-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit developments are intended to encourage the most imaginative and best possible design of building forms and site planning for tracts of land
where unitary plans would best adapt to topographic and other natural features of such sites. Under this procedure, well-planned residential, industrial,
commercial and other types of land use, individually or in combination, may be developed with increased design flexibility. Planned unit developments are
special uses under this Chapter. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Planned unit developments must be environmentally compatible. They should have a more beneficial effect upon the health, safety and general welfare
of the people of the City and, particularly, in the immediate surroundings, than would developments built in conformity with standard district regulations.
B. Site of planned unit developments shall be of sufficient size to accommodate self-contained developments and to create their own character.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 153/403
C. Approved planned unit developments shall be delineated and designated by number on the Zoning District Map. A file, available for inspection by the
public, shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator for each planned unit development so designated. The file shall contain a record of the
approved development plan and all exceptions authorized therein.
Planned unit developments are of such substantially different character from other special uses that the additionalstandards contained in this Chapter
are established to guard against their use solely as a means of intensifying the use of the land. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES:
5-11-3-1: PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
A. The pre-application conference shall be held with a pre-application committee designated by the Mayor. At such conference the applicant shall provide
information as to the location of the proposed planned unit development; the uses, and approximate area of use category; a list of any and all
exceptions to the Subdivision1 and Zoning Ordinances of the City, and any other data reasonably necessary to clearly explain the planned unit
development.
B. The committee shall review and consider the proposal as to its compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the goals and policies for planning of the
City and advise the applicant on the information, documents, exhibits, drawings and limitations on the proposal that should be included in the
application to the City for a special use permit for planned unit development. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-3-2: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A. Letter Requesting Special Use Permit for Planned Unit Development: The applicant shall request the special use permit, by application to the City
requesting the matter be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission for a preliminary discussion of the proposed
planned unit development, and the Plan Commission shall consider the proposed planned unit development at such meeting, which may be continued
from time to time.
B. Required Information and Exhibits: The applicant shall present such exhibits and written information as may be necessary to fully acquaint the Plan
Commission with the proposed development which should include, but not necessarily be limited to the following:
1. A tentative sketch plan, which may be in freehand sketch form, showing the location and extent of the types of land uses proposed.
2. The existing topography at five foot (5') contour intervals which may be taken from USGS information.
3. Existing streets surrounding the subject property.
4. Existing utilities including storm drainage facilities.
5. The following shall be provided by either graphic exhibits or written statement:
a. The density of residential uses and the number of dwelling units by type.
b. The ancillary and nonresidential uses to be provided in a residential planned unit development.
c. The off-street parking and other service facilities proposed.
d. The exceptions or variations to the zoning or subdivision requirements being requested as part of the planned unit development petition.
C. Decisions by Plan Commission: Within thirty (30) days after final adjournment of the meeting, the Plan Commission shall submit to the City Council (and
to the Zoning Board of Appeals if variations are requested) a report in writing containing its recommendations. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-3-3: FORMAL PETITION FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A. Filing of Petition:
1. The formal petition for a planned unit development shall be addressed to the City Council and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Thirty (30) copies of
the petition together with the supporting documents and exhibits hereinafter provided for shall be filed with the City Clerk simultaneously with the
filing of the formal petition.
2. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the petition together with the supporting documents and exhibits to each member of the City Council, the City
Attorney, the Zoning Administrator and to each member of the Plan Commission and, if any variation or variations are requested, to each member of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Notice of Application or Petition: Notice of the filing of the petition for a planned unit development shall be given to the owners of adjacent real estate as
provided in Section 5-12-7.
C. Required Information and Exhibits: The formal petition shall contain, in addition to all other requirements, the following:
1. A site plan of the planned unit development. This plan will be at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundredfeet (1" = 100') which shall
show all proposed streets (public and private), street classifications, rights of way, pavement widths of streets and driveways, all principal and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 154/403
accessory buildings and their use, lot sizes, building lines, easements for utility services, off-street parking service areas, open space, location of
trash receptacles, recreation facilities and any other information necessary to clearly show the proposed elements of the planned unit development.
2. Preliminary architectural plans for all residential buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to show the basic planning, the number of units per
building and the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit.
Preliminary architectural plans are not required for business or other nonresidential buildings at the time of this application, but must be submitted
to the Plan Commission for its approval prior to filing an application for a building permit.
3. A topographic survey with one foot (1') contour intervals and boundary survey of the subject area, prepared and certified by a registered Illinois
surveyor.
4. A rendered plan of the planned unit development area showing in contrasting colors, or by other means, the respective location of all categories of
land use.
5. A map of the general area showing the location of the planned unit development site and its relations to the existing roads and streets and use
districts within the immediately adjacent and surrounding areas.
6. Preliminary plans and outline specifications of the following improvements:
a. Roads, streets and alleys, including classifications, width of rights of way, widths of paved surfaces and construction details.
b. Sidewalks, including widths of paved surfaces and construction details.
c. Sanitary and storm sewer system.
d. Water supply system.
e. Street lighting and public area lighting system.
f. Recommended installations for electric, gas and telephone facilities and distribution.
g. Sequence of phases or stages of development of the planned development.
h. A general landscape planting plan shall be prepared by alandscape architect and shall meet the approval of the Plan Commission.
7. Estimates of cost of installation of all proposed improvements, confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
8. Petitioner's proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions to be established as a part of the planned unit development.
D. Hearing: The City Clerk shall set a hearing date which shall be not less than fifteen (15) or more than thirty (30) days after the filing of the petitions, and
shall cause notice of the hearing to be published at least once, no more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before said hearing date, in
one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City. Written notice shall be given by the applicant to all property owners as required pursuant to
Section 5-12-7.
E. Action by Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals: The petition shall be heard and reviewed by the Plan Commission (and where variations are
requested, by the Zoning Board of Appeals) and the report shall be submitted to the City Council. The report of the findings and recommendations shall
be accompanied by such plats, exhibits and agreements as shall have been presented by the petitioner, each identified for reference by letter or
number, together with any suggested changes therein. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-3-4: SPECIAL USE GRANTED; PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The City Council may grant a special use for a planned unit development which shall be by specific ordinance and which shall contain or to which shall be
appended all terms and conditions of the special use permit, including covenants and agreements, guarantees, performance bonds, plats and the like.
(Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-4: STANDARDS FOR GRANTING PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
No planned unit development shall be authorized by the City Council unless the Plan Commission shall find and recommend, in addition to those
standards established herein for special uses, that the following standards will be met:
A. The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the purpose of the
development.
B. The uses permitted in such development are not of such nature or so located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect upon the
surrounding neighborhood.
C. That any industrial park areas established in the plannedunit development conform to all requirements therefor as set forth elsewhere in this Title.
D. That all minimum requirements pertaining to commercial, residential, institutional or other uses established in the planned unit development shall be
subject to the requirements for each individual classification as established elsewhere in this Title, except as may be specifically varied in the ordinance
granting and establishing a planned unit development use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 155/403
E. When private streets and common driveways are made a part of the planned unit development or private common open space or recreation facilities
are provided, the applicant shall submit as part of the application, the method and arrangement whereby these private facilities shall be operated and
maintained. Such arrangements for operating and maintaining private facilities shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-
94)
5-11-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Construction of Improvements: The petitioner shall construct and install the required improvements in accordance with the City subdivision regulations2.
B. Street Classification and Specifications: Street classifications, definitions and specifications shall be in accordance with the regulations pertaining to
same as established in the subdivision regulations3 and the Comprehensive Plan of the City, as may be amended from time to time, as may be
modified by the special use permit. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-6: RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
For planned unit developments located in one or more residence districts, exceptions may be made in the regulations of such districts, as follows:
A. Use Regulations:
1. In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 Districts, uses listed as permitted uses are allowed, and single-family attached, single-family semi-detached
and multiple-family dwellings may be allowed.
2. Uses listed as permitted uses in the R-7 District are allowed, and uses listed as permitted uses in the B-1 District may be allowed.
3. Uses listed as special uses in the zoning district in which the development is located may be allowed.
4. In developments containing over fifty (50) dwelling units, uses specifically listed as permitted and special uses in the B-1 Office Business District may
be allowed provided, that such uses and accessory uses shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the development.
B. Site and Structure Requirements:
1. Gross Density Premiums: The maximum gross densities for residential planned unit developments may be increased up to a maximum of fifteen
percent (15%) in accordance with and when the development includes one or more of the following:
a. Is adjacent to, or across from, a public or permanent open space which is not less than ten (10) acres in area with a depth perpendicular to a lot
line of the planned unit development of not less than three hundred feet (300').
b. For the dedication of public recreational and educational sites recommended in the Comprehensive Plan, equal to the number of dwelling units
that would otherwise have been permitted upon lands so dedicated.
c. For the provisions of unique design features which require unusually high development costs and which tend to achieve an especially attractive
and stable development, as determined by the Plan Commission.
d. In the R-7 District, for the provision of permanent open space at grade, in addition to required yards, a percentage of the site devoted to such use.
2. Yards: Yard requirements may be varied or waived; except along the perimeter of the development.
C. Signs: In accordance with the regulations set forth in Section 5-6-1 of this Title.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities: In accordance with regulations set forth in Chapter 10 of this Title. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-7: BUSINESS PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
For planned unit developments located in one or more business districts, exceptions may be made in the regulations of such districts, as follows:
A. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted and Special Uses: Uses listed as permitted and special uses in the business districts are allowed.
2. Accessory Uses: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-3-5 of this Title.
B. Gross Density: In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, not more than twelve (12) dwelling units per gross acre; except that an efficiency unit shall be counted as
sixty seven-hundredths (0.67) of a dwelling unit, and a lodging room as five-tenths (0.5) of a dwelling unit.
C. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Chapter 10 of this Title.
D. Access to Public Streets: All in accordance with
regulations set forth in Section 5-3-3 and subsection 5-7A-6B of this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 156/403
E. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-7-1 of this Title.
F. Landscaping and Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsections 5-3-7A and 5-7A-6D and Section 5-11-3 of this Title.
G. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in Section 5-8-1 of this Title.
H. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this Title. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-11-8: INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
For planned unit developments located in one or more industrial districts, exceptions may be made in the regulations of such districts, as follows:
A. Use Regulations:
1. Permitted and Special Uses: Uses listed as permitted and special uses in the commercial and manufacturing districts shall be allowed.
2. Accessory Uses: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-3-5 of this Title.
B. Site and Structure Requirements:
1. Yards: Yard requirements may be waived, except along the exterior boundaries of the development.
2. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio requirements of the district are applicable to the entire planned unit development and not to specific uses which
may be located within theplanned development. For this purpose, the net site area shall be used in the computation.
C. Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Chapter 10 of this Title.
D. Access to Public Streets: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-3-3 and subsection 5-7A-6B of this Title.
E. Signs: All in accordance with regulations set forth in Section 5-8-2 of this Title.
F. Landscaping and Screening: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsections 5-3-7A and 5-7A-6D and Section 5-11-3 of this Title.
G. Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the performance standards established and set forth in Section 5-8-1 of this Title.
H. Outdoor Storage: All in accordance with regulations set forth in subsection 5-7A-6E of this Title. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
Chapter 12
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5-12-1: ENFORCEMENT1:
The city building and zoning administrator/inspector, hereinafter referred to as the "officer", is designated as the zoning officer of the city to be responsible
for enforcing this zoning title. Said officer shall have the power and shall see that the provisions of this title are properly enforced. However, it shall also be
the duty of all officers, citizens and employees of the city, particularly of all members of the police and fire departments, to assist the building and zoning
administrator/inspector by reporting to him any new construction, reconstruction, improved land uses or upon any seeming violation. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-
1994)
5-12-2: PLAN COMMISSION2:
The plan commission of the city shall have the authority, responsibility and duties set forth as follows:
A. To hear and report findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council on all applications for amendments and special use permits in the
manner prescribed by standards and other regulations set forth herein.
B. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this title, and to make reports of its recommendations to the mayor and city
council not less frequentlythan once each year.
C. To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 157/403
D. Nothing herein shall limit the authority, responsibilities and/or duties of the plan commission conferred on it by statute and by the provisions of section 2-
1-5 of this code. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
5-12-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
In addition to the authority, responsibilities and duties conferred on it pursuant to the provisions of title 2, chapter 2 of this code, the zoning board of
appeals shall have authority, responsibilities and duties set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
5-12-4: APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
Appeals to the zoning board of appeals shall be initiated by a letter or petition addressed to the zoning board of appeals setting forth specifically the matter
or matters appealed from and the relief requested. Such letter or petition shall be filed with the city clerk. An appeal shall be processed and shall be
submitted to public hearing in accordance with the same procedures as set forth herein for the processing of variations3. The zoning board of appeals
shall, within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing or public hearings on the appeal, make its recommendations to the city council in
writing. The city council shall act upon such appeal within a reasonable time. The decision of the city council shall constitute a final appealable
administrative ruling. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
5-12-5: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged or moved until a building permit shall have been applied for, in writing, and issued by
the Officer. Said permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of erection, reconstruction, enlargement or
moving.
B. Before a permit is issued for the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building or structure or use of premises, the plans and
intended use shall indicate conformity in all respects to the provisions of this Title.
C. Every application for a building permit submitted to the Officer shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale,showing the lot and the building site
and the location of existing building on the lot, accurate dimension of the lot yards and building or buildings, together with locations and uses, together
with such other information as may be necessary to the enforcement of this Title.
D. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals,
convenience or the general welfare. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-12-6: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificate Required: A certificate of occupancy to be issued by the Officer shall be required for any of the following, except buildings incidental to
agricultural operations other than residences:
1. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged.
2. Change in use of an existing building.
3. Occupancy and use of vacant land except for the raising of crops.
4. Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification except for the raising of crops.
5. Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefor shall have been issued.
B. Applications for Certificates, Action by City:
1. New or Existing Buildings: Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which has been enlarged
shall be made at the same time as the application for the zoning permit for such building. Said certificate shall be acted upon within three (3) days
after a written request for the same has been made to the Officer after the erection or enlargement of such building or part thereof has been
completed in conformance with the provisions of this Title.
2. Land Uses, Changes in Use: Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or of a
building, or for a change in the nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the Officer. If the proposed use is in conformity with the
provisions of this Title, the certificate of occupancy therefor shall be issued within three (3) days after the application for the same has been made.
C. Temporary Certificate: Pending the issuance of such acertificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Officer for a period of not
more than six (6) months during the completion of the construction of the building or of alterations which are required under the terms of any law or
ordinance. Such temporary certificate may be renewed, but it shall not be construed in any way to alter the respective rights, duties or obligations of the
owner or of the City relating to the use or occupancy of the land or building, or any other matter covered by this Title, and such temporary certificates
shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants.
D. Statement of Compliance: Each certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of
this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 158/403
E. Record of Certificates: A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Officer and a copy shall be forwarded, on request,
to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-12-7: APPLICATION FOR ANNEXATION, ZONING, VARIATION OR SPECIAL USE; NOTICES:
A. Filing: All applications for annexation, zoning and/or variations and special use, to be considered at the monthly meeting of the plan commission or to be
considered at a public hearing before the zoning board of appeals, and to be thereafter considered by the city council shall be filed with the city clerk
not later than the fifteenth day of the month preceding the month during which the applicant desires to have the application considered by the plan
commission and/or the zoning board of appeals.
B. Notices:
1. Notice To Be Mailed: For all applications certified public notice shall be mailed by the applicant. Said notices shall be mailed after a public hearing
date has been scheduled by the city clerk to be held before the planning commission/zoning board of appeals. The notices shall be mailed to all
owners of record within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location in which the property is located, and to owners or occupants of
other properties which may be affected as determined by the planning commission. The owners of record within the two hundred fifty foot (250')
requirement shall be determined by consulting the tax assessor's rolls of the township or the county in which the property is located, provided the
number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty foot (250')
requirement. The notice shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:
a. Common description of property.
b. Requested action.
c. Date, time and place of hearing.
d. Reference to building, planning, and zoning department of the city of Plano for further information, including telephone number of building,
planning, and zoning department. The notice shall be mailed not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such
hearing. The notice shall be sent by regular mail, properly addressed as shown on the assessor's rolls and with sufficient postage affixed thereto,
and shall be attested to by means of a certificate of mailing and an affidavit of mailing which shall include a copy of the notice and a complete list
of names, addresses and tax parcel numbers of said owners of record required to be mailed the notice.
The certificate of mailing and the affidavit of mailing with its attachments shall be submitted to the city clerk prior to the hearing date and shall be
made part of the hearing record.
In connection with the requirements of this section, the following forms and instructions are on file with the city clerk:
(1) Form for certified public notice.
(2) Instructions for determining scope of two hundred fifty foot (250') distance.
(3) Form for owners of record and tax parcel number listing.
(4) Affidavit form for mailing.
(5) Certificate of mailing form.
2. Posting Of Sign: For all rezoning petitions a sign provided by the city clerk shall be posted by the petitioner and/or property owner. The sign shall be
posted after a public hearing date has been scheduled by the city clerk to be held before the planning commission. The sign shall be at least two feet
(2') in height and four feet (4') in length and shall be posted not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than ten (10) days in advance of the public
hearing. The sign or signs shall be posted so that at least one sign is clearly readable from all adjacent roadways. The sign shall contain the
following information:
a. Requested action.
b. Date, time and place of public hearing.
c. Reference to building, planning, and zoning department of the city of Plano for further information, including telephone number of building,
planning, and zoning department.
The sign shall not be removed until the public hearingbefore the planning commission has been completed unless otherwise directed by the
planning commission or city council. This section is intended to be a directive, and any failure to comply with the requirements hereof shall not
deprive the planning commission or city council of jurisdiction to pass any amendment to this section, nor shall any defect render invalid any
proceedings held in furtherance of any such amendment.
The petitioner and/or property owner shall also file with the city clerk no later than ten (10) days before the public hearing date, an affidavit
verifying who posted the sign and the date and time of its posting, and including a location map showing where said sign was posted on the
property and a photograph of said sign after it was erected. In connection with the requirements of this section, the following forms and instructions
are on file with the city clerk:
a. Instructions for the posting of the sign.
b. Affidavit form for posting of sign.
3. Publications: The city clerk shall cause a notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city of Plano not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing.
C. Complete Application: No application will be processed by the city clerk and forwarded to the plan commission or the zoning board of appeals unless
and until all documentation, including mapping, required to be submitted with the application has been received by the city clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 159/403
D. Annexations: All applications for annexation shall be accompanied by an annexation map prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor showing the
existing city limits and containing an accurate map of the property to be annexed accompanied by the exact legal description thereof and the acreage
thereof. Said map shall, where feasible, be contained on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") paper.
E. Natural Resource Inventory: Prior to or simultaneously with the filing of an application for annexation, the applicant shall request from the Kendall
County soil and water conservation district a natural resource inventory of the subject real estate. No application for annexation will be heard by the
plan commission, the zoning board of appeals or the city council until the city has received the natural resource inventory.
F. Compliance: Failure of the applicant to comply with the guidelines contained in this section shall result in delays in the processing of the application for
annexation, zoning and/or variation or special use.
G. Meetings: The petitioner, or his representative, shall attendall pertinent meetings to present the petition, and failure to attend may result in the delay of
any processing of the application or petition. (Ord. 2006-32, 4-24-2006)
5-12-8: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals, after a public hearing, may determine and vary the regulations of this title in harmony with their general purpose
and intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the board of appeals makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards
hereinafter prescribed, and further finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this title.
B. Application For Variation: An application for a variation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, and copies thereof delivered to the zoning board of
appeals, the zoning officer and the city council. The application shall contain such information as the zoning board of appeals may from time to time, by
rule, require. At a minimum, such application shall contain the following information:
1. Ownership.
2. Existing zoning of property.
3. Zoning of adjacent and contiguous property.
4. Proposed variation.
5. A written explanation of the need for the variation.
6. The legal description and the common address of the subject property, including permanent index number assigned by the taxing authorities.
7. A current plat of survey prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor showing the location of all lot lines, utility easements, existing structures,
including fences, and the location of pavement.
C. Notice Of Application Or Petition: Notice of the application or petition shall be given in accordance with the provisions of section 5-12-7 of this chapter.
D. Processing Of Application:
1. Submittal To Board: All variations on which the zoning board of appeals may act shall be submitted to the zoning board of appeals and acted on in
the following manner: The zoning board of appeals shall publish notice of a public hearing on such application for variation, stating the time and
place and the purpose of the hearing. Said notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing, but not more thanthirty (30)
days, in a paper of general circulation in the city. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the city clerk to the petitioner and to the owners of
record of real estate situated within two hundred feet (200') of the real estate sought to be affected by the application or petition. The hearing may be
adjourned and continued from time to time upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the zoning board of appeals present at the
hearing. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
2. Decision By Zoning Board Of Appeals: The zoning board of appeals shall, within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing or
hearings, make its recommendations to the city council in writing. The concurring vote of a majority of the then duly appointed and acting members of
the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to recommend the granting of a variation to the city council. (Ord. 2000-24, 9-25-2000)
3. Action Upon Petition: The city council shall act upon such petition for variation within a reasonable time.
E. Standards For Variations:
1. The zoning board of appeals shall not recommend to the city council variation of this title, unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case that the standards for hardships set forth in the Illinois municipal code4 are complied with and the following:
a. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
b. The conditions upon which the petition for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
c. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this title and has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property.
d. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 160/403
e. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or substantially increase the congestion in the public
streets, or increase the danger to the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
2. The zoning board of appeals may recommend such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards established in this subsection, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood
and to better carry out the general intent of this title.
F. Permitted Variations: Variations from the regulations of this title may be recommended by the zoning board of appeals to the city council only in
accordance with the standards established in subsection E of this section and, absent exceptional circumstances consistent with the purpose and
intent of this title and this code, in the following instances:
1. To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or setback required by the applicable regulations, but by not more than twenty five percent (25%).
2. To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area or widths of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the
respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than ninety percent (90%) of the required area and width. The percentage set forth in this
subsection is not to be reduced by any other percentage for minimum lot width and area set forth in this Title.
3. To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial use of such facility by
each use does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week.
4. To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by no more than one parking space or loading space, or twenty percent
(20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater.
5. To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use
served.
6. To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the gross area of any sign.
7. To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations.
8. To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this subsection when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the effective
date hereof, is, by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental domain proceeding reduced in size so that
the remainder of said lot of record or zoning lot or structure on said lot does not conform with one or more of the regulations of the district in which
said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located.
G. Other Variations: Variations other than those listed may be granted by the City Council, but only after a public hearing as set forth herein for an
authorized variation. The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the elected members of the City Council shall be necessary to grant the variation. (Ord.
1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-12-9: SPECIAL USES:
A. Special Use Categories: The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based upon the division of the City into districts, within which districts
the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses on neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
Such special uses fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact
upon neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Initiation of Special Use: Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application to use such land for one or more of the
special uses provided for in this Title in the zoning district in which the land is situated.
C. Application for Special Use: An application for a special use or expansion of a special use shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by
such plans or data as prescribed by the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals from time to time. At a minimum, such application shall
contain the following information:
1. Ownership.
2. Existing zoning of property.
3. Zoning of adjacent and contiguous property.
4. Proposed special use.
5. A written explanation of the need for the special use.
6. The legal description and the common address of the subject property, including permanent index number assigned by the taxing authorities.
7. A current plat of survey prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor showing the location of all lot lines, utility easements, existing structures,
including fences, and the location of payment.
8. Site plan containing all information deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission for complete review of the application for special use.
D. Notice of Application or Petition: Notice of the application or petition shall be given in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-12-7.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 161/403
E. Processing of Application:
1. Upon receipt of the application referred to herein, the Plan Commission shall hold at least one public hearing. At least fifteen (15) days in advance of
such hearing, but not more than thirty (30) days, notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the petitioner and to the owners of record of real estate situated
within two hundred feet (200') of the real estate sought to be affected by the application or petition. The hearing may be adjourned and continued
from time to time upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Plan Commission present at the hearing.
2. For each application for a special use, the Plan Commission shall report to the City Council its findings and recommendations, including the
stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed necessary for the protection of
the public interest. The Plan Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing or hearings, make its recommendations to
the City Council in writing.
3. The City Council may grant or deny any application for a special use; provided, however, that in the event of written protest against any proposed
special use, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage adjacent thereto, or across an alley, or directly
opposite therefrom, such special use shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the City Council.
F. Standards for Special Use: No special use shall be recommended by the Plan Commission unless the Plan Commission shall find:
1. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare.
2. That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
3. That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
4. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
6. That the special use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may in each instance be modified by the City Council pursuant to the recommendations of the Plan Commission. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-12-10: AMENDMENTS:
A. Initiation: Amendments may be proposed by the Mayor and City Council, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals or any property owner.
B. Processing Application Generally:
1. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data, and such other
information as specified by the Plan Commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed amendments will conform to the standards set forth herein. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the City Council to the Plan
Commission with the request to hold a public hearing. Copies thereof shall also be forwarded to the Plan Commission which shall consider such
application at its next regular meeting and forward its findings and recommendations to the City Council.
2. An application for an amendment to the Zoning Map (to rezone real estate) shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
a. Ownership.
b. Existing zoning of property.
c. Zoning of adjacent and contiguous property.
d. Proposed zoning.
e. A written explanation of the need for the rezoning.
f. The legal description and the common address of the subject property, including permanent index number assigned by the taxing authorities.
g. A current plat of survey prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor showing the location of all lot lines, utility easements, existing structures,
including fences and
the location of pavement.
h. Site plan containing all information deemed appropriate by the Plan Commission for complete review of the application.
3. An application for a text amendment shall include, at a minimum, the following:
a. Identification of the specific section of the ordinance proposed for amendment.
b. Written explanation of the need for the change to the existing ordinance, including a discussion of any pending developments that the revised
regulation would affect.
c. Text of the proposed amendment.
An application for amendment may be filed simultaneously with and/or may be heard simultaneously with the filing of and/or the review of a
preliminary plat of subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 162/403
C. Notice of Application or Petition: Notice of the application or petition shall be given in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-12-7.
D. Hearing:
1. Notice; Adjournment: The Plan Commission shall publish notice of a public hearing on such application stating the time and place and the purpose of
the hearing. Said notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than thirty (30) days in advance of such hearing, in a paper of
general circulation in the City. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the petitioner and to the owners of record of real estate
situated within two hundred feet (200') of the real estate sought to be affected by the application or petition. The hearing may be adjourned and
continued from time to time upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Plan Commission present at the hearing.
2. Site Plan: The Plan Commission shall have the right to require an applicant or petitioner to submit to the Plan Commission for review during its
consideration of any amendment a site plan for the proposed development. Such site plan may include, but not by way of limitation, the following
data:
a. Proof of ownership/authorization.
b. Plat of survey.
c. Site plan including:
(1) Property boundary.
(2) Topography.
(3) Existing and proposed buildings.
(4) Driveways and parking lots (including space for handicap parking).
(5) Landscaped open space.
(6) Location of freestanding signs.
(7) Fences, walls and enclosures.
(8) Loading docks.
d. Floor plans, building elevations, sketches as requested.
e. Landscape plan.
f. Tree protection plan, if there are trees worthy of protection.
g. Project data table(s), including density, FAR, parking ratio, coverage ration, lot size, and other data as requested by the Plan Commission.
3. Recommendation by Plan Commission: The Plan Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing or hearings,
make its recommendations to the City Council in writing. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning
classification of particular property, the Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with
respect to the following matters:
a. Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question.
b. The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question.
c. The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification.
d. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since the day
the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification.
e. Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The Plan Commission may hear a request for any change in zoning and may recommend a zoning classification more restrictive than that
requested.
5. A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the meeting with a minimum of three (3) concurring votes shall berequired to
recommend granting or denying an application for an amendment. Where possible, all motions should be made in the affirmative.
6. The report to the City Council shall contain the number of members present and the number of votes for or against the motion.
E. City Council Action:
1. The Mayor and City Council, upon receiving the recommendations of the Plan Commission may grant or deny any proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable Illinois statutes and laws, or may refer back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
2. If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the City Council within six (6) months of the date upon which such
application is received by the Mayor and City Council, it shall be deemed to have been denied. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-94)
5-12-11: ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
A. Petition for Annexation Agreement: All annexation agreements shall be initiated by the filing of a petition with the City Clerk. Such petitions shall be
verified under oath by all the record title owners, including mortgage holders, of all the lands included within the annexation agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 163/403
B. Request for Zoning Amendments or Variations:
1. All petitions for annexation agreement requesting a zoning classification other than the zoning classification assigned to lands annexed to the City, or
for variations, shall be processed in the same manner as a petition for a request for zoning amendments or variations, as provided herein, for lands
within the jurisdictional limits of the City. All such requests for zoning amendments or variations shall be accompanied by the fees as provided in
Section 5-12-12 of this Chapter, and the said fees shall be paid at the time of filing the petition for annexation agreement.
2. The Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals, after consideration and hearing of the request for zoning amendment or variations incidental to
and part of petitions for annexation agreement, shall make specific findings of facts and recommendations with respect to zoning amendments or
variations upon the property included within the annexation agreement, as in all cases within the jurisdictional limits of the City.
C. Public Notice and Hearing: At the conclusion of the hearings before the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals of the City, and upon those
bodies reporting their specific findings and recommendations, the Mayor and City Council shall set the time and place for hearing on the petition for
annexation agreement.Thereafter, the City Clerk shall cause public notice, as provided in the statutes, to be published one time in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, giving notice of the time and place of the public hearing for annexation agreement before the Mayor and City Council,
said notice to be published not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to public hearing before the said Mayor and Council.
D. Other Annexation Agreement Requests: In all cases of petitions for annexation agreement which do not include requests for zoning classifications other
than those assigned to property annexed to the City or a request for variations, the City Council may refer the petition to such committees or bodies as
it deems appropriate, or as required by law, for study and recommendations. Upon receiving the recommendations of such committees or bodies, or if
no such referral is made, the City Council and Mayor shall set the time and place of public hearing and the City Clerk shall cause notice of the said
hearing to be published in the manner specified in subsection C of this Section. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994)
5-12-12: FEES:
A. Fees Required: The required fees shall accompany an application form for an amendment, appeal, special use, planned unit development, temporary
use, variation, zoning certificate, annexation agreement, preannexation agreement, and review by the Project Review Board, the Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and the City Council of any zoning or subdivision requests within the one and one-half (11/2) mile radius of the
City. (Ord. 1999-2, 1-25-1999)
B. Minimum Fees: The minimum fees are established to cover the expenses that may be incurred due to staff time plus consultants' time required to
review and process such application, and other expenses such as printing and publication of notices, postage and other costs. The minimum fees are
payable at the time of filing of application for any request covered above.
C. Fees For Outside Consultants: The petitioner or applicant shall be responsible for the payment of all fees or charges incurred by the City payable to
outside consultants retained by the City in any capacity connected with the review of any application filed by the applicant or owner under this Chapter
or the subdivision control or other ordinance of the City affecting the use of land. Consultants retained by the City shall bill the City directly for their
services. Upon receipt of invoices from outside consultants by the City, copies of said invoices shall be provided to the applicant or petitioner. The
applicant or petitioner shall immediately pay to the City the amount of the invoice. The City shall thereupon pay the invoice or invoices. At no time shall
there be any transfer of funds from any developer directly to any consultant or directly to any City staff personnel in connection with consultant fees. All
payments by the applicant or petitioner shall be made to the City Clerk who shallremit said payments to the City Treasurer.
D. Transfer Of Funds: At no time shall there be any transfer of funds from any developer to any consultant or City staff personnel. All payments to
consultants shall be executed only under the conditions specified in subsection C of this Section, and the developers shall be invoiced directly and
solely by the City.
E. Fee Schedule:
Minimum/
Fixed Fee
AMENDMENT
To the text of this Title $ 200.00
To the Zoning Map
Base fee 200.00
For each acre, up to and including 20 acres 30.00
For each acre in excess of 20 acres 20.00
APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
200.00
PREANNEXATION AGREEMENT, ANNEXATION AGREEMENT
Review of zoning/subdivision proposal within the 11/2 mile zoning jurisdiction outside of the City limits:
Base fee 300.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 164/403
For each acre in excess of 5 acres 20.00
SPECIAL USES
Planned unit developments
Base fee 300.00
For each acre up to and including 20 acres 30.00
For each acre in excess of 20 acres 20.00
All other special uses
Base fee 250.00
For each acre 20.00
TEMPORARY USES 50.00
VARIATIONS 200.00
ZONING CERTIFICATES
Single-family residences 5.00
All others 25.00
ALL FEES ARE NONREFUNDABLE
(Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994; amd. Ord. 1997-1, 2-24-1997)
5-12-13: PROJECT REVIEW BOARD:
The Project Review Board consisting of members of the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, City Council, and all department heads, shall review
specific development proposals within and outside the City limits of the City. With reference to any specific development proposal, either within the City
limits, or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the City limits, the Project Review Board shall, in consultation with the City's resident engineer and the
City's consulting engineer and the City's Planner, estimate in advance of any further meetings before the Project Review Board and any hearings before
the Planning Commission, Zoning board of Appeals, or the City Council, the total costs to be incurred by the City for consulting services, including, but not
limited to, engineering, legal, planning consultation, and other experts. The amount thus estimated shall be paid over by the applicant to the City and shall
be deposited into an escrow account with the City to be used to pay for the services as they are rendered and to ensure that as bills are tendered for such
services that funds are available, from the applicant, to pay the same. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow shall be refunded to the applicant at the
conclusion of the project upon determination by the City Engineer that no additional funds are required.
Prior to any consideration of any specific development proposal, applicant shall make and pay to the City a nonrefundable application review fee in the
sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Credit shall be given to the applicant for the advance deposit, three hundred dollars ($300.00), against expenses
thereafter incurred by the City and billed to the applicant pursuant to the terms of this Section. (Ord. 1999-2, 1-25-1999)
5-12-14: UNPAID FEES AND CHARGES:
Neither the City Council nor any of its advisory boards, including the Project Review Board, will conduct any further hearings or meetings with reference to
a specific development project in the event any statements rendered for fees or charges incurred by the City for consulting services remain delinquent and
unpaid for more than fourteen (14) days subsequent to the rendition of the statement for such fees or charges. (Ord. 1999-2, 1-25-1999)
5-12-15: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this Title shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1994-16, 6-27-1994; amd. Ord. 1997-1, 2-24-1997)
Chapter 13
TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
5-13-1: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, comfort and general welfare. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
5-13-2: APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 165/403
A. The building and zoning administrator/inspector of the city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to trailer or recreational vehicle sales establishments located in business or manufacturing zoning
districts. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
5-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE HOME: A manufactured home structure transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width
and forty (40) body feet or more in length or when erected on site is three hundred twenty (320) square feet or more and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems that may be contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure that meets all
the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the
secretary (HUD) and complies with the standards established under this title. For manufactured homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying
compliance to the standard for mobile homes NFPA 501, in effect at the time of manufacture is required.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any type of vehicle used primarily for recreational pleasure or bearing recreational vehicle registration license plates.
Examples include, but are not limited to, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be towed by another vehicle but not designed for human occupancy and which may include, but is
not limited to, a utility trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer or cargo trailer.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling purposes which does not contain built in sanitary facilities and has a gross
floor area of less than one hundred thirty (130) square feet.
TRAILER, CONSTRUCTION OFFICE: A "trailer" as defined herein except, that it is used by a contractor as an office or for storage of equipment or
materials during the actual construction of a building project.
TRAILER HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: See definition of Mobile Home.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which may contain cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross
floor area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet or more but less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
5-13-4: LOCATION AND USE:
A. It shall be unlawful to bring a mobile home into the city, or to permit a mobile home to stand in the city.
B. Camping trailers, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles may be stored within the city; provided, that it shall be unlawful for any person to inhabit such
camping trailer, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle within the city, except as provided as follows:
1. Emergency, such as fire, flood, storm, etc. Use beyond thirty (30) days will require a permit issued by the building and zoning administrator/inspector.
2. Guests, not to exceed seven (7) days.
C. No trailer, camping trailer, travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be permanently affixed to the ground or connected to city water or sewer, or shall be
used as a principal or accessory unit or structure on a lot in any district.
D. One trailer, camping trailer, travel trailer or recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in the open on a lot in a residential zoning district, and only
when it is located rear of the front building setback line and a minimum of five feet (5') away from the side and rear property lines, or if in front of the
front building setback line, when it is parked or stored on an established driveway composed of a dustless surface material.
1. Exception: No trailer, camping trailer, travel trailer or recreational vehicle, shall be parked or stored in such a way that, in the opinion of the building
and zoning administrator/inspector, it blocks the visibility of oncoming traffic so as to create a safety hazard.
2. Exception: Lots in the R-1, R-2, R-3 zoning districts, and residential lots exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area, shall be allowed
one camping trailer, travel trailer or recreational vehicle and one additional trailer, that may be parked or stored in the open, and only when it is
located rear of the front building setback line and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') away from the side and rear property line, or when it is parked or
stored on an established driveway.
E. No inoperative or unlicensed trailer, camping trailer, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle shall be kept or stored in the open on any premises, nor at any
time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
F. A trailer used by a contractor as an office, or for the storage of equipment or material, shall be permitted to stand on private property during the period of
actual construction of a building project in the city. Construction trailers shall be located on the same or a contiguous lot as the buildings being
constructed and shall be removed from the property prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
5-13-5: DURATION:
A. As the purpose of a trailer, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle is to be mobile, the regulations regarding storage and parking contained herein are to be
for a limited duration only. The maximum time a trailer, travel trailer, or recreational vehicle may be stored or parked continuously in the open on a
zoning lot is six (6) months.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 166/403
B. Cargo or "moving" trailers specifically designed for moving one's belongings from residence to residence, sometimes known as "PODS" trailers, are
allowed to be placed on a driveway for a maximum duration of two (2) weeks. An additional one week may be granted with permit from the building and
zoning administrator/inspector. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
5-13-6: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2015-24, 9-14-2015)
Chapter 14
SIGN REGULATIONS
5-14-1: PURPOSE:
This section of the zoning ordinance is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of sign regulations for the following
purposes:
A. To encourage, as a means of communication in the city, the employment of signs which are:
1. Compatible with their surroundings.
2. Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.
3. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors.
4. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
5. Respectful of the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
B. To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
C. To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
D. To maintain and enhance community appearance and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development by promoting the reasonable, orderly
and effective display of signs.
E. To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property.
F. To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
G. To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally relate. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-2: SCOPE:
No sign shall be constructed, erected, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or expanded until a permit for such sign has been
obtained in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in this chapter. However, no permit shall be required for routine maintenance as defined
herein. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found in the zoning ordinance.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
AWNING: A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be permanently affixed or affixed
in such a manner that it may be raised or retracted to a position against the building.
AWNING SIGN: Any sign that is painted, printed or otherwise placed on the outer surface of an awning in such a manner that the awning forms the
background surface of the sign.
BANNER SIGN: Any temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or building and secured on at least two (2) sides.
National flags, state or municipal flags, shall not be considered banners.
CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS: Any hood or roof like structure of permanent construction supported entirely by the building, and projecting from the
building's wall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 167/403
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be manually changed or rearranged.
CITY: The city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: The mayor and aldermen of the city of Plano.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN: A sign plan approved by the plan commission indicating the size and location of all signs to be located in a unified
business center or on a business or manufacturing property. This is a component of the overall site plan submittal and approval process.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign announcing the impending construction of a project, limited to displaying the name of the project, the developer, the
financial institution providing the finance, the designer(s), the general contractor, a phone number where more information may be obtained, and a date
announcing the planned completion of the project.
DOWNTOWN: All commercially zoned properties which touch the area bound by North Street to the north, Dearborn to the south, Cook to the west and
East to east.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, or relocate and includes the painting or lettering of a sign.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light which is not contained within the sign itself.
FACADE: Any side, surface or wall below the roof of a building which is parallel or within forty five degrees (45°) of parallel with a parcel's frontage on a
public thoroughfare, which faces toward and relates to that public thoroughfare. If a building has a complex shape, then all walls or surfaces facing in the
same direction, or nearly the same direction, are part of a single facade.
FLAG: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign where the source of illumination is not maintained constant or stationary in the intensity or color at
all times when such sign is in use.
FOR SALE/FOR LEASE/FOR RENT SIGNS: A sign which directs attention to a housing, office, or retail development with space for sale, lease or rent.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign not attached to a building; primarily ground signs, pole signs, pylon signs, and portable signs.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN: Any sign used in residential zoning districts to advertise the sale of used, unwanted household goods.
GASOLINE STATION: A premises where motor fuels are sold for direct use by motor vehicles.
GRADE: Established or finished elevation measured at the centerline of the adjacent street.
GROUND SIGN: Any detached sign which has its bottom portion erected upon or mounted on a base that is permanently set on the ground that is at least
as wide as the bottom side of the sign. Ground signs are also commonly known as monument signs.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign where the text gives the name and address of a building, business, development, or establishment. Such a sign may also
be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which is lit by an artificial (usually electric) light source.
INFLATABLE SIGN: Any sign or inflatable device of more than two (2) cubic feet in capacity designed to be filled with air or a gas lighter than air, displayed
to attract the attention of the public. This definition shall include balloons and balloon signs.
INSPECTOR: The building and zoning administrator or his designee, of the city of Plano.
INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "loading only", and other similar directives.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: The illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light concealed or contained within the sign itself, and
which becomes visible in darkness through the translucent portion of the sign face.
MOVIE OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A fully enclosed building with fixed or movable seats arranged in an auditorium fashion, where motion
pictures or live entertainment acts are presented.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
OFF SITE SIGN: Any general outdoor advertising sign, which is designed to advertise or direct attention to a business or activity conducted or a product,
commodity, service, real property, entertainment, or facilities offered or sold elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building upon which the
sign is located or to which it is affixed, or which directs persons to a location different from where the sign is installed. The term "billboard" shall be included
in this definition.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
POLE SIGN: A sign mounted on one or more freestanding pole(s) or pylons.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign displayed in conjunction with an official election or referendum, used on behalf of candidates for elected public office or to
advocate a position on referenda.
PORTABLE SIGNS: Any sign attached to or mounted upon a frame intended to be moved from place to place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 168/403
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects more than twelve inches (12") in a perpendicular
fashion from such building.
ROW OR RIGHT OF WAY: The publicly owned property in which public streets are constructed. Normally comprised of paved roadway with curbs or
graveled shoulder, landscaped parkway or ditch, and may include public sidewalks. When no public sidewalks are present the edge of the right of way is
considered (for the purposes of enforcement of this chapter) to be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the edge of the paved roadway.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign used to advertise the sale, lease or rent of an individual home, apartment or property located in a residential
zoning district.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.
ROOF SIGN: A sign mounted on the roof of a building.
ROUTE 34 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: All business zoned properties which are contiguous to each other and at least one of which touches Route 34
between Eldamain on the east and the city limits on the west.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, message, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure,
or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: A person or entity who performs work for compensation in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The sign and all parts associated with its mounting.
SIGN SUPPORTS: All structural features by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles, braces, guys, and anchors.
SIGN SURFACE AREA: The total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or color used as an integral part of the display or to
differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign designed, constructed, or erected to display a message for a limited duration of time. Such signs include, but are not limited
to: banner, beacon or searchlight, garage/yard sale, grand opening, inflatable, political, portable, real estate, and special event signs, as well as any other
sign which by its definition and application in this chapter is designated as a "temporary sign".
UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER: A premises containing three (3) or more individual offices or businesses sharing a common building.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to and supported by a wall or building, and within six inches (6") of such wall, or painted on the wall surface of any
building.
WINDOW AREA: Any transparent area on a facade through which the interior of a premises may be viewed from outside.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign which is affixed or placed so that its message or image is read as a part of the total composition of a window area.
ZONING LOT OR LOTS: A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a single unit,
under single control or ownership. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the county recorder of
deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one lot. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following signs shall be exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this chapter:
A. Government Signs: Any public notice, warning, directional, and other instructional or regulatory signs required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or
local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Interior Signs: Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, which cannot be read from vehicles passing on adjoining streets.
C. Nonsign Decorations: Temporary displays, including holiday lights, decorations, painted window areas, works of art, flags (not exceeding 50 square
feet), memorial signs, religious or historic symbols, and other displays with no commercial message.
D. Traffic Control Signs: On private property, such as stop, yield, and similar signs which meet Illinois department of transportation standards, and which
contain no commercial message.
E. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets listing names or buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part
of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
F. Directional And Warning Signs: Signs, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area, which provide instruction, direction or warning and are located entirely
on the property to which they pertain to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar
nature or with respect to warnings, "no trespassing", "no dumping", and similar warning signs. Parking lot entrance and exit signs shall not exceed five
feet (5') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 169/403
G. Business Nameplates: Nonelectrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises, provided that the
sign area does not exceed two (2) square feet in area, provided that no more than one sign per principal use may be erected.
H. Permanent Subdivision Identification Signs: Subdivision and multiple-family complex identity signs, provided that:
1. Only one sign is erected on each corner at each primary entry to the subdivision or complex; and
2. If there is more than one primary entrance, the separation between signs along the perimeter of the complex shall be at least two hundred feet
(200'); and
3. The sign area of an individual sign does not exceed fifty (50) square feet on both sides of a two (2) sided sign, or fifty (50) square feet on a one sided
sign; and
4. The sign contains only the name of the subdivision or complex and appropriate logo; and
5. The sign is located outside of the "vision triangle", defined in subsection 5-14-6G1 of this chapter.
I. Vending Machine Signs: Permanent, no flashing signs on vending machines, gasoline pumps, ice containers, automatic teller machines, or other similar
machines. Such signs shall relate only to that which is dispensed by the machine. Such signs may be illuminated only on the front. Logos, names or
other promotional information shall be considered the permitted sign.
J. Window Signs: Window signs. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-5: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Administrative Officer: The building and zoning administrator is designated to administer this chapter.
B. Permit Requirements And Fees:
1. Permit Required: Unless otherwise exempted in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, structurally modified or relocated without having first obtained
a valid permit for such sign, issued by the city. No permit shall be required for routine maintenance of a sign.
2. Permit Application: Application for sign permits shall be submitted on a form and in the manner prescribed by the building and zoning administrator.
Each application shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it is to be located. Applications for permits shall
be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with all applicable regulations. Submission requirements shall
include:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
b. A drawing or drawings indicating the location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or advertising structure is to be
attached or erected;
c. A drawing or photograph showing the position of the sign or advertising structure in relation to structures;
d. Two (2) prints of the drawings and specifications, and color renderings for the proposed sign or advertising structure, including the methods of
construction, illumination, materials and attachment to the buildings or in the ground. Such drawings must include all text and graphics proposed
on the sign, drawn to scale with dimensions;
e. If required by the building and zoning administrator, a copy of a statement by a registered professional engineer indicating that said sign meets
structural and wind pressure requirements, and will not pose a public health or safety threat;
f. Name of person, firm, corporation or association responsible for erecting the sign or advertising structure;
g. Signature of the owner or agent of the zoning lot on which the sign or advertising structure is to be erected;
h. Any additional information as the building and zoning administrator shall require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable chapters
of this code; and
i. A landscape plan, including proposed location, quantity, size, and species of required landscape improvements.
3. Permit Fees: With each application for a sign permit, permit fees shall be paid in conformance with the following schedule:
a. Nonilluminated signs: Thirty five dollars ($35.00) plus twenty five cents ($0.25) for each square foot of gross surface area for each exposed face of
the sign.
b. Illuminated signs: Fifty five dollars ($55.00) plus twenty five cents ($0.25) for each square foot of gross surface area for each exposed face of the
sign.
c. Temporary signs: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each sign.
Persons guilty of erecting or maintaining a sign without first securing the necessary permit shall be subject to a penalty of two hundred percent
(200%) of the normal fee amount in addition to the obligation to pay the normal fee and any other remedies the city may have under this code.
(Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-6: GENERAL STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 170/403
A. Applicable Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all signs must conform to the regulations and standards of all other applicable
chapters of this code.
B. Commercial Message Location: A sign which displays a commercial message is permitted only on the premises where the business, profession,
accommodation, commodity, service, entertainment, or other commercial activity represented on the sign is located.
C. Obstruction To Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes: No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent or inhibit
free ingress to, or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or inhibit the use of fire protection systems. No sign or advertising structure shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
D. Glass Limitation: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or its equivalent as approved by the building and zoning administrator, and
of such thickness as required to withstand wind loads.
E. Movable Sign Parts: No sign or its parts shall be permitted to be movable or rotating.
F. Items Secured: All manually movable items on a sign, such as covers to service openings, shall be properly secured.
G. Location:
1. No sign shall be located in any of the following vision triangles formed by intersecting streets. At any intersection where at least one of the
intersecting streets is an "arterial" or "collector" street as defined in the comprehensive plan of the city, the sides of the triangle formed by the
centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be one hundred twenty feet (120') in length as measured outward from the point of intersection of said
centerlines along such centerlines. At all other intersections each of such sides shall be eighty feet (80') in length.
2. No sign shall be allowed to encroach upon the public right of way or public property, except as permitted under section 5-14-13 of this chapter.
3. No sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of that residential lot line.
H. Illuminated Signs: All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or
park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residential district, which sign is visible from such residential
district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
I. Traffic Safety: No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or
imitate, resemble, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
J. Landscape Requirements: The following requirements must be included on plans that are submitted as a part of a sign permit application for a ground
mounted or pole sign:
1. For every one square foot of gross sign area, there shall be provided one square foot of landscape area adjacent to the sign.
2. The required landscape area shall complement the sign and consist of plantings such as deciduous or evergreen shrubs, flowering plants, and
ground cover. Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as part of the landscaped area.
3. All landscape areas shall be mulched to conserve moisture and minimize weed growth.
4. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain all such landscaped areas in a neat and proper manner. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-7: COMPUTATIONS:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
A. Computation Of Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign face shall be the total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed of a single
rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, but not including any supporting framework
or bracing.
B. Computation Of Area Of Multifaced Signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign
faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the
same time, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation Of Height: The height of a sign shall be the measurement from the top of the highest element of the sign to: 1) the average level of the
finished ground surface, exclusive of any filling or mounding, around any sign located more than twenty five feet (25') from a street right of way; or 2)
crown of the street when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from one street right of way. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-8: SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 171/403
The following signs shall be permitted by the city in residential zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Exempt signs as specified in section 5-14-4 of this chapter.
B. The following temporary signs as specified and regulated in section 5-14-12 of this chapter:
1. Residential real estate signs to a maximum size of two feet by three feet (2' x 3'), and only when pertaining to and located on the property for sale or
for rent.
2. Political signs.
3. Garage/yard sale signs.
4. Construction signs.
C. One identification sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in total surface area for the following uses: religious institution, service organizations, private
or public school, golf courses and facilities constructed and maintained by any taxing district. Such a sign may be illuminated, shall not exceed ten feet
(10') in height, and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line. Two (2) such identification signs may be erected at entrances to the
facility if the permitted square footage is divided equally into two (2) symmetrical signs, provided that all other provisions of this chapter are met. (Ord.
2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-9: SIGNS ALLOWED IN BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in business and manufacturing zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Freestanding Signs: Shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one freestanding sign per lot, shopping center, shopping center outlot, or multiple business center (i.e., either 1
pole sign or 1 ground sign), which shall be erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment.
2. Height: No pole sign shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height from grade, and no ground sign shall exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade.
3. Surface Area: No pole or ground sign shall exceed a maximum surface area of one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Setback: No pole or ground sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any property line. Such signs shall be placed no closer than eighteen
feet (18') to any building or structure it identifies and shall not obscure any architectural features of a building, such as entrances, display windows, or
decorative cornices when viewed from any street.
5. Ground Clearance: All pole signs shall maintain a ground clearance of seven feet (7') from the grade to the bottom side of the sign.
6. Illumination: Pole signs may only be internally illuminated.
7. Tenant Identification Panels: Provision for identifying tenants within a shopping center or multiple business center as part of the permitted square
footage of the sign identifying the shopping center or multiple business center as a whole shall be permitted.
8. Route 34 Commercial District Off Site Exemption: Any business that falls within the boundaries of the Route 34 commercial district or the downtown
commercial district that would be prohibited from erecting an off site sign by subsection 5-14-15I of this chapter, may acquire signage as follows:
a. In cooperation with a business property owner immediately adjacent to Route 34, submit a permit application for a shared freestanding sign
advertising both the business adjacent to Route 34 and the "off site" business.
b. The shared sign must in all other aspects comply with the regulations of this chapter.
B. Wall Signs: Shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: A wall sign shall be erected upon the wall of the building facade having its principal frontage upon a public street. A wall sign may be on
the building facade other than the principal frontage if it faces a nonresidential district and the total square footage does not exceed the total
permitted on the principal frontage. In no case shall a wall sign be permitted that faces the side of any adjoining lot located in a residential zoning
district.
2. Number: A maximum of one wall sign per establishment shall be permitted, erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment, subject to the
following provisions:
a. No wall signs shall be permitted for individual tenants in a multi-story or multi-tenant office building, unless specifically authorized as part of an
approved PUD at the time of approval of said PUD.
b. A corporate logo shall be permitted, but shall count as the permitted wall sign if it is not incorporated into the wall sign.
3. Height: The maximum height of a wall sign shall be thirty feet (30') from grade, or two (2) stories, whichever is less, but in no case shall any portion
of such sign be extended above the roofline.
4. Surface Area: The surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per one linear foot of building front, or one hundred fifty (150)
square feet, whichever is less.
5. Projection: No wall sign shall project from the building wall more than twelve inches (12").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 172/403
6. Scale And Proportion: Wall signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building facade they are mounted to and with the architectural
elements of the building, such as windows, cornices, sign friezes and bays.
7. Overhang: The edges of wall signs shall not overhang the top of bays or equivalent architectural features of building facades.
8. Illumination: Wall signs may only be internally illuminated.
9. Corner Units: Establishments occupying a corner unit in a building shall be entitled to have two (2) wall signs, one per wall, each adhering to all of
the other standards in this subsection, provided that:
a. The primary wall sign shall be deemed to be that which is located on the side of the unit that has the legal address or the principal entrance for the
general public.
b. The surface area of the secondary wall sign shall not exceed that of the primary wall sign.
c. The location of the secondary wall sign is not adjacent to any residential dwelling unit or vacant property located in a residential zoning district.
d. Both sides of the corner unit face a public street. Signs facing a service drive, loading dock entrance, or the like shall be prohibited.
C. Canopy, Under Canopy, And Marquee Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one canopy or one marquee sign per lot or per establishment, erected for the purpose of identifying the
establishment, except as otherwise provided for in this subsection C, and provided that no wall signs are directed to the same street frontage.
2. Location: Canopy/marquee signs may be mounted on the face (vertical edges only) of the canopy/marquee proper.
3. Signable Area: The signable area for canopy/marquee signs shall not extend beyond the canopy/marquee face on which the sign is located. No sign
or portion of a sign shall exceed the borderline of any outer edge of said canopy/marquee. No sign shall be placed on or over the roof of said
canopy/marquee.
4. Surface Area: The surface area of a canopy/marquee sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, or thirty percent (30%) of the signable wall area of a
canopy/marquee whichever is greater.
5. Projection: No canopy/marquee sign shall project more than eight inches (8") from the canopy/marquee proper.
6. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the canopy/marquee to the grade or walkway under
said canopy/marquee.
7. Scale And Proportion: Canopy/marquee signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building they are mounted to and with the
architectural elements of the building.
8. Material: Canopy/marquee signs shall be constructed of a noncombustible type material.
9. Illumination: Canopy/marquee signs may only be internally illuminated.
10. Under Canopy Signs: In addition to the signs permitted in this subsection C, one under canopy sign shall be permitted to be erected above a
general public entrance into the establishment in order to identify said establishment, provided that:
a. A minimum clearance of eight feet (8') from the walkway is maintained.
b. Such signs shall be placed perpendicular to the building, with the top edge of the sign fastened to the bottom edge of the canopy.
c. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in surface area.
d. Such signs may only be internally illuminated.
e. A limit of one sign per establishment shall be permitted.
D. Awning Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: Individual letters, words, or symbols may be directly affixed or applied to any surface of an awning, generally by painting, printing, or
weaving. Signs shall not be constructed of or applied to other material which is then fastened to the awning.
2. Surface Area: Provided that no wall signs or canopy/marquee signs are directed to the same street frontage, the surface area of an awning sign shall
not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the exterior surface area of an awning. If wall, canopy, or marquee signs are directed to the same street frontage,
the sign letters shall not exceed eight inches (8").
3. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the awning to the grade or walkway under said awning.
4. Illumination: Awning signs shall not be illuminated. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-10: PERMITTED EXTRA SIGNS:
A. Criteria: Certain business operations are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign requirements and therefore justified to be permitted to
have extra signs, in addition to those specified in section 5-14-9 of this chapter, as specified below. These include:
1. Gasoline Stations: Gasoline stations are unique because their primary functions are performed out of doors in a manner prescribed by state statutes.
2. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: These theaters are unique because of the rapid turnover of the name of their entertainment product.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 173/403
3. Unified Business Centers: Unified business centers are unique because of the concentrated development and their centralized ownership
characteristics.
4. Restaurants With Drive-Through Windows: Restaurants with drive-through windows.
B. Gasoline Stations: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to gasoline stations:
1. Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as "self-service" or "full-service". Such signs shall not have more than two
(2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face.
2. One sign displaying the price of fuel sold, with a maximum surface area of six (6) square feet per fuel type. Such signs shall not have more than two
(2) faces.
3. One nonilluminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed over the opening to each bay. Such signs shall have
one face and shall not exceed three (3) square feet each.
4. One nonilluminated nameplate identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall have one
face and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products which are directly related to motor vehicles, if the signs are located directly adjacent
to a display of the product(s) described. Such signs may have two (2) faces, however, their total area shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet.
6. One sign over each pump stand not to exceed twenty four inches (24") in height with length governed by the length of the pump itself.
7. One wall sign on a detached car wash building, provided that it conforms to all other provisions for wall signs as stated in this chapter.
8. Any signs required by state or federal government.
C. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following sign is permitted uniquely to
theaters:
1. Each theater may have one sign of up to fifty (50) square feet which will accommodate changeable lettering copy.
2. A theater's changeable copy sign may have two (2) faces if it is freestanding.
3. A theater's changeable copy sign may be located on a marquee, provided it does not project above or beyond the structural limits of such marquee.
4. Otherwise, a theater's changeable copy sign shall conform to the regulations for the sign type to which it most nearly resembles.
D. Unified Business Centers: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following additional signs are permitted uniquely to
unified business centers:
1. A unified business center may have one freestanding identification sign for the center in addition to the wall or canopy signs permitted for each
separate business. The permitted area of such identification sign shall be a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet. Tenant identification
panels are permitted as part of the permitted square footage of the center identification sign.
2. Unified business centers may have common directory signs to guide pedestrians to individual businesses on the site. Such signs shall be limited to
six (6) square feet.
E. Restaurants With Drive-Through Windows:
1. Menu Board Signs: In addition to the one permitted freestanding sign, two (2) freestanding single faced menu board signs shall be permitted per lot
or outlot for restaurants with drive-through facilities, provided that each sign does not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in surface area or eight feet
(8') in height. Such signs may only be internally illuminated. If two (2) menu board signs are provided, such signs shall be located at least eight feet
(8') apart. Menu board signs shall be permitted only in business zoning districts. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-11: UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER SIGN PLAN:
No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a unified business center until a comprehensive sign plan, as a component of the site plan approval,
has been approved for the center and the sign complies with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-12: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. General Provisions: The following general provisions shall apply to all temporary signs:
1. Permit Required: An application is required for all temporary signs, except for construction signs, window signs, residential real estate signs, and
political signs. Upon application, the building and zoning administrator may issue permits for temporary signs or displays related to grand openings,
special promotions, going out of business, emergency information, and similar purposes.
2. Duration: A temporary sign may be of one of two (2) types of duration:
a. Long term, short duration: Permit period is six (6) months, renewable in six (6) month increments. Signs may be displayed only during a time
period consisting of the shorter of two (2) time periods; daylight hours on days that business is open for customers, or the hours that the business
is open for customers. No temporary sign may be displayed while the business is closed. The business owner is responsible for the sign and shall
install and remove it daily as required to comply with this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 174/403
b. Short term, long duration: Fifteen (15) days, twenty four (24) hours per day. This type of permit is allowed four (4) times per business per calendar
year.
3. Location: All temporary signs shall be erected only on the property of the permittee, and shall be set back a minimum of two feet (2') from any public
right of way.
4. Illumination: No temporary sign shall be illuminated.
5. Construction: All temporary signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner which reasonably prevents the possibility of the signs becoming
hazards to the public health and safety as determined by the building and zoning administrator.
6. Number: Unless a specific number of signs are listed for a particular temporary sign type, only one temporary sign shall be permitted per zoning lot
or business.
B. Temporary Sign Types: Temporary signs shall be limited in use to the following types of signs:
1. Freestanding Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Freestanding signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from grade.
b. Material: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, or other durable material and reasonably supported in or on the ground by
adequate bracing.
c. Surface Area: Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area per face, and may be single faced or double faced.
d. A-Frame Signs: A-frame signs shall be allowed on the sidewalk provided they are no more than six (6) square feet per face, no more than four feet
(4') tall, and are located no more than three feet (3') from the front face of the building of the business being advertised.
2. Banner Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Banner signs shall not exceed the height of the first floor of the building, or twelve feet (12') from grade, whichever is greater.
b. Location: Banner signs without a permanent frame shall be affixed only to building walls. Banner signs with a permanent frame may also be
affixed to poles.
c. Number: One banner sign shall be permitted per zoning lot or business. If banner signs are mounted with a permanent frame, additional banner
signs are permitted at a ratio of one sign per seventy five feet (75') of lot frontage.
d. Surface Area: Banner signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area.
3. Business And Manufacturing Districts For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height And Location: Such signs shall be located on the property advertised for sale, lease or rent and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
any property line, with a maximum height of ten feet (10').
b. Removal: The sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the real estate closing, or lease or rental transaction is completed.
c. Size: The maximum surface area of such a sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Residential Real Estate Signs: Shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Location: The sign is located upon the property that is offered for sale, lease, or rent, or has been sold.
b. Message: The sign content shall be limited to the words "for sale", "for lease", "for rent", "open house", or "sold" or substantially similar
terminology; the name, address, and phone number of the individual realtor or agent; and the name and logo of the realtor's franchise or brokering
office.
c. Number: Only one sign shall be permitted for each building, dwelling unit, or lot.
d. Removal: The sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the real estate closing, or lease or rental transaction is completed, except that
"open house" signs shall be erected and removed on the day of the event.
e. Size And Height: The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from grade.
5. Beacon Or Searchlights: May be permitted in connection with grand openings or special events provided:
a. Direction Of Illumination: Lights must be oriented skyward, not breaking an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the ground.
b. Duration: The sign(s) may be displayed for no more than fifteen (15) days. Upon expiration of said fifteen (15) days, the use of said sign shall be
discontinued and no beacon or searchlight advertising the same business or establishment shall be reinstalled or reerected for a period of six (6)
months.
c. Number: Only one unit shall be permitted per zoning lot.
6. Political Signs: Shall be allowed without permit, provided that:
a. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property and set back from any public right of way.
b. Number: There shall be no limit on the number of political signs permitted; provided, however, that the quantity of signs displayed does not create
a safety hazard to traffic by distracting motorists or interfering with safe pedestrian flow, in which case the chief of police and/or the building and
zoning administrator shall be authorized to require that the number of signs be reasonably reduced.
c. Size And Height: In residential districts, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in
height from grade. In nonresidential districts, the sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed six feet (6')
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 175/403
in height from grade. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
7. Inflatable Signs:
a. Duration: Inflatable signs may be displayed for thirty (30) days, at which time the temporary sign permit may be renewed. There is no limit to the
number of times a permit may be renewed in a calendar year.
b. Number: Only one inflatable sign is permitted per zoning lot.
c. Permit Fee: Forty five dollars ($45.00) per thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 2014-27, 7-28-2014)
8. Garage/Yard Sale Signs: Shall be permitted, provided that:
a. Duration: The sign shall not be placed or erected for more than four (4) consecutive days at the location of the sale.
b. Number: One sign shall be permitted for each lot where the garage/yard sale is being held; provided, however, that one sign shall be permitted
along each side of a lot abutting a public street up to a maximum of two (2) signs per lot.
c. Size And Height: The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area if the sign is single faced or eight (8) square feet in surface area if
the sign is multifaced. The sign shall not exceed five feet (5') in height from grade.
9. Construction Signs: Shall be permitted, provided that:
a. Duration: Signs shall not be installed prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days of issuance of an
occupancy permit.
b. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property on the premises of the construction and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any public
right of way.
c. Number: One sign shall be permitted per zoning lot.
d. Size And Height: In business and manufacturing districts, the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not
exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade. For residential uses in a single-family zoning district, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
surface area and shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from grade. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-13: SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No signs shall be allowed in the public right of way, except for the following:
A. Permanent Signs: Permanent signs, including:
1. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or
regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
B. Emergency Signs: Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted
work within the public right of way. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-14: OFFICIAL, CORPORATE AND ANCILLARY FLAGS:
The display of official, corporate and ancillary flags shall be permitted subject to the following requirements. These regulations are designed to control the
use of permanent flagpoles or staffs upon which the flag is located and the relationship of the flag to the flagpole or staff. Flags and flagpoles do not
require a specific sign permit. Flags shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements:
A. Flags shall be displayed only on permanent flagpoles or staffs designed and constructed specifically and exclusively for flag display. No official,
corporate or ancillary flag shall be displayed on or attached in any manner to light poles, sign poles, trees, vehicles, or similar structures or objects. The
temporary display of flags where such requirements are impractical, such as a parade, holidays, or special events, shall be deemed to be acceptable.
B. There shall be a maximum of one flagpole per one hundred feet (100') of frontage within nonresidential zoning districts.
C. Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
D. The display of more than two (2) flags per flagpole shall be prohibited.
E. The height of a flagpole shall be in proportion to the scale of the building to which the pole relates, and in no case shall it be higher than the following
height limitations:
Building Height
Pole Height
Measured From Grade
Residential uses 25 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 176/403
All other uses:
0 - 25 feet
25.1 feet or higher
30 feet
35 feet
F. The vertical length of a permitted single flag on a flagpole or staff shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the length of the pole or staff upon which the flag is
hung. Under no circumstances shall any flag exceed fifty (50) square feet in surface area. The official flag of the United States Of America is exempt
from this size restriction.
G. Flags shall be displayed in such a manner that no portion of the flag shall project over any property line or contact any other structure when fully
extended.
H. Flags shall not be mounted on or over roofs or rooflines in any fashion. Wall mounted official and corporate flags shall be displayed from flagpoles or
staffs not to exceed ten feet (10') in length. No portion of such flagpoles or staffs shall extend above the roofline or over a property line.
I. Official flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. The official flag of the United States Of America shall be
displayed in accordance with the flag code, title 36, USC, chapter 10, as amended by PL 344, 94th congress, approved July 7, 1976, or as amended in
the future. All other official flags should be displayed in accordance with the same standards of respect and protocol.
J. Corporate and ancillary flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. Tattered or torn flags shall be removed or
replaced promptly. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-15: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation under section 5-14-4 of this chapter are prohibited in the city. Such signs
include, but are not limited to:
A. Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
B. Any sign or advertising device painted or displayed on any vehicle or trailer parked on the public right of way, public property, or private property so as
to be prominently visible from a public right of way and parked for the flagrant purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a
business or activity.
C. Signs nailed, tacked or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation in such a way as to puncture bark.
D. Handbills, posters, notices, or similar attention gathering devices posted or affixed on traffic control boxes, signs, lamp poles, utility poles, or traffic
control support.
E. Projecting signs.
F. Any sign attached to a chimney, on a fence or fence type wall, retaining wall, bench, fence post, refuse enclosure, utility box, storage shed, bus shelter,
satellite dish, antenna, or other accessory structure.
G. Any exterior string of lights or exposed light bulbs, except those that are temporarily displayed in conjunction with traditionally accepted civic, patriotic,
or religious holidays for a duration not to exceed sixty (60) days.
H. Any additional or subsequent sign painted on, attached, or otherwise affixed to poles or permitted signs.
I. Off site signs, to include, but not be limited to, "snipe signs". "Snipe signs" are hereby defined as those temporary signs relating to or giving direction to
new construction or new subdivisions. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-16: PERMITTED OFF SITE SIGNS:
A. Religious institutions, service organizations, and other nonprofit organizations are eligible to erect signage on city owned property immediately adjacent
to existing city signage. Sign construction will be at the organization's expense and must be in accordance with design criteria as set forth by the city of
Plano. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-17: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
A. Maintenance And Repair: Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in safe, presentable,
and good structural condition at all times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts required to maintain the sign,
advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning in its originally permitted and installed condition in accordance with the following criteria and with the
applicable chapters of this code:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 177/403
1. Paint Or Treat: To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, the owner of any sign or advertising structure shall, as required, paint all parts and
supports thereof unless the same are galvanized, stainless or otherwise treated.
2. Repairs: Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign, advertising structure,
marquee, awning, canopy or support structure shall be repaired.
3. Clean And Sanitary: All signs or advertising structures and the area surrounding same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary
and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all debris, rubbish and obnoxious substances, and any related grassed area or landscaping shall be
kept trimmed and in a healthy condition.
B. Obsolete Or Abandoned Signs: For any sign or advertising structure now or hereafter existing, which advertises a business, commodity, service,
entertainment, activity, or event which has been discontinued, or is located on property which has been vacant and unoccupied, the building and zoning
administrator shall give written notice requiring removal of the sign to permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper person fails to remove the
sign or structure within sixty (60) days after such notice the building and zoning administrator is hereby authorized to have such sign or advertising
structure removed.
C. Unsafe And Unlawful Signs: For any sign or advertising structure that is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or
erected, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the building and zoning administrator shall give written notice to the
permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises
upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper person fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards of this section
within thirty (30) days after such notice, the building and zoning administrator is hereby authorized to have such sign or advertising structure removed.
The building and zoning administrator may summarily, and without notice, have removed any sign or advertising structure which is an immediate safety
hazard to persons or property.
D. Lien To Recover Costs: In the event of failure by any party to reimburse the city within sixty (60) days for costs incurred for repair or removal ordered by
the building and zoning administrator, the city council shall certify the charges for repair or removal to the city's legal counsel, who will be then
authorized to file a notice of lien in the office of the Kendall County recorder of deeds to foreclose this lien, and to sue the owner of the real estate, or
sign permittee, or their agents, in a civil action to recover the money due for the foregoing services, plus all expenses and reasonable attorney fees to
be fixed by the court. Included in the expenses recoverable by the city are the costs of filing the notice of lien, foreclosing said lien, and all litigation
costs, together with all office and legal expense incurred in connection with the collection of the amount due. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-18: VIOLATIONS:
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this section, by the
zoning ordinance, and by state law:
1. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the
sign is located;
2. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without first securing such a permit;
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has lapsed.
B. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-19: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
A. Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter, or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated,
as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a violation of
the zoning ordinance of the city. The remedies of the city shall include the following:
1. Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs in the same zoning lot;
2. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity;
3. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the city under the zoning ordinance;
4. Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under the zoning ordinance; and
5. In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the city under the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code for such circumstances.
B. The city shall have such other remedies as provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning ordinance.
C. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a
certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-20: SAVING CLAUSE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 178/403
or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
5-14-21: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council of the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, that the several provisions of this chapter
are separable, in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provision hereof invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not
specifically included in the said ruling.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building or other
structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said ruling.
(Ord. 2012-5, 2-13-2012)
Chapter 15
SITE PLAN REVIEW
5-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of requiring site plan approval is to ensure that plans that are otherwise in conformance with this title also include the compatible
arrangement of buildings, off street parking, lighting, landscaping, ingress and egress, and drainage of the site in a manner that will promote safety and
convenience for the public and will preserve surrounding property values. Site plan review is not a substitute for required state and city building permit
reviews. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Site plan review is required for all new construction or additions and changes in the use of land or existing buildings which results in any alteration or
construction within the following zoning districts:
1. R6-AT attached residential.
2. R-7 general residence district.
3. R-8 general residence district - planned unit development.
4. B-1 office district.
5. B-2 limited business district.
6. B-3 general business district.
7. B-4 business/wholesale district.
8. B-5 service business district.
9. M-1 limited manufacturing district.
10. M-2 general manufacturing district.
11. M-3 general manufacturing district - planned unit development.
B. The following activities are excluded from site plan review:
1. Normal maintenance, but not reconstruction.
2. Construction or alteration of any building in use exclusively as a single-family or two-family dwelling.
3. "Home occupations" as defined in this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-3: VARIANCE:
The city council may grant exceptions from the site plan requirements as may be reasonable if literal interpretation of one or more provisions is impractical
or would cause undue hardship because of unusual conditions pertaining to the land in question. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-4: SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following development standards are established as criteria for the review of site plans:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 179/403
A. Responsive To Site Conditions: This subsection is intended to ensure that commercial, office, industrial and multi-family residential developments are
compatible with the surrounding area and the unique site characteristics that may exist and that they contribute to, but are not a detriment to the unique
character of the area in which the site is located.
1. Consistent With Comprehensive Plan: The proposed use and the design of the site should be consistent with the comprehensive plan.
2. Relationship To Surrounding Development: A site shall be developed in harmony with neighboring street pattern, setbacks and other design
elements.
3. Site Analysis: Site plans should be based on an analysis of the site. Such site analysis shall examine characteristics such as site context; geology
and soils; topography; climate and ecology; existing vegetation, existing and adjacent structures, road network and traffic impact, storm water
management and detention; visual features; bicycle and walking paths and current use of the site. In addition to the standards listed below,
petitioners must also follow the regulations outlined in this zoning ordinance and the subdivision ordinance.
4. Preserving Natural Features: To the fullest extent possible, improvements shall be located to preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas
of environmental sensitivity, and tominimize negative effects and alteration of natural features. Fragile areas such as wetlands and floodplains shall
be preserved as open space. Slopes in excess of twenty percent (20%) as measured over a ten foot (10') interval also should remain as open space,
unless appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability, erosion and safety are taken.
5. Desirable Transition: The site should be planned to achieve a desirable transition to the street, with buildings and landscaping fronting on and
reinforcing the streetscape to the greatest extent practicable, and encouraging safe pedestrian movement.
6. Visibility: Parking, loading, storage and service areas, utility structures and machinery should not be visible from public ways and surrounding areas.
7. Enhancement And Relation To Surrounding Buildings: Proposed buildings and structures should be encouraged to generally enhance or relate to the
surrounding buildings and the local context, or in any case, not have an adverse impact on these. The scale, proportions, massing, articulation and
design features of structures should enhance the continuity of the streetscape, emphasize the human scale and integrate with the surrounding
landscape.
8. Height, Massing And Scale: Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height, massing and scale of each building
should be integrated with its site, the existing terrain, surrounding landscape and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
9. Site Layout: Improvements shall be laid out so as to avoid adversely affecting ground water and aquifer recharge; minimize cut and fill; avoid
unnecessary impervious cover; prevent flooding and pollution; provide adequate access to lots and sites; and mitigate adverse effects of shadow,
noise, odor, traffic, lighting, drainage and utilities on neighboring properties.
10. Historical Context: Site plans shall be designed to enhance historic architectural resources as identified by the National Register of Historic Places,
the Kendall County Historical Society, or local landmark designation. Owners are encouraged to allow site research for archaeological resources.
11. Open Space And Pedestrian Circulation: Improvements shall be designed to facilitate convenient and safe pedestrian and bicycle movement within
and to the property. This should be done through a continuous system of sidewalks and bicycle paths.
12. Buffering: Measures shall be taken to protect adjacent properties from any undue disturbance caused by excessive noise, smoke, vapors, fumes,
dusts, odors, glare or storm water runoff. Incompatible, unsightly activities are to be screened and buffered from public view.
13. Emergency Vehicle Access: Every structure shall have sufficient access for emergency vehicles.
B. Traffic And Parking Layout:
1. This subsection is intended to ensure that commercial, office, industrial and multi-family residential developments are compatible with the
surrounding traffic patterns and that the development will provide adequate parking and traffic control methods to assure the safety of the occupants
and visitors to the development.
2. Site plans should minimize dangerous traffic movements and congestion, while achieving efficient traffic flow and providing the optimum number of
parking spaces while maintaining city design standards. The number of curb cuts should be minimized and normally be located as far as possible
from intersections. Connections shall be provided between parking areas to allow vehicles to travel among adjacent commercial or office uses. Cross
easements or other recordable mechanisms must be employed.
3. Shared parking lot access shall be promoted where practical. Substantial and immediately effective perimeter screening and interior lot landscaping
should be provided to break up large expanses of asphalt with plant and other landscape materials. Must meet the landscaping requirements of title
6, chapter 15 of this code.
4. Conflicts between pedestrians and vehicular movements should be minimized.
5. When truck traffic will be present upon the site, the road size and configuration shall be adequate to provide for off street parking and loading
facilities for large vehicles. Truck traffic routes should be located behind the buildings whenever possible.
6. Barrier curb shall be employed for all perimeters of and islands in parking lots, as well as for all service drives, loading dock areas, and the
equivalent. Curb stops shall be prohibited. Relief from this provision may be considered for rear yard parking facilities in industrial zoning districts
where barrier curb installation would conflict with drainage requirements or for hardship cases as may be determined in conjunction with city officials.
Depressed curbs for all driveway and sidewalk intersections shall be provided by the pour in place method and shall not be saw cut.
7. Traffic studies may be required by the city council, in cases where the proposed use may create high vehicular traffic situations. Such traffic studies
should address:
a. Projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels;
b. Projected traffic flow patterns, including vehicular movementsat all major intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site; and
c. Impact of traffic upon abutting roads in relation to existing road capacities.
d. Existing and proposed daily and peak hour traffic levels as well as road capacity levels shall also be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 180/403
8. The site plan shall include a continuous system of bicycle and jogging paths.
9. Traffic control signs and devices shall be provided at all locations within a parking lot so as to provide for safe means of entering and exiting a lot and
to provide for safe traffic movement within the lot.
10. Improvements to existing roads as required by the authority having jurisdiction.
11. Loading bays shall not be located in front of any commercial structure or in the area abutting a public street.
C. Design Standards: These design standards are intended to ensure that commercial, office, industrial and multi-family residential development are
compatible with the surrounding area and contribute to the unique and historical character of the city of Plano.
1. Variation Of Design: The proposed site plan design shall provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visitors as well as its neighbors
through aesthetic use of materials, textures and colors that will remain appealing and will retain a reasonably adequate level of maintenance.
Buildings shall be in scale with the ultimate development planned for the area. Monotony of design shall be avoided. Variations in detail, form, and
setting shall be used to provide visual interest. Variation shall be balanced by coherence of design elements. Building facades of metal and other
similar sheathing materials, such as are used on pole barns and steel buildings, are prohibited. The steel and pole barn style of buildings are
prohibited except that such structures may be considered only for industrial districts or accessory buildings that are located interior to the lot and
screened from view.
2. Commercial And Office Development:
a. Any exterior building facade shall incorporate a predominance of high quality materials that may include, but not limited to, utility brick, sandstone,
other native stone, or glass. Utility brick, sandstone or other native stones shall at a minimum extend from ground level to the top of windows with
minor accents allowed in place of utility brick, sandstone or other native stones. Plastic or vinyl siding shall be prohibited on commercial and office
buildings.
b. Precast panels, manufactured panels, concrete block and/or EIFS construction or its equivalent are discouraged. If precast concrete, concrete
block, or split face concrete block are utilized, the use of colors, patterns, or other forms of architectural relief within these panels shall be required.
c. No uninterrupted length of facade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet. All facades greater than one hundred feet (100') in length shall
incorporate some horizontal architectural relief that may include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses, pilasters or other architectural
elements as approved by staff.
d. Except for those roofs allowed under subsection C2e of this section, any roof on a commercial structure shall incorporate at least one of the
following architectural treatments:
(1) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet (3') past the supporting walls.
(2) Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot (1') of
vertical rise for every three feet (3') of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot (1') of vertical rise for every one foot (1') of horizontal run.
(3) Three (3) or more slope planes.
(4) Prominent cornices along the roofline of any facade.
e. Any commercial structure with a flat roof design shall incorporate a screen wall that provides for a one hundred percent (100%) screening of HVAC
or mechanical equipment from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the height of the
supporting wall and such parapets shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the height of the supporting wall.
f. Any commercial establishment in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance(s)
featuring no less than three (3) of the following:
(1) Canopies, metal seam awnings or porticoes.
(2) Overhangs.
(3) Recesses/projections.
(4) Arcades.
(5) Raised corniced parapets over the door.
(6) Peaked roof forms.
(7) Arches.
(8) Outdoor plaza.
(9) Display windows.
(10) Architectural details such as tile work, brick solder courses or molding shall be integrated into the structure.
(11) Other design elements as deemed appropriate by staff.
g. Any commercial establishment having a square footage of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less shall have clearly defined, highly visible
customer entrance(s) featuring no less than one of the following:
(1) Canopies, metal seam awnings or porticoes.
(2) Overhangs.
(3) Recesses/projections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 181/403
(4) Arcades.
(5) Raised corniced parapets over the door.
(6) Peaked roof forms.
(7) Arches.
(8) Outdoor plaza.
(9) Display windows.
(10) Architectural details such as tile work, brick solder courses or molding shall be integrated into the structure.
(11) Other design elements as deemed appropriate by staff.
h. All commercial establishments shall incorporate sidewalks at least five feet (5') in width along all sides of the lot that abut a public street. Any
pedestrian sidewalk shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of materials like pavers, brick or scored concrete to enhance
pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkway.
i. Any commercial structure that exceeds twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall incorporate sidewalks, no less than eight feet (8') in width along
the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Any such
sidewalk shall be located a minimum three feet (3') from any facade, except where features such as arcades, colonnades, porticoes or entryways
are part of the facade.
j. Any facade or roof color incorporated in a commercial structure shall be of low reflective, subtle, neutral or earth tones and the use of high intensity
or metallic colors shall bediscouraged. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but exposed neon
tubing shall be discouraged from building trim or accent areas.
k. Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited from being located on any facade facing a public street. All drive-through facilities shall be located on the
side or rear of the structure that is either facing the site's parking area or internal drive aisle.
l. Any commercial structure more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall incorporate a public space, such as a plaza, courtyard or
landscape garden within the vicinity of the structure's main pedestrian entrance of the development's principal structure and shall incorporate a
minimum of three (3) of the following provisions:
(1) Pedestrian seating in the form of benches or ledges.
(2) Water features.
(3) Seasonal plantings.
(4) Textured paving.
(5) Raised brick planters with landscape.
(6) Pedestrian scaled lighting.
(7) Sculpture or other artwork.
(8) Outdoor eating or a cafe.
(9) Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited from being located on any facade facing a public street. All drive-through facilities shall be located on
the side or rear of the structure that is either facing the site's parking area or internal drive aisle.
m. A trash enclosure shall be provided for waste containers in a commercial office building. This enclosure must completely screen the trash from
sight and must have a gate, which also screens the trash and trash container. The enclosure must be designed and built in a manner, which
complements the building's construction and style.
3. Industrial Development: These standards are intended to ensure that industrial development responds and builds upon the strength and character of
the neighborhood area. The design of the first industrial development in an undeveloped area shall establish a desirable character for the area and
infill development shall complement or contribute to the character of the existing area.
a. Any industrial structure facade facing a public street and which has a facade length that exceeds one hundred feet (100'), measured horizontally,
shall incorporate recesses, projections,glass wall systems or other ornamental/architectural features along twenty percent (20%) of the length of
the facade.
b. Industrial structures' facades shall be constructed with precast concrete panels and/or masonry materials including, but not limited to, brick,
concrete block or split face concrete block. Where precast concrete or all types of concrete block are utilized, the use of colors, patterns, or other
forms of architectural relief within these panels shall be required. Materials other than precast panel or masonry materials may be used on
industrial facades that do not face public streets. However these materials are discouraged unless existing buildings already establish the
character of the industrial area and this character would allow these materials on the side and rear facades. If alternate materials are used on
these other facades they should not be directly visible from any public street.
c. Industrial loading bays shall not be located in front of any industrial structure or in the area abutting a public street.
d. The placement of mechanical equipment, utility meters, electrical conduit and other services or utilities shall be located or screened in a manner
so as not to be visible from the street or ground level of adjacent properties.
e. In order to provide an appropriate landscape screening between any public right of way and any industrial structure, the following landscape
standards shall be adhered to by all industrial developments in addition to the landscape requirements incorporated in title 6, chapter 15 of this
code:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 182/403
(1) There shall be a continuous landscape connection, with no parking areas or driveways, between any industrial structure and a public street for
at least a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the site's frontage, with a depth equal or greater than thirty feet (30').
(2) Security fences on industrial sites shall be screened with natural vegetation and the use of barbed wire, razor wire or fencing slats shall be
prohibited.
f. All industrial buildings shall incorporate sidewalks at least five feet (5') in width along all sides of the lot that abut a public street. Any pedestrian
sidewalk shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of materials like pavers, brick or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian
safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkway.
g. A trash enclosure shall be provided for all industrial buildings.
4. Multi-Family Residential Uses: These standards are intended to minimize the bulk and mass of multi-family units and to create distinctive
neighborhoods by avoiding monotonous design and giving multi-family dwellings a more residential character.
a. Multi-family units shall contain the following minimum requirements:
(1) Townhomes Or Attached Units: Townhomes or attached units shall contain a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of either face brick or stone on all
four (4) facades of the first floor.
(2) Apartment Buildings: Apartment structures shall not contain less than one hundred percent (100%) face brick or stone on the front elevation
and no less than seventy five percent (75%) face brick or stone on the rear or side elevations.
(3) Front Entryway Features: To infuse a denser multi-family development with small scale features that are similar to low density development,
multi-family dwellings shall incorporate three (3) of the following architectural features in the front entryway facade:
(A) Deep roof overhangs.
(B) Projecting window bays.
(C) Balconies or terraces.
(D) Offsets in the facade.
(E) Porches.
(4) Materials Different On Each Floor: Materials at the ground level that are distinctively different from the floors above.
(5) Rear Facade: No multi-family unit shall incorporate an uninterrupted rear facade of more than twenty (20) horizontal feet. All rear facades
greater than twenty feet (20') in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections, recesses, or bay windows having a depth
of at least three percent (3%) of the length of the rear facade and extending at least twenty percent (20%) of the length of the rear facade.
(6) Garage Doors: Multi-family structures should incorporate front elevations that are not dominated by garage doors and wherever possible,
garage doorways should be recessed into the multi-family structures or placed in the rear of multi-family structures.
(7) Alignment: To minimize the number of multi-family units facing residential streets, multi-family structures whenever possible should be aligned
along one of the following urban design configurations: motor courts, courtyards, village greens, or a public square.
(8) Common Spaces: Multi-family structures should be arranged in such a manner as to enclose and frame common spaces. These common
spaces should include gardens, courtyards, recreation and play areas. These common spaces should incorporate at least three (3) of the
following features:
(A) Seasonal planting areas.
(B) Large flowering trees.
(C) Pedestrian seating.
(D) Pedestrian scale lighting.
(E) Gazebo or other decorative shelters.
(F) Play structures for children.
(G) Natural environmental areas.
(9) Screening: Multi-family structures shall screen all mechanical systems, utility boxes with a one hundred percent (100%) screening. Any air
conditioning wall unit located in a multi-family units shall be one hundred percent (100%) visually screened through the incorporation of a custom
cover or natural vegetation.
D. Lighting:
1. Exterior lighting should be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and exposed accessories should be integrated with the building
design.
2. Adequate provision should be made to avoid glare of vehicular and stationary lights that would affect the established character of the neighborhood,
and to the extent such lights will be visible across any property line, the performance standards for illumination shall be met.
E. Refuse Disposal And Recycling Storage Areas:
1. All refuse disposal and recycling storage areas should be located in areas designed to provide adequate accessibility for service vehicles. Locations
should be to the rear of buildings or in areas where minimal exposure to public streets will exist. Refuse disposal and recycling containers, and other
equipment such as grease containers, or outdoor storage of materials such as pallets, should not be placed outside of enclosures. Such enclosures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 183/403
should not be located in required aisles or landscape buffers. Refuse and recycling enclosures for food establishments should not be located
adjacent to boundaries with residential districts. All refuse and recycling enclosures should be screened by a solid fence or wall to a height not
greater than six feet (6'). Containers or material within the fence enclosure should not extend above the height of the fence. A solid latchable gate
should secure the area. The use of chainlink fences with slats is prohibited. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-5: PETITION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A. Standing: The property owner shall make a petition for siteplan review.
B. Filing: Petitions for site plan review shall be filed in writing with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by such documents and information as the city
council may require. Such documents and information shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Completed petition for site plan review in a format developed by the city;
2. Applicable application fee;
3. Generalized location map;
4. Plats and drawings depicting compliance with the aforementioned site design standards.
C. Plan Requirements: The petition for site plan review and drawings shall include the following:
1. Name of the project, boundaries, and location map showing the site's location in city, date, north arrow and scale of plan.
2. Name, address and telephone number of the owner of record.
3. All existing lot lines, easements and rights of way, including area in acres or square feet.
4. Contiguous land uses and zoning, and location and use of structures within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the site.
5. Location and use of all existing and proposed structures within the development.
6. Location of all present and proposed roads, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, fences, curbs, paths and walls.
7. Location and proposed screening details for all permanent waste disposal containers.
8. Location, height, intensity and bulb type of all external lighting fixtures. The direction of illumination and methods to eliminate glare into adjoining
properties should be shown.
9. Location of all present and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, sewage or septic systems, water supply, telephone, cable and electrical
systems, and storm water drainage systems, such as drain lines, culverts, catch basins, hydrants and drainage swales.
10. Location of existing and proposed natural features, including topography, forest cover and water sources.
11. Elevation plans for exterior facades of proposed structures, showing design features and indicating type and color ofmaterials to be used.
12. Landscaping proposed for the development, including new plantings and existing plant material to be preserved, along with an indication of trees to
be removed or transplanted. A separate landscape plan may be submitted in lieu of illustration on the site plan.
13. A copy of the permit application and any revisions required by the U.S. army corps of engineers for any floodplain or wetland modification.
14. Timetable for construction of improvements. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-6: PROCEDURE:
A written application for site plan review shall be submitted to the city clerk, who will schedule the item for review. Consultation with the appropriate city
staff and consultants is encouraged throughout this process to ensure a minimum delay. If requested by the applicant, the city will review applications for
site plan review concurrently with separate requests for rezoning or platting. The review process will include the following:
A. Project Review Committee: One copy of the complete application, along with twelve (12) copies of the site plan shall be submitted by the property
owner or his certified agent to the city clerk at least five (5) days prior to the project review committee meeting. The purpose of the project review
committee meeting will be to evaluate the completeness of the application and to provide the applicant with general feedback/input on the proposed
site plan. Prior to the project review committee meeting, the city clerk shall distribute copies of the site plan to the following:
1. Mayor.
2. City engineer.
3. City engineering consultant.
4. City planning consultant.
5. City attorney.
6. Police chief.
7. Fire chief.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 184/403
8. Director of economic development.
9. Superintendent of schools.
10. Building, planning and zoning committee chair.
11. Director of building, planning and zoning.
B. Plan Commission: After review by the building and zoning committee, the applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the site plan, along with any
revisions, to the director of building, planning and zoning. If the site plan has been modified since the original application, an additional twelve (12)
copies of the revised plan shall be submitted for distribution to members of the project review committee as noted in subsection A of this section.
Members of the project review committee, independently or collectively, shall submit comments on the site plan prior to the plan commission meeting.
After reviewing reports from project review committee members, the plan commission shall recommend approval or denial of the site plan, with or
without conditions, or may defer the item for further study.
C. Committee Of The Whole: After recommendation by the plan commission, the applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the site plan, along with any
revisions, to the director of building, planning and zoning. If the site plan has been modified since the original application, an additional twelve (12)
copies of the revised plan shall be submitted for distribution to members of the project review committee as noted in subsection A of this section. After
reviewing reports from project review committee members and recommendations of the plan commission, the committee of the whole shall recommend
that the site plan be placed on a regular city council agenda for approval or denial, with or without conditions, or may defer the item for further study.
D. City Council: The city council shall approve or deny the application for site plan review. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-7: EXECUTION OF STATEMENT OF AGREEMENT AND CONDITIONS:
If approved by the city council, the city attorney shall prepare a statement of agreement and conditions authorizing the site plan and summarizing any
conditions imposed by the council upon such plan. The statement of agreement and conditions shall be executed by both the mayor and petitioner. As a
condition of approval, the city council may require the applicant to file with the city treasurer a letter of credit or a performance guarantee approved by the
city attorney to ensure completion of approved landscaping, fencing, parking and loading, drainage and all other specific items of the site plan. The amount
of the performance guarantee and the required completion date shall be recommended by the city engineer based on current construction costs. (Ord.
2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-8: REVOCATION:
Where a site plan has been approved and where no substantial construction work is initiated within one year from the date approving the site plan, then,
without further action by the city council, such site plan approval shall become null and void.(Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
5-15-9: ENFORCEMENT:
It is the policy of the city that enforcement of this site plan review requirement shall be deemed in the highest public interest. If any person violates the
provisions of this chapter, the city may exercise any or all of the remedies and penalties available under law including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Imposition of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense. For the second
and subsequent offenses, the fine shall not be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues.
B. Said violation shall be considered a nuisance, in which case the city may take summary steps to abate the nuisance and charge the violator with the
cost of abating the nuisance. Upon nonpayment, the city may file a lien against the property.
C. If the violation occurs in connection with the development of property or the building of structures, the city may revoke all permits and cause the
cessation of any and all construction.
D. The city may obtain an injunction requiring the abatement of the violation.
E. In addition to the fines herein, the city shall be entitled to all costs of prosecution, including attorney fees incurred by the city, and the cost, if any, of
abating the violation. (Ord. 2006-45, 5-22-2006)
Chapter 16
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
5-16-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be commonly known as the TOWER AND ANTENNA ORDINANCE and shall become a part of the zoning ordinance, and all of the
general, procedural and other provisions of the zoning ordinance which are not specifically superseded or contradicted by the terms herein, shall remain in
full force and effect. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 185/403
5-16-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless telecommunications
facilities. The city of Plano shall give due consideration to its comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. The provisions of this chapter are not intended and shall not be intended to prohibit or have the
effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this chapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent wireless services. To the extent that any provisions of this chapter amending the zoning
ordinance or the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision of the zoning ordinance, provisions of this amending
chapter shall be deemed controlling. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-3: EFFECT:
Should the application of this chapter, or any section or subsection thereof, have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal
wireless service to all or a portion of the city of Plano, such applicant may petition the city council for an amendment to this title, this chapter, or any section
or subsection therefor, in the manner provided in section 5-12-10 of this title. The city council, upon receipt of such petition, shall promptly forward the
petition to the plan commission for review and for a public hearing in the usual and customary manner for zoning text amendments as provided in section
5-12-10 et seq., of this title. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-4: PROCEDURE:
In the course of reviewing any approval required hereunder made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install personal wireless
service facilities, the city building and zoning administrator (hereafter referred to as the "zoning officer"), the plan commission, the zoning board of appeals,
or the city council, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the city of Plano, taking into account
the nature and scope of the request, and any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record. All applications shall be processed in their usual and customary manner, and this chapter shall not be interpreted to require expedited
processing of an application. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-5: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and towers.
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used to receive or radiate electromagnetic waves as defined by the FCC or any successor agency.
ANTENNA STRUCTURES: Those structures which include the radiating and/or receiving system, its supporting structures (see definition of Towers), and
any appurtenance mounted thereon as defined by the FCC or any successor agency.
BACK HAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and antenna structures.
NO IMPACT ANTENNAS AND TOWERS: A tower or antenna which is either: a) virtually invisible to the casual observer, such as an antenna behind
louvers on a building, or inside a steeple or similar structure, or b) camouflaged so as to blend in with its surroundings to such an extent that it is no more
obtrusive to the casual observer than the structure on which it is: 1) placed, such as a rooftop, lighting standard, or existing tower, or 2) replacing, such as
a school athletic field light standard.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY: Any facility for the provision of personal wireless services as defined by the FCC or any successor agency.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services
as defined by the FCC or any successor agency.
PREEXISTING TOWERS OR ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been properly issued prior to
the effective date hereof, including permitted towers and antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER AND ANTENNA ORDINANCE: Shall refer to this chapter.
TOWERS: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communications purposes, including self-support lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The tower includes the structure
and any support thereto.
UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE: That service which offers telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual
licenses issued by the FCC, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services as defined by the FCC or any successor agency. (Ord.
2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-6: APPLICABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 186/403
A. New Towers And Antennas: All new towers and antennas in the city of Plano shall be subject to these regulations.
B. Amateur Radio Operations/Receive-Only Antennas: This chapter shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under eighty feet
(80') in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. No
receive-only antenna shall exceed the highest point on the nearest residential rooftop of a dwelling by more than ten feet (10').
C. Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Existing towers and existing antennas which predated this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this chapter other than the requirements of subsections 5-16-7D, E, G, and P of this chapter. All preexisting towers and antennas shall be subject to the
tower and antenna administrative fee as of January 1 following the effective date hereof.
D. AM Array: For purposes of implementing this chapter, AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which functions as
one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer
perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-
2013)
5-16-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Special Use: Antennas and towers are considered a special use. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with the city of Plano development regulations, including,
but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Approved Site Zoning Districts: Antennas, antenna structures, and towers shall be allowed as permitted special uses as provided in section 5-16-8 of
this chapter.
D. Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce
visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structure shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural settings and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives
and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
F. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards or regulations of the FAA, the FCC, or any other agency of the state
or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more restrictive compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower and antenna at the owner's expense.
G. Building Codes/Safety Standards: Any owner or operator of an antenna, antenna structure or tower shall maintain the antenna, antenna structure or
tower in compliance with the standards contained in the current and applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers
that are published by the electronic industry association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city of Plano concludes that an
antenna, antenna structure or tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner or operator of the antenna, antenna structure or tower, that the owner or operator shall have thirty (30) days to bring such
antenna, antenna structure or tower into compliance with the applicable standards. Failure to bring the antenna, antenna structure or tower into
compliance within the thirty (30) day period shall constitute grounds for removal of the antenna, antenna structure or tower at the owner's and/or
operator's expense.
H. Measurement: For purposes of measurement, tower setback and tower separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the
city of Plano irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
I. Not Essential Services: Antennas, antenna structures and towers shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
J. Public Notice: For purposes of this chapter, any special use request, variance request, or appeal shall require public notice and individual notice by the
city of Plano to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the zoning lot in
question. Streets, alleys, and watercourses shall not be considered in the determination of "abutting" or in calculating the two hundred fifty feet (250').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 187/403
K. Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower other than those required by the FCC.
L. Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas and towers shall comply with the requirements of
subsection 5-16-8K of this chapter.
M. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The city of Plano encourages all plans for tower and antenna sites to be submitted in a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
N. Antennas On Existing Towers: An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the zoning officer and, to minimize adverse visual
impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
1. Reconstruction: A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type
as the existing tower, unless the zoning officer allows reconstruction as a monopole.
2. Height:
a. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty feet (30') over the tower's existing height, such height not
exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150') in total, to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna.
b. The height change referred to in subsection N2a of this section may only occur one time per communication tower.
c. The additional height referred to in subsection N2a of this section shall not require a distance separation. The tower's premodification height shall
be used to calculate such distance separations.
3. On Site Location:
a. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on site within fifty feet (50') of its existing
location.
b. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one tower may remain on the site.
c. A relocated on site tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between
towers. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of this chapter.
d. The on site relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in the
zoning ordinance shall only be permitted when approved by the zoning officer.
4. New Towers In Residential Zoning Districts: Antennas, antenna structures, and towers proposed for location in R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R6-AT, R-7,
and R-8 zoning districts shall be erected only upon municipally owned property, or public recreational property which may include, but not be limited
to, golf courses and forest preserve lands.
5. New Towers In Nonresidential Zoning Districts: An applicant may locate any new tower in an A-1, R-1, M-1, M-2, M-3 or B-5 zoning district, provided
that: a) a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; b)
the zoning officer concludes the tower is in conformity with the purposes set forth in the ordinance codified herein and the requirements of this
chapter; c) the tower meets the setback and separation requirements in subsection 5-16-8E of this chapter; and d) the tower meets the following
height and usage criteria:
a. For a single user, up to and including one hundred twenty feet (120') in height;
b. For two (2) users, up to one hundred fifty feet (150') in height; and
c. For three (3) or more users, up to and including one hundred eighty feet (180') in height.
O. Roadway Access: All sites on which antennas, antenna structures, and towers are located must have a passable roadway access of compacted
macadam base not less than seven inches (7") thick surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all weather
dustless material.
P. Fencing: The structures upon any site upon which an antenna, antenna structure, or tower is located shall be surrounded by an opaque screen which is
no more than ten feet (10') in height and equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device. Screening materials shall include either wooden or chainlink
fencing. Barbed wire shall be prohibited unless a variance is obtained to the contrary. Shrubbery and bushes shall be required, in addition to the
wooden or chainlink fence, unless specifically waived by the city of Plano in its discretion in appropriate cases.
Q. Annual Administrative Fee And Certifications: Each owner and/or operator of an antenna, antenna structure or tower shall be required annually on
January 1 to pay an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and to provide the following certifications in writing by a certified engineer:
1. That the owner or operator's antenna, antenna structure or tower has been inspected and is in compliance with all state and local building codes and
standards published by the electronic industry association; and
2. That the owner or operator's antenna is in compliance with the FCC RF emissions standards.
The city of Plano reserves the right to increase the amount of the administrative fee as it deems necessary. A separate administrative fee shall be
paid by each user or collocator on a tower.
R. Permit Required: Prior to the construction of an antenna, antenna structure or tower, the provider of the radio, television, or telecommunications
services shall obtain a permit from the city of Plano for the erection of such antenna, antenna structure or tower. An applicant for a permit for an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 188/403
antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall pay a fee in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in section 5-12-12 of this title, plus any reasonable
legal, engineering, or consulting fees which may be required at the conclusion of the review.
S. Waiver Of Provisions: An applicant can request a waiver of any provision of this chapter upon the showing of appropriate justification and benefit to the
public. Such request shall be treated as a request for a variance and the appropriate procedures thereto shall apply. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-8: SPECIAL USES:
A. General Provisions:
1. Radio and telecommunications antennas, antenna structures, and towers used for personal wireless facilities, personal wireless services, radio
transmission, or television transmission shall be subject to the special use provisions contained within section 5-12-9 of this title and applications for
special use permits shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of the zoning ordinance, except as modified in this chapter.
2. In granting a special use permit, the plan commission may impose conditions to the extent the plan commission concludes such conditions are
necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
3. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
4. An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of
the city council of the city of Plano to reimburse the city of Plano for the cost of reviewing the application.
5. Antennas, antenna structures, and towers shall be allowed as special uses only consistent with all of the requirements of this chapter in the following
zoning districts: R-1 (one-family residence - golf course, public utility facilities, public service use facilities only), M-1, M-2, or M-3 manufacturing
districts and A-1 (agricultural district).
B. Information Required: In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits referenced above, each petitioner requesting a
special use permit under this chapter for an antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location, type, and
dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives,
proposed means of access, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, adjacent roadway, and other information deemed necessary by the city of
Plano to be necessary to assess compliance for this chapter. In addition, the following information shall be supplied:
1. Legal description of the parent track and leased parcel (if applicable);
2. The setback distance between the proposed structure and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties and unplatted
residentially zoned property;
3. The separation distance from other such structures described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to table 2 of this section shall be
shown on an updated site plan or map and the applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing structure(s) and the owner/operator
of the existing structure(s), if known;
4. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
5. The method of fencing, and finish color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination;
6. A description of compliance with subsections 5-16-7C, D, E, F, G, H and L of this chapter and all applicable federal, state or local laws;
7. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether the construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
users;
8. Identification of the entities providing the back haul network for the structure(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the city of Plano;
9. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to
provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower; and
10. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the city of Plano based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological, or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
C. Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits: The city of Plano shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use
permit above and beyond those factors referenced in section 5-12-9 of this title. The city of Plano may waive or reduce the burden on the petitioner of
one or more of these criteria if the city of Plano concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby:
1. Height of the proposed antenna, antenna structure, or tower;
2. Proximity of the antenna, antenna structure, or tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
3. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
4. Surrounding topography;
5. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
6. Design of the antenna, antenna structure, or tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
7. Proposed ingress and egress; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 189/403
8. Availability of other suitable existing antennas, antenna structures, towers, alternative power structures and other structures or alternative
technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures as discussed elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Height: No antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall exceed a height of one hundred eighty (180) linear feet in aerial height. Where an arm has been
installed to facilitate collocation of an additional antenna on the existing antenna structure or tower, the arm shall not exceed a length of twelve (12)
linear feet.
E. Setbacks And Separation:
1. Setbacks: Antennas, antenna structures, or towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the antenna, antenna structure, or tower from
any property line.
2. Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas; provided, however, that the plan commission may reduce
the standard separation requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby, or if enforcement of said setback would effectively
prohibit said tower:
a. Separation From Off Site Uses/Designated Areas:
(1) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off site uses and/or designated areas as specified in table 1
of this section, except as otherwise provided in table 1 of this section.
(2) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
Off Site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex residential units' principal building 500 feet
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan
approval which is not expired
500 feet
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands, including unplatted residential use property without a valid preliminary
subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multi-family residentially zoned land greater than
duplex
500 feet
Existing multi-family residential units greater than duplex 100 feet or 100 percent of the
tower height, whichever is
greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands or nonresidential areas None. Only setbacks apply
Big Rock Creek or any watercourse 100 feet
b. Separation Distances Between Towers:
(1) Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base,
pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) are as shown in table 2 of this section.
TABLE 2
EXISTING TOWERS - TYPES
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
>75 Feet High
Monopole
<75 Feet High
Lattice 1,000 1,500 500 250
Guyed 1,000 1,750 1,500 1,250
Monopole >75 feet high 500 1,500 250 250
Monopole <75 feet high 250 1,250 250 250
F. Siting On Wetland Prohibited: No antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall be located in an area which has been designated as a wetland either by the
city of Plano, Kendall County, the state of Illinois department of natural resources, the United States department of the interior or the United States
army corps of engineers, and any and all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction.
G. FCC Signage: To the extent that signage is required by the FCC on an antenna structure, or tower that signage shall constitute no more than five
percent (5%) of the square footage of the antenna, antenna structure, or tower or shall be no larger than is required by the FCC, whichever shall
constitute the smallest signage area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 190/403
H. Preservation Of Landscape: Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the proposed antenna, antenna structure, or tower site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
I. Utilities And Access Required: Radio and telecommunications antennas, antenna structures, and towers, including, but not limited to, those used for
personal wireless services, personal wireless facilities and unlicensed wireless services, shall be required to include adequate utilities, access, and/or
other facilities necessary for the servicing of the antenna, antenna structure or tower. All such utilities shall be buried.
J. Signal Interference: No signal transmission from any antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall interfere with police, fire, public works or any other
governmental radio bank signals. In the case of the possibility of such interference based upon the frequencies selected for the proposed antenna,
antenna structure, or tower, the petition for special use shall be denied.
K. Equipment Shelter And Equipment Cabinets:
1. Equipment Shelter: A provider of a radio, television, or telecommunications antenna, antenna structure, or tower may provide an equipment shelter
on the site of the antenna, antenna structure, or tower. The square footage of the equipment shelter may not exceed more than twenty percent (20%)
of the total square footage of the antenna, antenna structure or tower ground site or four hundred fifty (450) square feet, whichever is greater. At any
antenna, antenna structure, or tower site in which more than one antenna has been collocated, no more than three (3) equipment shelters shall be
allowed. Multiple equipment shelters shall be contained under one roof if at all practicably possible. No equipment shelter shall be approved as part
of the site plan unless appropriate electrical power and road ingress and egress facilities are planned for inclusion at the equipment shelter site.
Providers of radio, television, or telecommunications antennas, antenna structures, or towers who provide an equipment shelter shall be subject to
the accessory building requirements set forth in section 5-3-5 of this title.
2. Equipment Cabinets:
a. In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located in a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than
four feet (4') in height or twenty four (24) square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located at a minimum of six feet (6') from all lot
lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by hedging or shrubbery with an ultimate height of at least forty two (42) to forty eight inches (48")
and a planted height of at least thirty six inches (36").
b. In a rear yard; provided, the cabinet or structure is no greater than six feet (6') in height or sixty four (64) square feet in gross floor area. The
structure or cabinet shall be screened by hedging or shrubbery with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted height of at least thirty six
inches (36"). In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet (6') in height or a hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted
height of thirty six inches (36").
c. In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than six feet (6') in height or sixty four (64) square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by a hedge or shrubbery with an ultimate height of eight feet (8') and a planted height
of at least thirty six inches (36"). In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties which abut or
are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet (6') in height or a hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet (8')
and a planted height of thirty six inches (36").
L. Code Requirements: Any antenna, antenna structure, or tower must meet code requirements established by the applicable codes as adopted by the city
of Plano including, but not limited to, the national electrical code, national electrical safety code, and all applicable marking and lighting standards as
established by the federal aviation administration.
M. Engineering Justification: No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant provides justification and demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the zoning board that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the zoning board related to the availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures, or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following:
1. No existing antennas, antenna structures, or towers are located within the geographic area required to meet petitioner's engineering requirements;
2. Existing antennas, antenna structures, towers, or other structures are not of sufficient height to meet petitioner's engineering requirements;
3. Existing antennas, antenna structures, towers, or other structures do not have sufficient structural strength to meet petitioner's engineering
requirements;
4. The petitioner's proposed antenna, antenna structure, or tower would cause electromagnetic interference with the existing antenna, antenna
structure, or tower, or the antenna on the existing structure would cause interference with the petitioner's proposed antenna;
5. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing antenna, antenna structure, or tower or to adapt to an
existing antenna, antenna structure, or tower are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new antenna, antenna structure, or tower development are
considered unreasonable;
6. The petitioner demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing antennas, antenna structures, or towers or other structures
unsuitable;
7. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network
using multiple low powered transmitters and receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Cost of alternative technology that exceeds new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
N. Removal Of Abandoned Antennas, Antenna Structures, Or Towers: Any antenna, antenna structure, or tower that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months or for which the annual administrative fee is not paid within a twelve (12) month period shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna, antenna structure, or tower shall remove same from within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the city of
Plano notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna, antenna structure, or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the city of
Plano shall remove such antenna, antenna structure, or tower at the owner's expense and file a lien against the real estate for the cost of removal or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 191/403
such other action as provided by law. If there are two (2) or more users of a single antenna, antenna structure, or tower, then this provision shall not
become effective until all users cease using the antenna, antenna structure, or tower.
O. Collocation: A request for approval of a special use permit for the installation of an antenna, alternative antenna, antenna structure or tower, the zoning
board may by express condition require that the applicant shall allow, on a commercially reasonable basis, other providers of personal wireless
telecommunications services to collocate additional antennas or antenna structures on a freestanding pole which is part of applicant's proposed
personal wireless facility, where such collocation is technologically feasible. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Prohibited Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting Towers: Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of light construction and height) shall be permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Rebuilding Damaged Or Destroyed Nonconforming Antennas, Antenna Structures Or Towers: Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the
contrary, bona fide nonconforming antennas, antenna structures or towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having
first obtained administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements specified elsewhere in this
chapter. The type, height, and location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approved. Building permits to
rebuild a facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the
facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained within the time specified or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in subsection 5-16-8N of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-2013)
5-16-10: ANNUAL REPORTING OF INFORMATION:
Each owner of an antenna, antenna structure, or tower regulated under this chapter, and including those previously existing structures which would have
been regulated under this chapter, shall, on an annual basis, furnish the city of Plano, with such information as is required by the city of Plano to aid with
the administration of this chapter.
Such information shall include, but not be limited to, changes in availability of space on any tower for collocation of additional antennas, plans to abandon
a position on a tower, thereby leaving space for the possible collocation of another antenna, plans and/or willingness to modify said tower and antenna
structure so as to provide for the possibility of collocation, or intentions to abandon a tower structure, or other nonproprietary information as may be
required by the city of Plano. Upon written notice from the city of Plano to the owner thereof, as of the effective date hereof, which tower and/or antenna
structure would otherwise be regulated by this chapter, the owner shall register with the city of Plano, and shall provide such nonproprietary information as
is deemed useful by the city of Plano for administration of this chapter. This section is specifically deemed to have a retroactive effect. (Ord. 2013-18, 7-8-
2013)
Chapter 17
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5-17-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations regarding the location of sexually oriented businesses in the municipality, in
order to minimize and control the negative secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses within the municipality thereby promoting the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose
nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is obscene. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-2: FINDINGS:
Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses presented to the municipality's plan commission and city
council from findings incorporated in the cases City Of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. , 120 S.Ct. 1382 (2000), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991), City Of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Berg v. Health And Hospital
Corporation Of Marion County, Indiana, 865 F.2d. 797 (7th Cir. 1989), Ellwest Stereo Theaters, Inc. v. Wenner, 681 F.2d. 1243 (9th Cir. 1982), Bamon
Corp. v. City Of Dayton, 730 F.Supp. 80 (S.D. Ohio 1990), and EWAP, Inc. v. City Of Los Angeles, 97 Cal.App.3d 179, 158 Cal.Rptr. 579 (1979), and on
studies in other cities and states including the "Report Of The Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses"
(Minnesota 1989), "Memorandum re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance" of the assistant chief of police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990), Hecht, Peter R.,
Ph.D., "Report To: The American Center For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of Sex Oriented Businesses" (March 31, 1996), "Adult
Entertainment Businesses In Indianapolis, An Analysis" (1984), and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D. and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., "Final Report To The City Of
Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime And Adult Business Operations On Garden Grove Boulevard" (Garden Grove, CA, October 23, 1991);
this legislative body finds:
A. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 192/403
B. Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate
booths or rooms for viewing films, videos, or live sexually oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable diseases such
as syphilis, gonorrhea, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
C. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and a decrease in the residential and
commercial property values that surround them, especially those properties within one thousand feet (1,000') of such businesses.
D. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased crime in the neighborhood,
including sex related crimes like prostitution, obscenity, and sexual assault. This correlation is especially acute when more than one sexually oriented
business is located in a neighborhood, and when a sexually oriented business is located near a public open space such as a park, cemetery or school.
E. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased harassment and propositioning
of women, children and the elderly in the neighborhood.
F. Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and offensive material such as pornographic
magazines and used condoms being discarded in the surrounding neighborhood, making them available to children.
G. Location of sexually oriented businesses in a neighborhood can create a "sex for sale" reputation in a neighborhood.
H. The foregoing findings raise substantial governmental interests and concerns.
I. The municipality cannot entirely prohibit sexually oriented businesses which are not obscene from locating within the municipality.
J. The municipality can effect reasonable locational regulations which it believes will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with
sexually oriented businesses.
K. Locating sexually oriented businesses in the M-1 limited manufacturing district will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with
sexually oriented businesses.
L. Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located seven hundred fifty feet (750') from any other sexually oriented businesses will ameliorate these
deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses, while also balancing the first amendment requirement of providing some
market for such businesses.
M. Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located one thousand feet (1,000') from any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park including any
lineal recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious worship, and seven hundred fifty feet (750') from any lot
zoned for residential purposes and seven hundred fifty feet (750') from any lot used for residential purposes, complies with the requirements set forth in
state law, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-5-1.5, and will ameliorate the deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.
(Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, and as used elsewhere in this title where referring to sexually oriented businesses:
EMPLOYEE: A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage
or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS: Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee-only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial
purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and
training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Plano, an Illinois body politic and corporate.
NUDITY OR NUDE: Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device, costume, or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any
specified anatomical areas.
PATRON: Any natural person who is not an employee.
SEMINUDITY OR SEMINUDE: Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or
any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the following when done in a place where the public is invited or permitted, or on the premises of any club or
organization where only members and their guests are invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose including sale and rental,
regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 193/403
A. The live exhibition or display of a natural person or people in the state of nudity or seminudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;
B. A hotel, motel or similar establishment, if such establishment rents rooms for a period not exceeding ten (10) hours. However, it shall not include
such establishment solely because such establishment is renting a room for a period of less than ten (10) hours when the room being rented is a
dining room, banquet room, ballroom, conference room or similar facility unless such rooms are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or
excretory functions, or if the use of such rooms would otherwise constitute a sexually oriented business without regard to the length of their rental;
C. The offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, and also the offering of physical
contact. which constitutes specified sexual activities regardless of the sex of the person performing or receiving said contact;
D. The offering of products, services or activities to males, females or both, with a natural person or people of the same or opposite sex, or both, when
one or more of the people, whether a patron, agent, employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
E. The display or offering to others, of any description or depiction, of a natural person, people, or characters as in cartoons and animation, by any
medium, including, without limitation, film, motion picture machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc
(CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine, and computer software, which is:
1. Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified
anatomical areas; or
2. Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas, including, without limitation, the use of the term "adult" or "mature" and the use
of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX";
F. The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of the specified anatomical areas;
G. The term sexually oriented business shall exclude the following:
1. The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicides or other nonprescription contraceptives, in and of themselves, unless displayed and
offered to others on the premises of a business which would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;
2. The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois;
3. The display and offering to others of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified sexual
activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the state of Illinois is employed to dispense
prescription drugs, instruments or devices;
4. Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast-feeding an infant;
5. The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the motion picture association of America
of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in their entirety;
6. Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal, state or local governmental funds;
7. The display and offering to others of items which would otherwise qualify as a sexually oriented business pursuant to subsection E of this
definition, if and only if the display and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business displaying and
offering such items to others:
a. Less than twenty five percent (25%) of its gross income comes from the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
(1) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
(2) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" or "mature" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
b. Less than twenty five percent (25%) of its display space is used for the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 194/403
(1) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
(2) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" or "mature" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX"; and
c. Less than twenty five percent (25%) of the items it offers to others are the following types of items:
(1) Items which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, and
(2) Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without
limitation, the use of the term "adult" or "mature" and the use of the designation of one or more "X" such as, but not limited to, "XXX";
8. A person or business establishment if the only basis for designating said person or business establishment as engaging in a sexually oriented
business is that they are engaged in the practice of massage. For purposes of this definition "massage" shall mean any method of pressure on or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or
with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams,
lotions, ointments or other similar preparations used in this practice, and if each and every natural person performing the foregoing at such
establishment satisfies the following criteria:
a. Said person has graduated from a massage therapy school which requires a minimum of five hundred (500) hours for graduation approved by
the American massage therapy association commission on accreditation and training, associated bodywork and massage professionals, and/or
approved by the Illinois state board of education; or
b. Said person has achieved current, active or certified level membership status within a professional organization with standards comparable to
the American bodywork and massage professionals (including recognized international massage associations: Rolf, Trager, APTA, HPA, IMF,
AOBTA, IMTA), and mandated continuing education requirements and a written code of ethics; or
c. Said person has achieved a state license from a state which regulates massage therapy by means of a written application; or
d. Said person has achieved a passing score on a recognized certification exam (IMF or NCETMB); or
e. Said person has received a minimum of five hundred (500) hours training under the direct supervision of a person licensed to practice the
healing arts by the state of Illinois, followed by at least ten (10) years' active practice of massage therapy within the state of Illinois;
H. Certain uses which fall within the strict definition of sexually oriented business may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or federal
law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses constitute a sexually oriented business under this definition, they shall not be
permitted uses in any district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the
female breast if less than fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by makeup, paint, or similar matter applied
directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following, whether actual or simulated:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks, or female breasts,
regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of seminudity;
B. The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or uncovered,
or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or seminudity;
C. Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual, including, without limitation, intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, analingus,
masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal;
D. Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer. (Ord. 2000-
34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-4: SPECIAL USE:
Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and subject to the setback requirements of section 5-17-5 of this chapter, sexually
oriented businesses shall be a special use only in the M-2 general manufacturing district. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000; amd. Ord. 2016-18, 4-25-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 195/403
5-17-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No sexually oriented business shall be located within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of any other sexually oriented business, nor within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park including any linear recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, and
place of religious worship, nor within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of a lot zoned for residential purposes, nor within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of a lot
used for residential purposes. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-6: RESTRICTIONS ON USE:
All sexually oriented businesses shall be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any
manner that permits the observation from outside the building of any image, material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state of nudity or seminudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or
any other means. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-7: SIGNAGE:
No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of billboard, signboards or sign, within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, daycare center,
cemetery, public park including any linear recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious worship. (Ord. 2000-34,
12-11-2000)
5-17-8: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The restrictions set forth in this chapter shall supersede any other restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of any ordinance as applied to
sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the restrictions are in conflict. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
5-17-9: AMORTIZATION:
If at the time this chapter becomes effective, any sexually oriented business exists in a location not permitted by this chapter or is otherwise not in
compliance with this chapter, then said sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal nonconforming use. However, notwithstanding any other
ordinance or section of any ordinance to the contrary, said legal nonconforming sexually oriented business shall come into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter within one year of the effective date of this chapter. No sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal nonconforming use
after one year after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-34, 12-11-2000)
Title 6
LAND SUBDIVISION
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
6-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION AND PLAT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PLANO or the PLANO
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-2: PURPOSE:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the City becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the community, and to which the future
community will, of necessity, be faced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the incorporated limits of the City and within the unincorporated
area lying within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with the regulations hereinafter
contained in this Title. These regulations are designed to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the City, for the coordination of streets
within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and to secure a uniform system of utilities and services, and otherwise to promote
realization of the Comprehensive Plan. The regulations of this Title are adopted:
A. To protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. To conserve, protect and enhance property and property values.
C. To secure the most efficient use of land.
D. To facilitate the adequate but economical provision of public improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 196/403
E. To provide for the orderly growth and development of the City.
F. To provide adequate facilities for safe and efficient means of traffic circulation.
G. To safeguard the public against flood damage, soil erosion and sedimentation.
H. To prescribe reasonable rules and regulations governing subdivision and plats, location, width and course of streets and highways, the installation of
utilities, street pavements and other essential improvements, and the provisions of necessary public grounds for schools, parks, playgrounds and other
public open space.
I. To establish procedures for the submission, approval and recording of plats.
J. To provide the means for enforcement.
K. To provide penalties for violations. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-3: JURISDICTION:
This Title shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the incorporated limits of the City and within the unincorporated area lying within one and one-half
(11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the City. Said subdivisions shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with the applicable regulations hereinafter
set forth in this Title. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
and effectuation of the purpose set forth herein for the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare.
B. Conflicting Laws And Agreements: Where this Title imposes greater restrictions or requirements than one imposed or required by other provisions of
law, rules, regulations, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this Title shall control, but nothing herein shall interfere with, abrogate or annul any
easement, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between parties which impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this Title. (Ord. 1998-
23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-5: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular.
B. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof; and
any word appearing in parenthesis directly after a word herein defined, shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Title, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBDIVISION: That formal act of transference of public improvement to a specific subdivision or development from private
ownership and control to that of the appropriate public agency pursuant to conditions, procedures and terms set forth in this Title.
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of properties whose principal frontage is on some
other street.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets, railway rights of way or waterways or limits of subdivision.
BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR/INSPECTOR: The Building and Zoning Administrator/Inspector of the City of Plano, Illinois, or his duly
authorized representative.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (FRONT): A line nearest the front of and across a lot or parcel of land establishing the minimum open space to be provided
between the front line of a building or structure and the line of the fronting street right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 197/403
CITY COUNCIL: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Plano, Illinois.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of residential
developments and the principal streets for circulation within such a development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights of way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for
the use and enjoyment of residents of a planned unit development. Common open space may contain structures for recreational use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Refers to the composite of the functionaland geographical elements of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Plano
and environs of any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and the Official Map.
CONDOMINIUM: Refer to 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
CROSSWALKWAY: Any lane marked off to be used by pedestrians in crossing a street.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street open only at one end, having a vehicle turnaround at the other end.
DEAD-END STREET: A street having only one outlet.
DENSITY, GROSS: A ratio of the total number of dwelling units on a site, divided by the total acreage of the site, to include streets, schools, parks,
existing flood plain, wetlands, steep slopes, extensive quality woodland, and an allocation of open space, etc., expressed as dwelling units per acre.
DENSITY, NET: A ratio of the total number of dwelling units on a site, divided by the number of acres used exclusively for a residential type acreage,
not to include schools, parks, streets, existing flood plain, wetlands, steep slopes, extensive quality woodland, and an allocation of open space, etc.,
expressed as dwelling units per acre.
DESIGN STANDARDS OR DESIGN REQUIREMENTS: All requirements and regulations relating to design and layout of subdivision.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose(s), of any designated part of such owner's property.
ESTATE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision which is located within one and one-half (11/2) miles from the Municipality and which has lots of not less than
one acre and which does not contain lots fronting onto a County or State highway or a roadway designated as an arterial highway.
EXEMPT SUBDIVISION: A. A division of land ordered or approved by a court or affected by testamentary or intestate provisions;
B. A division of land solely for agricultural purposes;
C. A conveyance of land for use as right of way for highway, railroad or other public utilities not involving any new streets or easements of access;
D. The sale or exchange of parcels between owners of adjoining property if additional lotsare not thereby created, and the lots resulting are not
reduced below the minimum size required by this Title or any other applicable law or ordinance;
E. A conveyance made to correct errors in prior conveyances; and
F. The division of acreage in excess of five (5) acres intended for future development of subdivision.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described within this Title.
FRONTAGE: The property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the right-of-way line of
the street; or with a dead-end street, all property abutting one side of such street measured along the right-of-way line from the nearest intersecting
street and the end of the dead-end street.
FRONTAGE LOT: That portion of the frontage which lies between the side lot lines of a single lot.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A public or private marginal access roadway generally paralleling and contiguous to a street or highway and designed to promote
safety by eliminating unlimited ingress and egress to such street or highway providing points of ingress and egress at more or less uniformly spaced
intervals.
IMPROVEMENTS: All facilities constructed or erected by a subdivider within a subdivision to permit and facilitate the use of lots or blocks for a principal
residential, business or manufacturing purpose.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer system, water supply and distribution systems, roadway, earthwork, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, no-access strip, off-street parking area or other improvement which the City may require under this Title.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat of subdivision, recorded with the Kendall County Recorder of Deeds and to be
used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot, two (2) opposite lot lines of which abut upon streets which are more or less parallel.
LOT LINE: A boundary line of a lot.
LOT SPLIT: A dividing or redividing of a lot or lots in a recorded plat of subdivision into not more than two (2) tracts which meet the criteria established
within these regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 198/403
LOT WIDTH: The distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the line establishing the lot depth at the
established building setback line.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve abutting properties.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots not involving any new streets, roads or extension of Municipal facilities;
and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel of adjoining property; and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
applicable Comprehensive Plan or any functional segment thereof, Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Control Ordinance or regulation, and Official Map
relating thereto.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A land area at least twelve feet (12') wide along the lot line of a lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no vehicular
driveway shall be permitted, within the "no-access" strip.
PARCEL: The word "parcel" shall refer broadly to a lot, tract or any other piece of land.
PARKWAY: The unpaved strip of land within a street right of way and parallel to the roadway.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block designated for pedestrian use.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plano Plan Commission.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which, at its time of development, is developed under single ownership or unified control, which
includes two (2) or more principal buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned development procedures of this Title and/or the Zoning Title.
(Refer to Title 5, Chapter 11 of this Code.)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAT: A drawing or map made to measurable scale upon which the design requirements of the planned unit
development are to be met and intended for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT: A subdivision as it is represented as a formal document by drawing and writing.
PLAT COMMITTEE: The committee designated by the City Council to have the final decision on all plats. Appeals may be made to the full City Council.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as described herein.
RESERVE STRIP (SPITE STRIP): Right-of-way "reserve or spite" strips controlling access to streets shall not be permitted.
RESUBDIVISION: The subdivision of a tract of land which has previously been lawfully subdivided and a plat of such prior subdivision duly recorded.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right of way" for land platting purposes in the City shall mean
that every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final recorded plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such
right of way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights of way intended for roads, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on
which such right of way is established.
ROADWAY: The paved portion of the street available for vehicular traffic.
SCREENING: Decorative fencing, walls, earthen berms, or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind
such fencing or evergreen vegetation. When fencing is used for screening, it shall be not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height.
SERVICE DRIVE: A public street, generally paralleling and contiguous to a main traveled way, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating
promiscuous ingress and egress to the right of way and providing safe and orderly points of access at fairly uniform spaced intervals.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, CENTRAL: A system of sanitary sewers serving ten (10) or more lots that discharge either into an interceptor sewer or
an approved sewage treatment plant.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: A septic tank seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other sewage treatment device approved by
the Kendall County Department of Public Health and servicing only one lot.
SIDEWALK: That portion of street or crosswalk way, paved or otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only. The minimum sidewalk width shall
be: in residential developments, four feet (4') minimum; in all other developments, five feet (5') minimum.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR PERMIT: A plan prepared by aprofessional engineer that shows the method, control and implementation of erosion
measures, storm runoff and/or grading of lands for the construction of improvements.
SPECIAL USE: A specific use of land or building, or both subject to special provisions and which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as a permitted use. (See Title 5 of this Code.)
STREET: An area which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets. The word
"street" refers to the width of the street right of way or easement, whether public or private, and shall not be considered as the width of the roadway or
paving or other improvement on the street right of way. Such is to include, but not be limited to, that which is named or commonly referred to as street,
avenue, road, lane, boulevard or way.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, such as the principal entrance of residential development and the principal circulating streets within such a
development, which carries traffic from minor streets to primary and secondary streets.
STREET, HALF: A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the subdivider has allocated but part of the ultimate right-ofway
width.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A local street which is parallel and adjacent to thoroughfare streets and expressways, and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on the primary streets and expressways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 199/403
STREET, MINOR: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PRIMARY: A street which serves as a main traffic thoroughfare, both within and outside of the City, carrying heavy volumes of traffic.
STREET, SECONDARY: A street which collects and distributes traffic within intensively developed areas and is used primarily for internal trips within
the planning area.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the property lines abutting both sides of a street right of way.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner, or any other person, firm or corporation authorized by the owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of these
regulations for the purpose of subdividing land.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The term subdivision includes
resubdivision and, where it isappropriate to the context, relates to this Title; however, the requirements contained herein shall not apply, and no plat is
required, in any of the following instances:
A. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access.
B. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
C. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land.
D. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not involve
any new streets or easements of access.
E. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes, or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use, or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
F. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes, or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use, or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
G. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
H. The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land existing on the effective date hereof into no more than two (2) parts and not involving any new
streets or easements of access.
SUBDIVISION BOND: A surety bond, a certificate of deposit, or an irrevocable letter of credit approved by the City Engineer and the City Council and
payable to the City of Plano, sufficient to cover the full cost plus ten percent (10%) of the improvements as estimated by the engineer employed by the
subdivider and approved by the City Engineer to assure the satisfactory installations of improvements. The irrevocable letter of credit form is shown
within this Title and any other form must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney.
THOROUGHFARE, COLLECTOR: A street which is used to carry traffic from minor to secondary streets.
THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY: A street designed to serve as a major traffic artery for movement of vehicles through the City or between various parts
of the City.
THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY: A street which is used to carry traffic from collector streets to thoroughfare streets.
TURNAROUND: An area at the closed end of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac within which vehicles may reverse their direction without any backing up.
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-6: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION:
No parcel shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for subdivision by reason of flooding, collecting of ground water, bad drainage, adverse earth or rock
formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the subdivision or of the
community. Such land shall remain unsubdivided until such time as the conditions causing the unsuitability are corrected, or the developer can provide
exhibits and data to the City for approval of suitability for development. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-1-7: LANDS FOR PUBLIC USE:
Where a proposed park, playground, school, fire station, police station or other public use shown on the Official Map of the City is located in whole or in
part in the subdivision, the appropriate public agency or governing bodies shall be given an opportunity to begin, within one year from the date of recording
of the final plat, procedures to acquire said acreage. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PROCEDURES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 200/403
6-2-1: GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Summary Of Subdivision Process: The following is a summary of the requirements for processing a subdivision request:
1. Existing proper zoning or an application filed for a zoning change with building code and zoning administration (Building and Zoning
Administrator/Inspector).
2. Sketch plan conference with City Plan Commission.
3. Environmental plan review by the health authority.
4. Preliminary plat evaluation by Plan Commission, City Planner and Engineer.
5. Preliminary plat review with City Planner and City Engineer, Plan Commission and City Council.
6. Improvement plan review with the City Planner, City Engineer, Plan Commission and City Council.
7. Final plat review with City Plan Commission, City Planner and City Engineer.
B. Required Information: Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the City and in the unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles
beyond the City limits, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other land for public use, an owner or subdivider shall submit: 1) a sketch plan; 2) a
preliminary plat; and 3) a final plat to be acted upon by the City authorities in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-
1998)
6-2-2: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURES, SKETCH PLAN:
A. Owner To Obtain Documents: Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is recommended that the owner or his authorized representative obtain
from the City Clerk the checklist and procedures for subdivisions, a copy of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, ZoningOrdinance,
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Ordinance, and other applicable City ordinances.
B. Filing Of Preapplication Report:
1. The owner or his authorized representative prepares a preapplication report containing information described below and files twenty four (24) copies
with the City Clerk at least twenty (20) days prior to the next regular Plan Commission meeting and requests a preliminary conference.
2. City Clerk transmits a copy of the preapplication report and request at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular Plan Commission meeting to:
a. Plan Commission.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals.
c. City Attorney.
d. City Council and Mayor.
e. City Engineer.
f. Planning Consultant.
C. Contents: Preapplication report should contain the information listed below to give the Plan Commission the proposed general land use and layout and
how it will fit into the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
1. Show in writing how the subdivision will fit into the Comprehensive Plan and goals and policies of the City as to density, number and dwelling units
by type, type of development (regular subdivision or PUD) and zoning to be requested.
2. Proof of ownership, name, address and phone number of owner, engineer, surveyor, and land planner.
3. Map showing acreage, tentative layout, size of lots and price range; tentative layout and size of streets; accurate boundary map of property to be
subdivided; and City limits.
4. Location and size and unused capacity of nearest utilities (water, sewer and storm drainage facilities), major problems, if any, and list of data studies
and costs to be provided by owner or his authorized representative.
5. County Soil and Water Conservation District report giving land characteristics such as natural drainage, swamp areas, wooded areas and ridges,
flood plains, soil survey reports, etc.
6. Existing covenants and proposed protective covenants.
7. Business areas.
8. School, playground, park and other public areas to be included in the development.
9. General location of proposed utilities and street improvements.
10. Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions, showing location and extent of types of land uses proposed. It may be a free-hand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the
topographic data and contours of not more than five foot (5') intervals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 201/403
11. Location by township, section, town and range or by other legal description.
12. Population and economic impact study, projected revenues from development compared with projected costs for governmental services to be
provided to development.
13. Study of impact of subdivision on school district showing estimated student population, assessed valuation per pupil, etc.
14. Financial assistance, if any, to be contributed by owner to respective governmental agencies.
15. Existing streets surrounding subject property.
16. Off-street parking and other service facilities proposed.
17. For multiple-family, commercial and industrial areas, show the location of buildings, approximate dimension, off-street parking and delivery areas,
and buffer zones.
D. Review Of Preapplication Report: At a regular meeting, a preapplication conference will be discussed by the Plan Commission. Items of review will be:
1. Conformity to plan or orderly pattern of development.
2. Appropriateness of lot configuration.
3. Preliminary opinion as to soundness of proposal.
4. Whether regular subdivision or PUD submission is appropriate.
5. General discussion and whether all information asked for has been provided.
E. Decisions: At the next regular meeting of Plan Commission (if required by said Commission) the Plan Commission will further study information
presented at the preapplicationconference and make a recommendation to owner at the meeting or within fifteen (15) days, sending a copy of
recommendation to Mayor and City Council and the City Clerk. If recommendation is for regular subdivision, the preliminary plat application procedure
listed below is to be followed; if a PUD is recommended, then follow the procedure/requirements of a planned unit development along with the
preliminary plat requirements. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Filing Of Preliminary Plat:
1. The owner or his authorized representative shall file an application for approval of the preliminary plat with the City Clerk. Twenty four (24) copies of
the preliminary plat and the required filing fee shall accompany the application.
2. City Clerk sends complete application and preliminary plan, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission, to:
a. Plan Commission.
b. Zoning Board of Appeals.
c. City Attorney.
d. City Council and Mayor.
e. City Engineer.
f. Planning Consultant.
B. Required Information And Exhibits: Preliminary plat should contain or be accompanied by the following information:
1. Proof of ownership.
2. Proposed name of subdivision.
3. Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description.
4. Names and addresses of owner, engineer, surveyor and land planner who made the plan.
5. Scale of the plan, one foot to one hundred feet (1'-100') or larger, unless another scale is approved by the Plan Commission.
6. Date.
7. North point.
8. Easements, location, width and purpose.
9. Boundary lines on map showing acreage, layout, number and size of lots and streets, and City limits.
10. Location, width and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroads and utility rights of way, parks and other public open
ways, and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent easements, and section or corporation lines, within
or adjacent to the tract.
11. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided land, showing ownership where possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 202/403
12. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes and exact location,
distance and direction to nearest usable facilities.
13. Either a preliminary plan for water, sewer and storm sewers or a written statement setting forth general plans for such improvements and indicating
the method to be employed to overcome particular problems that may be encountered with the development of the proposed subdivision.
14. Zoning on and contiguous to the tract.
15. Streets on and adjacent to tract, name and right of way, width and location, approximate grades and gradients, type, width and elevation of
surfacing, type of construction and similar data for alleys, if any.
16. Sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage, tree cover and soil types.
17. Sites to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses.
18. Proposed building setback lines, showing dimension.
19. Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size, acres in parks, multi-family dwellings, churches, industry, etc. Site data shall also
include minimum lot sizes, gross density calculations, and net density calculations.
20. Draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
21. Contour lines of not greater than two foot (2') intervals for topography of the tract.
22. Any other data regarding physical conditions that is needed to properly study and act upon the proposed plan.
23. Proper form for the approval of the City Council and Plan Commission with space for signatures.
24. Proposed utilities and street improvements.
25. Population and economic impact study, projected revenues from development compared with projected costs for governmental services to be
provided to development, including school district.
26. Financial assistance, if any, to be contributed by other respective governmental agencies.
C. Approval Qualifications: The following qualifications shall govern approval of the preliminary plan:
1. The approval of a preliminary plan by the Plan Commission is tentative and advisory only, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout as
submitted, and is subject to final approval by the City Council.
2. The City may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community.
3. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage disposal, gas and electric
service, fire hydrants, grading, gradients and roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets by the proper governing authority, or anyone so appointed,
and the City officials, where concerned, prior to the approval of the final plat by the City.
4. Tentative approval shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months from signing by the Mayor and City Clerk unless, upon application
of the developer, the City Council grants an extension. If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the preliminary plan must again be
submitted for approval to the Plan Commission.
D. Plan Commission Action And Recommendations:
1. At the regular Plan Commission meeting, the Plan Commission will appoint a Subdivision Committee which will study all information received, and
will check with all City departments and determine what additional service will need to be provided to the subdivision, cost and any other information
available (Fire Department, Police Department, Street Department, Sewer and Water Department, City Planner and Engineer as well as the school
district).
2. At the next regular Plan Commission meeting the Subdivision Committee will present its report, a discussion on this Committee report will be held
and a study of all materials presented will be done. A recommendation to City Council will be made at this meeting or, if necessary, tabled until the
next regular meeting.
3. The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat by the third regular meeting from the date of filing of
application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting documents, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by
mutual consent. The preapplication procedure, sketch plan phase shall not be considered part of this time requirement.
4. When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the Plan Commission, it shall be referred to the City Council and a copy of its recommendation
shall be sent to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
5. If the Plan Commission approves the plat, it shall so indicate on the plat:
Recommended for approval to City Council this day of , 19 .
Signature of Plan Commission Chairman
If not approved, the Plan Commission shall furnish the City Council, the Zoning Board and the applicant a written statement setting forth the reasons for
disapproval and specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this Ordinance and Official Map, and with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 203/403
E. Hearing On Zoning Changes Or Variances: If zoning change variances of the Plano Zoning Ordinance are required, the City Clerk and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall set a date for a public hearing on these variances or zoning changes within the preliminary plat, with notification in a newspaper of
general circulation as specified by State statute, of time and place of hearing not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
The Zoning Board shall forward its recommendation to City Council in time for next City Council meeting following hearing.
F. City Council Action, Procedure Upon Approval:
1. The City Council shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days of its regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the Plan Commission
and the Zoning Board of Appeals, (if a variation or rezoning is required).
2. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the following notice of approval shall be stamped upon four (4) prints thereof, and required
signatures affixed:
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivisionshown hereon has received approval by the City Council of the City of Plano,
Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plats and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the City Council will receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such
form and within such time as required by this ordinance.
The City Council of the City of Plano, Illinois
Date , 19
By , Mayor
Attest , City Clerk
3. Four (4) prints of such approved preliminary plat shall be distributed by the City Clerk as follows:
a. One print to Plan Commission;
b. One print to City Planning Consultant;
c. One print shall be retained by the City Clerk for filing; and
d. One print shall be returned to the subdivider.
G. Conditions Of Approval: Approval of the preliminary plat by the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and City Council shall be conditioned upon
all stipulations set forth within this Title. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-2-4: IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Plans Required: Improvement plans, as required by this Title, shall be furnished within ten (10) months from the approval of the preliminary plat. If only
a portion of the plat is to be improved and submitted for final plat approval, construction plans and specifications need be prepared for such portion
only. However, the entire area of the proposed subdivision, as well as any additional area necessary to proper design of facilities, shall be the basis for
design, and so indicated.
B. Description And Required Information: Final construction plans shall be prepared on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") tracing cloth, or equal
material of good quality such as high quality tracing paper or plastic drafting film. Five (5) copies of such are to be filed with the City Clerk, and shall
contain at least the following information:
1. Title page.
2. Preliminary and final plat of the subdivision.
3. General layout of drawing of the proposed streets andsidewalks.
4. General layout of drawing of the proposed water system, if provided. (May be combined with subsection B5 of this Section.)
5. General layout of drawing of the proposed sanitary sewer systems, or sewage disposal system.
6. General layout drawing of proposed storm drainage system, including proposed grades of surface drainageways, and detention/retention areas with
appropriate indication of high and normal water elevations.
7. General layout drawings of the proposed fire hydrant location if a water distribution system is provided.
8. General layout drawings of the proposed street lighting facilities.
9. Plans and profiles of streets, sidewalks and all sewers at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') (horizontal) and one inch equals five feet
(1" = 5') (vertical).
10. Details of street structures, typical cross section, etc.
11. The signature and seal of the Illinois registered professional engineer preparing said improvement construction plans.
12. Site development plan for permit approval of Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance requirements.
13. Specifications, engineer's quantities and detailed cost estimates for setting bonding requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 204/403
C. Review: Plans will be reviewed by the City Engineer, or his/her designee, for conformity to the preliminary plan and the provisions of this Title and other
applicable ordinances. The improvement plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the City Engineer while the Plan Commission is in the process
of reviewing the final plat. During the review process, the City Engineer may require such changes or revisions as may be required so that the
engineering design will conform to the subdivision and other ordinances of the City. The City Engineer shall submit a report to the Plan Commission as
to the adequacy of the water system, storm water management plan, sanitary sewer system, street system, sidewalks, street lighting, and other
required public improvements. The City Engineer's report shall be submitted prior to the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-2-5: FINAL PLAT:
A. Filing Of Final Plat:
1. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the owner or his authorized representative shall file an application for
approval of the final plat with the City Clerk. In case application for approval of a final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat,
the City Council may extend the time for application of approval of final plats for other parts of the approved preliminary plat until a later date or dates
beyond the foregoing one year period.
2. The City Clerk will refer the application for approval of the final plat to the Plan Commission, along with one contact print and supporting evidence
and documents, and a copy of same to:
a. City Council and Mayor.
b. City Engineer.
c. City Attorney.
d. Zoning Board of Appeals.
e. City Planning Consultant.
B. Description: The application for final plat approval shall include the original drawing, not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in
size, drawn with ink on linen tracing cloth or its equivalent, one transparency print and five (5) contact prints of a final plat, five (5) copies of all
supporting maps, plans and other drawings, and all other required documents. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved
preliminary plat; except, that the Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council may require such changes or revisions as are deemed
necessary in the interest and needs of the community, in keeping with the provisions of this Title.
C. Contents:
1. The final plat and accompanying documents shall contain the following:
a. Name of subdivision.
b. Location of township, section, town and range, or by other legal description.
c. Names of owners and certification by a licensed surveyor.
d. Scale one inch to one hundred feet (1":100') or unless another scale is approved by the Plan Commission (shown graphically).
e. Date.
f. North point.
g. Boundary of plat based on an accurate traverse with angular and lineal dimensions.
h. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. Proposed street
names shall be checked with the proper governing authority or anyone so appointed.
i. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments which shall be accurately described in the plat.
j. Municipal, Township, County or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
k. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and length of all arcs.
l. All easements for rights of way provided for public services and utilities.
m. All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimension in feet and hundredths.
n. Permanent monuments, to be placed at all block corners at points of tangency or curve lines and where street lines intersect this boundary of the
subdivision. Monuments shall consist of iron pipes not larger than one inch (1") or smaller than three-fourths of an inch (3/4") in diameter and not
less than twenty four inches (24") in length and shall be driven vertically into the ground so that the top thereof does not project more than six
inches (6") above the surface. All lot corners shall be marked by one-half inch (1/2") iron pins, not less than twenty four inches (24") in length,
driven into the ground in the same manner as the aforesaid monuments.
o. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any
area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners.
p. Building setback lines accurately shown by dimensions.
q. Protective covenants which meet with the approval of the Plan Commission which shall be lettered on the final plat or provided within a separate
document as approved by the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 205/403
r. Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereon
exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
s. Notarized certification, by owner or owners or by any mortgage holder on record, of the adoption of the plat and thededication of streets and other
public areas.
t. Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
u. Proper form for the approval of the City Council with space for signature.
v. Approval by signature of City, County, Township and State officials concerned with the specifications of utility installations.
w. Approval by signature of the Plan Commission. This approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the
public of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on the plat. Acceptance of the aforementioned public dedicated
ways or space shall be dependent upon approval by the proper governing authority.
x. All other certifications as required by this Title.
y. The final plat of all subdivisions platted after the effect hereof shall contain, in a conspicuous location, the following:
Healthy and properly pruned street trees having trunk diameter measured twelve inches (12") above the ground level of not less than two and
one-half inches (21/2") shall be planted along all street rights of way delineated on the within plat at a rate of one (1) tree per lot with the exception
of corner lots which shall have two (2) trees, one (1) on each street frontage. Tree locations shall be shown on the final engineering plans so as to
minimize conflicts with underground utilities. No trees shall be planted closer than fifty (50) feet of any right of way intersection. Credit will be given
to healthy properly pruned existing tree that meets the minimum size and location specified herein. The type of tree is to be approved by the City.
2. The final plat shall show thereon the following:
a. Certification by an Illinois registered land surveyor, to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located; and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct; and that he has complied with all rules contained herein
governing plats; and that the subdivision is or is not within five hundred feet (500') of a watercourse draining six hundred forty (640) acres or more;
and he shall also note all exceptions if any. He shall also include with thiscertification, a listing by number of all lots shown on the plat that are
totally or in part subject to periodic flooding or inundation based on the highest floodwater elevation of record in the area.
b. Certification by owner and, if required, by any mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and dedication of streets and other public
areas.
c. Certification of owner's signature before a notary public.
d. Certification in plats containing public improvements that approval of the City Engineer has been given as being in conformity with the rules and
regulations governing public improvements as required by this Title and as adopted by the City Council.
e. Certification by the Kendall County Clerk that all taxes and special assessments have been paid to date.
f. Easement provisions of the Northern Illinois Gas Company, Illinois Bell Telephone Company, Commonwealth Edison Company and all other
easements applicable.
g. Certificate that approval of the City has been obtained where required by law.
h. Certification that approval of the City Plan Commission has been obtained where required by law.
i. Kendall County Health Authority.
j. Kendall County Tax Mapping and Platting Officer.
k. Certification of receipt of school contribution (if required).
l. Certification of receipt of the required fee by the Zoning Department.
m. Certificate as to special assessment (when applicable).
D. Plan Commission Action And Recommendations:
1. Action must be taken by the Plan Commission within thirty (30) days after the complete final plat and all required attachments and submittals have
been submitted for approval.
2. When the final plat has been acted upon by the Plan Commission, it shall be referred to the City Council, with a copy of its recommendation to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
3. If the Plan Commission approves the final plat it shall so indicate on the plat:
Recommend for approval to City Council this day of , 19 .
Plan Commission Chairman
If the final plat is not approved, the Plan Commission shall furnish the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals and the applicant a written statement
setting forth the reasons for disapproval and specifying the aspects in which the proposed final plat fails to conform to this Title and Official Map and with
the intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
E. City Council Action Procedure Upon Approval:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 206/403
1. The City Council shall accept or reject final plat within thirty (30) days (one month) of its regularly scheduled meeting following the final action of the
Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, if necessary.
2. Upon approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall secure one transparency print and ten (10) contact prints of the approved final plat, and five
(5) copies of the approved supporting documents. The cost of the prints and copies of documents shall be paid by the owner.
a. One contact print of the final plat, when applicable, one copy of the accompanying protective covenants and one copy of the supporting
documents shall be delivered to the Plan Commission.
b. One contact print and all specifications, drawings and estimates shall be delivered to both the City Engineer, and the City Planning Consultant.
c. One transparency print and one contact print and all other supporting documents shall be retained by the City Clerk.
F. Record And Filing Of Approved Final Plat:
1. Upon approval by the City Council, the owner shall record the plat with the Recorder of Kendall County within three (3) months. If not recorded within
this time, the approval shall be null and void.
2. The final plat, in exact form as approved by the City Council and recorded with the County Clerk, shall be filed for record by the City Clerk. (Ord.
1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-2-6: FORMS OF CERTIFICATES:
Sample forms of the certificates enumerated in subsection 6-2-5C2 of this Chapter are as follows:
A. Surveyor:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
This is to certify that I, an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor (Seal No. ) that under the direction of the owners thereof I have surveyed and subdivided
into lots and streets the following described property: (legal description) , containing acres more or less.
I do further certify that:
1. (No) Part of this subdivision is within 500 feet of a surface drain of water course serving a tributary of 640 acres or more.
2. All lot corners and points of curvature have been (staked with iron rods or) monumented according to the Plat Act as amended.
3. All distances are shown in feet and decimal parts thereof.
4. All regulations enacted by the Plano City Council relative to plats and subdivisions have been complied with.
5. The attached plat is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision.
Dated at , Illinois, this day of , A.D., 19
Illinois Registered Land Surveyor No.
B. Owner:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in that attached plat and he has caused the same to be surveyed,
subdivided and platted as shown by the Plat for uses and purposes as indicated therein, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the
style and title thereon indicated.
Dated at , Illinois, this day of , A.D., 19
Owner
C. Notary Public:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
I, , Notary Public in and for the State and County aforesaid, do hereby certify that personally known to be the same persons who names are
subscribed to the foregoing certificate, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledge the execution of the annexed plat and accompanying
instruments for the uses and purposes therein set forth as his or their free and voluntary act.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 19
(SEAL)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 207/403
Notary Public
My Commission Expires
D. City Engineer:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
I, , do hereby certify that all matters pertaining to the requirements as prescribed in the regulations governing plats adopted by the City of Plano
insofar as they pertain to the annexed plat, have been complied with. Public works approved this day of , A.D., 19 .
Office of the City Engineer
E. County Clerk:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
"I, , County Clerk of Kendall County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid current general taxes, no
unpaid forfeited taxes and no redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the Annexed Plat."
Dated this day of A.D., 19
Kendall County Clerk
F. Easement Provisions:
1. An easement is hereby reserved for and granted to the Northern Illinois Gas Company, its successors and assigns, in all streets, alleys and other
public ways and places shown on this plat, said easement to be for the installation, maintenance, relocation and removal of gas facilities.
2. An easement is hereby reserved for and granted to the Illinois Bell Telephone Company and Commonwealth Edison Company and their successor
and assigns within the area as shown by dotted lines on the plat and marked "Easement", to install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain
conduits, cables, poles and wires, overhead and underground, with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other property with telephone and
electric services; also is hereby granted the right to use the streets for said purposes, the right to overhang all lots with aerial service wires to serve
adjacent lots, the right to enter upon the lots at all times to install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain within said easement area said
conduits, cables, poles, wires, braces, guys, anchors and other equipment and finally the right is hereby granted to cut down and remove or trim and
keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or saplings that interfere with any of the said public utility equipment. No permanent structures or trees shall be
placed on said easement, but some may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the
aforesaid uses or the rights granted herein.
G. City Council:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
Approved by the City Council of the City of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois. Dated at , Illinois, this day of A.D., 19 .
H. City Plan Commission:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
Approved by the Plano Plan Commission, this day of A.D., 19 .
Chairman
I. Kendall County Health Department:
1. Certificate for Private Water Supply and Individual Septic Fields:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
This is to certify that this Plat has been reviewed by the Kendall County Health Department regarding compliance with all State Laws and County
Ordinances and that it is hereby approved by the County Health Department provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) The minimum size septic tank to serve each lot having homes consisting of three (3) bedrooms or less shall be 1,000 gallons. For the
addition of each bedroom in excess of three (3), the working capacity of the septic tank must be increased by at least 250 gallons. For installation of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 208/403
a garbage grinder or disposal, the total working capacity of the septic tank must be increased by 50%.
(2) The minimum size soil absorption trench system to serve each home consisting of three (3) bedrooms or less shall be square feet consisting
of lineal feet of a 36' wide trench system. For the addition of each bedroom in excess of three (3), the soil absorption trench system shall be
increased by 300 square feet consisting of 100 lineal feet of a 3' wide trench system. For the installation of a garbage grinder or disposal, 300 square
feet consisting of 100 lineal feet of a 36" wide trench system.
(3) The minimum lot size within this subdivision shall be at least square feet, having a minimum lot width of feet.
(4) The private water supply to serve this dwelling shall be installed under permit from the Illinois Department of Public Health and in
accordance with their rules and regulations promulgated under the Illinois Water Well Construction Code and the Illinois Water Well Pump Installation
Code.
Approved this day of A.D., 19 .
Kendall County Health Department
Representative of Health Authority
2. Certificate For Residential Subdivision Served By Individual Mechanical Systems And Private Water Supply:
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
This is to certify that this plat has been reviewed by the KendallCounty Health Department regarding compliance with all State and County
Ordinances pertaining to the treatment and disposal of sewage. Approval is hereby granted provided the following requirements are met:
A. On each lot the following individual mechanical sewage treatment system must be installed:
1. An individual mechanical sewage treatment system designed and installed in accordance with the minimum requirements of the Kendall County
Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
2. The effluent from the sand filter must be discharged into a soil absorption trench system consisting of square feet designed and installed in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the Kendall County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance.
3. The overflow from the soil absorption trench system must be discharged into a permanently constructed chlorine contact chamber having the
capacity to provide a holding time of at least 30 minutes and provided with a chlorinator of sufficient size and capacity to maintain a chlorine residual
of between 0.2 and 0.75 parts per million in the final sewage effluent prior to being discharged.
4. The effluent from the chlorine contact chamber must be discharged directly to an approved watercourse.
5. The owner of each lot is required to obtain and maintain a service contract to be in effect at all times with copies being supplied to the Kendall
County Health Department.
B. The minimum lot size within this subdivision shall be at least square feet having a minimum lot width of feet.
C. The private water supply well to serve each dwelling shall be installed under permit from the State of Illinois and in accordance with the rules
and regulations promulgated under the Illinois Water Well Construction Code and the Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code.
Approved this day of A.D., 19 .
Kendall County Health Department
Representative of Health Authority
3. Certificate For Residential Subdivision Served By Sewage Treatment Plant And Public Water Supply With Construction Only Permits For Sewer
Main Extensions:
This is to certify that the water supply and sewage treatment anddisposal facilities proposed to serve this subdivision are in compliance with the
requirements of all State laws and County ordinances, provided that Operating Permits for the sewer main extensions are issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency prior to the occupancy of any homes in this subdivision.
Approved this day of A.D., 19
.
Kendall County Health Department
Representative of Health Authority
4. Certificate For Residential Subdivision Served By Sewage Treatment Plant And Public Water Supply:
This is to certify that the water supply and sewage treatment and disposal facilities proposed to serve this subdivision are in compliance with the
requirements of all State laws and County ordinances.
Approved this day of A.D., 19
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 209/403
.
Kendall County Health Department
Representative of Health Authority
J. Kendall County Tax Mapping And Platting Office:
I, , Director of the Tax Mapping and Platting Office do hereby certify that I have checked the property description of this plat against available
County records and find said description to be true and correct. The property herein described is located on Tax Map # identified as permanent real
estate tax index number (PN) .
Dated this day of A.D., 19
.
Director
K. Receipt Of School Contribution (If Required):
I do hereby certify that all matters pertaining to the requirements as prescribed in the School Site Contribution Ordinance, insofar as they pertain to
this plat, have been complied with.
Dated this day of A.D., 19
.
Superintendent of the Kendall County School Office
Superintendent of District No. 88
L. Receipt Of Plat Fees:
I do hereby certify that I have received payment of the fees required under the Title 6 of the Plano City Code dated this day of A.D., 19 .
Plano Zoning and Building Code Officer
or
Plano City Clerk
M. Certificate As To Special Assessments (When Applicable):
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL )
I, , City Treasurer of the City of Plano, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any
deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the Plat.
Dated this day of A.D., 19
.
City Treasurer
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
Chapter 3
STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
6-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Minimum Standards: All subdivisions under this title shall be required to have the improvements contained in this chapter and the design standards
herein contained are to be considered the minimum standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 210/403
B. General Design Requirements: In designing a subdivision,the developer shall conform to:
1. All applicable ordinances of the city.
2. The comprehensive plan, as amended, by the city.
3. The official map, as amended, of the city.
4. Applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and duly constituted agencies thereof.
5. Natural features such as tree cover, topography, etc.
6. Drainage, floodplain and soil conditions. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
6-3-2-1: STREETS:
A. All streets shall be designed in relationship to:
1. Topographic and drainage conditions.
2. Public convenience and safety.
3. Proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.
4. Alignment and continuation of existing section line streets in surrounding areas.
B. A public street shall be provided for convenient access to all property within the subdivision.
C. Streets shall be laid out in conformity to plans adopted by the City. Any right of way specified on said plan shall be dedicated to the public on or as part
of the final plat. Where streets are not a part of the Official Map or adopted street or highway plans, the arrangement of the streets in a subdivision shall
provide for the alignment and continuation of existing section line streets or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas, or
conform to an approved plan for the neighborhood which meets a particular situation where topography or other conditions make continuation of, or
conformance to, existing streets impracticable.
D. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way, or limited access road right of way, a street shall be located approximately parallel to
and at least one lot depth distance from each side of such right of way, unless there is already in existence a suitable frontage road. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-
24-1998)
6-3-2-2: ALLEYS:
Alleys shall not be approved unless necessary because of topography or other exceptional circumstances. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-3: CLASSIFICATIONS OF STREETS:
A. Primary Streets: Primary streets or major streets shall be those having inter-City or regional importance, including all State marked routes, and shall be
properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major streets and highways.
B. Secondary Streets: Secondary streets shall be inter-neighborhood streets and shall be properly related to special traffic-generating facilities such as
schools, churches, shopping and employment centers; to population densities; and to the major streets into which they feed.
C. Collector, Local And Land Access Streets: Collector, local and land access streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to topography; to
discourage use by through traffic; with the amount of street to provide convenient and safe access to adjacent property. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-4: TABLE OF STREET SPECIFICATIONS:
STREET SPECIFICATIONS
Street
ROW
Right-Of-
Way Width
Minimum
Roadway
Width
Including
Curbs
Minimum
Radius To
Center Line
Of Horizontal
Curves
Minimum
Length Of
Vertical
Curves
Tangent
Between
Reverse
Curves
Maximum
Gradient
Minimum
Gradient
Clear
Sight
Distance
Expressways 400' 500' 30x1 200' 5% 0.40% 500'
Primary2 80'_130' 40'_50' 500' 30x1 200' 5% 0.40% 500'
Secondary2 66'_80' 40' min. 400' 30x1 200' 5% 0.40% 400'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 211/403
Collector2
Minor - for row houses and apartments 66' 30' min. 150' 15x1 100' 8% 0.40% 200'
Minor - for family residences 66' 30'_36' 100' 15x1 100' 8% 0.40% 200'
Cul-de-sac2
Street 66' 30'_36' 100' 15x1 100' 6% 0.40% 200'
Turnaround
Diameter (min.)
Length (max.)
140'
900'3
80' min
Marginal access (by special approval only) 40'_55' 20' 200' 15x1 100' 6% 0.40% 200'
In business and industrial districts 80'_100' 48'_56' 500' 30X1 200' 5% 0.40% 500'
Notes:
1. Algebraic difference in rates of grade. Where x is less than 3, then 3 shall be substituted for the actual value.
2. See definitions.
3. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured along its center line, between the center line of an intersecting through street and the
maximum extent of the turn-around right of way. Also see Section 6-3-2-10 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-5: STREET WIDTHS:
A. Street right-of-way widths shall be as outlined in Section 6-3-2-4 of this Chapter.
B. The width of alleys shall not be less than twenty four feet (24'). (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-6: STREET GRADES:
The grade of any street shall not exceed six percent (6%), unless necessitated by exceptional topography and approved by the Plan Commission and City
Engineer. The minimum grade of all streets shall be four-tenths of one percent (0.4%). (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-7: CURVES IN STREETS:
A. Horizontal Curves: Subdivision streets and improvements to existing roads shall be designed so that all deflections in horizontal alignment will be
accomplished through segments of circular curves properly incorporated into the design. The minimum permitted center line radii shall be as outlined
within the Street Specification Table, Section 6-3-2-4 of this Chapter.
B. Vertical Curves: All breaks in grade shall be accomplished through suitable vertical curves properly incorporated into the design of the street profiles. In
each particular case, the length of the vertical curve shall be such as to provide a sight distance consideredadequate by the City Engineer and/or as
outlined herein.
C. Tangents: A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') long shall be introduced between two (2) curves, either one of which has a radius of two
hundred feet (200') or less, unless otherwise outlined herein. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-8: STREET JOGS:
Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-9: RESERVE STRIPS AND MAIL DELIVERY STRIPS:
A. Reserve Strips: Right of way "reserve or spite" strips controlling access to streets shall not be permitted.
B. Mail Delivery Strips (Mailbox Turnouts): A mail delivery strip in rural route delivery areas shall be provided in conformance with the requirements
contained in paragraphs 4-207, 5-411, and 6-412 of the Illinois highway code1, adopted June 8, 1959, and revised from time to time by subsequent
general assemblies. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-10: DEAD END AND CUL-DE-SAC STREETS:
A. Streets And Alleys: Dead end streets, as such, and dead end alleys shall not be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 212/403
B. Cul-De-Sac:
1. Cul-de-sacs designed to be permanent shall not be longer than nine hundred feet (900') measured along the centerline from the street right of way
and not less than one hundred forty feet (140') in diameter at the closed end. "Ts" may be required at temporary street ends at property boundaries
with an additional forty feet (40') of width and depth of right of way provided on each side of the street. The length of cul-de-sac may be increased in
low density subdivisions depending upon the number of lots abutting the cul-de-sac street.
2. Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for a local minor street, and in addition, shall provide a turnaround right of way one hundred feet (100') in
diameter which shall be paved. The interior of the cul-de-sac shall be landscaped. In subdivisions where a temporary "T" is permitted, the "cross"
shall be at right angles to the street, fourteen feet (14') out on both sides of the street from the edge of the pavement. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-11: HALF STREETS:
Half streets are not recommended and shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the
other requirements of these regulations, and where the plan commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided (special city ordinance for the specific subdivision). A right of way width of not less than fifty feet (50') and a pavement
width of not less than eighteen feet (18') shall be required for the half street. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of
the street shall be platted and constructed within such tract. In cases where half streets are accepted, the owner and subdivider shall be required to grade
and improve the half street the same as all other subdivision streets. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-12: HIGHWAYS AND PUBLIC ROADS:
A. Highway entrances shall be constructed with curb and gutter returns, and acceleration and deceleration lanes as specified by the city when proposed in
conjunction with a subdivision.
B. All existing public and/or dedicated roads abutting a subdivision are to be improved to a standard established by the city for the particular roadway in
question (such property is intended to provide the necessary latitude to the city to require adequate improvements, and to reduce engineering problems
and inequitable requirements for a subdivider). (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-13: STREET NAMES:
Streets that are extensions of or in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the existing streets; however, no other streets shall bear names
which duplicate or nearly duplicate so as to be confused with the names of existing streets within the city. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-2-14: STREET SIGNS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND DEVICES:
The subdivider shall provide street signs and traffic control signs and devices in accordance with the following manner and specifications:
A. A four-way street name sign shall be erected whenever possible on the northeast corner of each street intersection in the subdivision. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-
24-1998)
B. Sign material and mounting shall be of rust resisting material. All signs shall be thirty inches (30") in width and nine inches (9") in height, shall contain
white reflective lettering over a green background, and shall be mounted eighty inches (80") above final grade. All street signs shall be subject to final
approval by the city engineer and the director of the building, planning and zoning department of the city. (Ord. 2003-54, 12-8-2003)
C. All regulatory signs, including stop signs and yield signs, required to be installed in the subdivision and at intersections adjacent to the subdivision shall
be in conformity with the statutes of the state and shall be installed at the expense of the developer and at the direction of and at the location
designated by the corporate authorities of the city. At the request of the developer, the city will install such signs and the developer shall reimbursethe
city for the actual costs of the signs and the actual costs incurred by the city in the installation of the same. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-3: STREET AND ALLEY PAVEMENTS:
6-3-3-1: STREET PAVEMENTS:
A. Pavement: All subdivisions shall have pavement designed to the soil conditions actually found on the site. Soil conditions shall be determined with
reference to the soils report prepared by and obtained from the Kendall County soil and water conservation district (the "natural resource inventory"). If
adverse conditions for pavement construction are indicated by the natural resource inventory, or if adverse soil conditions are determined at the time of
the installation of roadway improvements, a pavement design, satisfactory to the city engineer, shall be provided by the subdivider's engineer.
B. Specifications: Street pavements shall be class I bituminous concrete surface course as specified by the current Illinois department of transportation
highway design specifications. All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be improved with a durable hard surface roadway. The pavement shall
be equal to or superior to a pavement consisting of a base course of crushed limestone, gravel or pozzuolana mix of a total thickness of not less than
twelve inches (12") when thoroughly compacted. The base course shall be constructed in two (2) 6-inch lifts, watered and rolled with a ten (10) ton,
three (3) wheeled roller and vibratory compactor. Materials and method of construction shall be in compliance with the specifications approved by the
division of highways of the state for the type of pavement designated as subclass B-5 in said specifications, and shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the
city engineer, to withstand the traffic that the roadways will presumably be subjected to. Minimum thickness of the class I surface course shall be three
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 213/403
inches (3") in residential areas and for commercial and industrial areas, the base shall be fifteen inches (15") minimum thickness and the surface shall
be four inches (4") minimum thickness.
Pavements on collector and local streets shall comply with the minimum requirements of the state "Division Of Highways Manual Of Instructions For
The Structural Design Of Bituminous Pavements". On major streets, secondary streets, county highways and developments intended for industrial use,
projected traffic data, CBRs and special uses shall be submitted to the city for evaluation. The city may require additional width and thickness of
pavements that engineering analysis deems appropriate.
C. Major And Secondary Streets: Major and secondary streets shall have pavement widths as established by the city and/or as outlined herein. Collector,
local streets and streets in any industrial development shall have a minimum pavement width as outlined within this title.
D. Temporary "Ts": Temporary "Ts" may be permitted at the end of streets intended for extension either in a subsequent unit or an adjacent parcel. The
pavement shall be of a minimum width of sixty feet (60') and a minimum depth of twenty feet (20') and shall be constructed totally within the existing
road right of way. These temporary "Ts" shall be removed at such time as the road is continued by whatever authority or developer proposes the
continuation.
E. Grading:
1. All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and similar items shall be removed.
2. Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be properly completed as shown on the grading plan and approved by the city
engineer.
3. After grading of streets is completed and approved, and before any base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work such
as water, sewer, gas mains and house service connections therewith, and also all underground conduits for electric and telephone lines (per utility
company requirements), shall be completely installed in place and approved.
4. When considered necessary by the City Engineer, settlement of all trench backfill shall be accelerated by means of water introduced through holes
jetted into backfilled trenches to a point approximately two feet (2') above the top of the sewer pipe. The holes shall be jetted not greater than six feet
(6') apart unless other processes are used which shall conform to the standards set forth in the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, section 66.7. Any depressions which develop within the street right of way due to settlement of backfilling material shall be refilled and
repaved at the subdivider's expense or, where the subdivider is not involved, by the company responsible for the trenching, in a manner acceptable
to the City Engineer.
5. The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid until backfilling of all trenches dug across the roadway has completely settled or
compacted to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Said trenches shall be backfilled with suitable material, mechanically tamped in eighteen inch
(18") lifts, and brought to the required grade. The surface course shall not be laid until the later of at least six (6) months after the base course is
complete or seventy percent (70%) of the lots in the subdivision are built out.
6. Corings, at least three (3) per block, only upon request of City Engineer for cause, shall be taken under the City supervision after the paving has
been completed and after the subdivider has requested acceptance of the street. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-3-2: ALLEY PAVEMENTS:
Alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the collector and local street specification, however, the paved surface may be only twenty feet (20') of the
twenty four feet (24') right of way. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-4: STREETLIGHTS:
A. Residential street lighting facilities shall be provided in subdivisions at all street intersections and at closer intervals if the gross subdivision density is
three (3) dwelling units per acre or more, and the subdivider shall arrange for and pay all installation costs required by the Commonwealth Edison
Company for the erection of the required streetlights.
B. A street lighting system shall be installed in business and manufacturing subdivisions and at street intersections and special problem locations in
residential subdivisions. Suchstreet lighting system shall be installed within two (2) years after the date of approval by the City Council of the final plat,
or in the event seventy five percent (75%) of the lots are not built upon within this two (2) year period, the City Council may extend the time to six (6)
months after seventy five percent (75%) of the lots have been developed. Location, type and method of installation of streetlights shall be in
accordance with standards and specifications recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-5: CURB AND GUTTER:
Concrete curb and gutter shall be provided along the outside edge of all street pavements in all subdivisions, residential and nonresidential, and shall be
type M-6-12 or B-6-12 Illinois Standard Specifications or other type approved by the City. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-6: GUARDRAILS:
Steel plate beam guardrails shall be placed along the shoulder of any street where street construction has resulted in an embankment greater than six feet
(6'). (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-7: SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 214/403
A. Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks shall be required within all subdivisions within one and one-half (11/2) miles of an existing public or elementary school
site, and within all subdivisions having an average lot width of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
1. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street, or may be on one side of a cul-de-sac street if recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the City Council in residential subdivisions.
2. Sidewalks shall be separated from public streets by the full width of parkways and shall be constructed in accordance with the following:
a. All sidewalks shall be air entrained Portland cement concrete and a minimum of six (6) bag mix, four inches (4") thick and three inches (3") of
grade AC16 pea gravel or compacted CA6 coarse aggregate Illinois standard specifications and be a minimum of four feet (4') in width.
Admixtures shall be approved by the city engineer.
b. Residential districts as follows:
Minimum width 4 feet
Minimum thickness 4 inches
c. Commercial districts as follows:
Minimum width 5 feet
Minimum thickness 5 inches
3. Sidewalks shall be located either one foot (1') off the property line on both sides of the street, or within a rear lot greenway servicing the lots on either
side.
B. Parkways: Parkways shall be required on both sides of all streets. They shall be graded and prepared for seeding by the subdivider with at least four
inches (4") of topsoil. Median strips in streets shall be considered as parkways unless paved, and shall be uniform throughout the course of the street.
All median strips shall be bordered by a roll type curb and gutter with storm drainage inlets where needed, as approved or unless otherwise directed by
the city engineer. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-7-1: BIKE AND HIKING TRAILS:
A. Bike and/or hiking trails shall be installed in all developments which include a local or regional trail as indicated by the Kendall County trails and
greenways plan as adopted by the Plano city council on February 23, 2004.
B. Construction of trails shall be as per the requirements of the trails and greenways plan, with the following minimum requirements:
1. Designated "local" trails shall be no less than eight feet (8') wide with a one foot (1') shoulder on each side.
2. Designated "regional" trails shall be no less than ten feet (10') wide with a two foot (2') shoulder on each side.
3. Minimum cross section of all trails shall be no less than two inches (2") of bituminous surface course on no less than eight inches (8") of compacted
granular fill over compacted subsoil base. Five (5) ounce geotextile fabric shall be used to bridge unstable soils where, in the opinion of the city
engineer, such conditions exist. Shoulders shall be constructed of no less than two inches (2") of compacted limestone screenings over eight inches
(8") of compacted granular fill.
4. Curve radii, and horizontal and vertical grades shall be per the recommendations of the trails and greenways plan and shall meet ADA and AASHTO
requirements to the greatest extent possible.
5. Trail construction shall include all necessary bridges, culverts, and drainage structures required to traverse existing bodies of water, or divert or
direct existing surface water flow. The existing natural low of surface or subsurface storm water shall not be impeded.
C. Directional, mile marker and route signage, pavement markings, and cautionary and regulatory signage shall beprovided in accordance with the
recommendations of section 4 of the trails and greenways plan and as required by applicable local, or state of Illinois traffic control regulations.
1. Trail signage shall be placed in accordance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
D. Trail locations, methods of construction, signage and accessories shall be indicated on the improvement plans and specifications required by section 6-
2-4 of this title for review and approval of the city engineer and his consultants.
E. All biking and hiking trails shall be constructed to the specifications set forth below:
1. Specifications For Biking And Hiking Trails: Bike paths shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of federal and state statutes or
regulations; "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction In Illinois", latest edition; subdivision regulations for the city of Plano; in
addition, the following specifications shall apply:
a. Bituminous concrete:
(1) Surface course shall be SuperPave mix C, N30.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 215/403
(2) Up to fifteen percent (15%) RAP will be allowed in surface.
(3) IDOT approved mix designs shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to scheduled work.
b. Bituminous paving contractor shall be IDOT prequalified. Notify engineer forty eight (48) hours prior to work or test being performed.
c. Proofroll subgrade. (Acceptable proofroll vehicles are tandem vehicles - 14 ton load.): One-half inch (1/2") rut maximum. Repair subgrade until an
acceptable proofroll is obtained.
d. Proofroll aggregate base course: No movement - rutting or rolling - allowed. Repair aggregate base course and other underlying layer, if
necessary, until an acceptable proofroll is obtained. (Ord. 2005-22, 4-25-2005)
6-3-8: ACCESS DRIVEWAYS:
A paved access from the property line to the street pavement may be required by the plan commission. The access driveway shall be in direct line with
and of the same width as the driveway for the dwelling to be served; except, that no access driveway shall exceed twenty feet (20') in width. In the case of
property zoned for other than single-family dwelling units, the requirements for access driveways shall conform as closelyas possible therewith. Pavement
shall conform to class I or better specifications of materials and standards of construction as prescribed for streets. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-9: BLOCKS:
A. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block length in
residential areas shall not exceed one thousand one hundred feet (1,100') nor have less than sufficient width to provide two (2) tiers of lots of
appropriate depth between street lines; except, that one tier of lots may back onto a limited access highway, railroad right of way or major street,
provided suitable screen planting contained in a no access reservation along the rear property line is provided.
B. Pedestrianway right of way, not less than ten feet (10') wide, may be required by the plan commission through the center of blocks more than nine
hundred feet (900') long where deemed essential to provide planned circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation
and other community facilities. Dead end crosswalks shall be prohibited and crosswalks shall not terminate at a watercourse, railroad, utility "highline"
or major street. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-10: LOTS:
A. General Lot Design:
1. All lots shall meet the minimum depth, width and area requirements of the applicable zoning and sewage treatment and disposal ordinances.
2. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
3. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
B. Depth And Width:
1. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off street service and
parking facilities.
2. Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of two to one (2:1) shall normally be considered as desirable for all lots.
3. Lot widths shall be measured at the building setback lineand may be reduced ten percent (10%) at the end of a cul-de-sac, providing lot area meets
with the requirements of the zoning title and county sewage treatment and disposal ordinance. The lot widths for any plat shall conform with the
zoning title classification.
4. The minimum depth of lots shall not be less than ninety feet (90') from any point on the front lot line to any point on the rear lot line. (Refer to Zoning
Title requirements in Title 5 of this Code).
C. Area: In determining the minimum lot area to meet the requirements of the Zoning Title and the County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance,
both of the following conditions must be met:
1. The buildable area of the lot, counting any required or contemplated improvements, shall be at or above flood protection elevations, such that an
adequate building site can be provided which is not subject to flooding, and
2. Eighty percent (80%) of the minimum lot area shall be at least three feet (3') above the highest seasonal groundwater level as estimated or as
determined by actual soil borings.
D. Lot Frontage:
1. Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. The fronting of single-family residential lots onto State and County highways is prohibited. Also
prohibited is the fronting of single-family residential lots onto any proposed major thoroughfare as designated by the Comprehensive Plan.
Subdivision entrances for residential and/or major entrances for commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall be located in a minimum distance
of not less than one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') center line to center line apart on County and State highways and arterial roads, as
designated by the Plan Commission, unless topography or already existing street locations can be shown to dictate otherwise.
2. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation and where a limited access highway, railroad right of way, major street or similar situation exists, in which case, double frontage lots are to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 216/403
be preferred provided suitable screen-planting contained in a no-access reservation along the property line and the right of way is provided.
E. Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have side yard building setback lines as specified in the Zoning Title.
F. Out Lots: Subdivisions must include all of the parcel being divided and may have no exceptions or exclusions, and shall not contain "leftover" pieces,
corners or remnants of land.Any "out lots" which may be of irregular shape or size and are intended for conveyance to a home owners' association or
the like shall be included in the subdivision and shall be numbered consecutively. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-11: EASEMENTS:
A. Utility easements shall be provided at the front or rear of all residential lots and along the side lot line where required. Such utility easements shall be at
least ten feet (10') wide and normally centered upon the rear or side lot line. Evidence shall be furnished to the City Engineer that easements and any
easement provisions have been incorporated on the plat and if the deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or the organization
responsible for furnishing the service involved. In all subdivisions, a permanent ten foot (10') utility easement shall be provided in the front yard.
B. All utility distribution lines for telephone, electric, cable TV, and gas service, and other public or quasi-public utilities in the subdivision shall be placed
underground. Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission now or hereafter effective, and the subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with said rules and regulations and shall file with the
Commission, pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act2, of any public utility whose service will be required for the subdivision with respect to the
provision of such facilities.
Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
C. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, stream or other body of water, appropriate dedications or easement
provisions, with adequate width or construction to accommodate observed and computed or anticipated storm water drainage through and from the
subdivision shall be made. The width of the easement or dedication shall be dependent on the area of land drained by the watercourse and shall allow
access for construction and maintenance equipment.
D. As required within the zoning title3, a screen planting easement may be required between residential and commercial or industrial lots, or along lot lines
to discourage the undesirable development of residential lots fronting ontraffic arteries. If such easement is to be used for public utilities, only such
plant materials shall be used to have an ultimate growth not exceeding fifteen feet (15').
E. A turnaround is required whenever any street planned to be continuous has been temporarily dead ended awaiting subdivision of adjacent land, which
will terminate upon extension of said street. The dimension of such a turnaround shall meet the requirements of this section. Temporary "Ts" may be
considered by the city as complying with this requirement. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-12: LANDSCAPING:
A. Preservation Of Natural Features: Natural features such as trees, streams, hilltops, rock outcropping and views should be preserved.
B. Unpaved Areas: All unpaved street rights of way shall be seeded or sodded. Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping. (Ord.
1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-13: PARKS:
A. General Requirements For Park Land Contributions: Unless otherwise waived, lands to be dedicated for any applicable park shall conform to the
following criteria:
1. Location: The park master plan, as adopted by the city council shall be used as a guide in determining the general location of park sites.
Neighborhood park sites should be accessible to the public and serve a population within a one-half (1/2) to one mile radius from the site, depending
on the classification of the park. Park sites should be located in conjunction with, and adjacent to school sites whenever possible and desirable.
Regional and citywide parks are intended to serve a broader area and should offer a greater variety of facilities and activities.
2. Topography And Soils: Park sites must possess suitable topography and soil types for the type of use to which they are dedicated. The developer
shall supply the city with a minimum of one soil boring per acre to a minimum depth of ten feet (10'). The developer shall also provide the city with a
phase 1 environmental study and any hazardous materials found on the site shall be removed by the developer prior to conveyance and the city shall
be provided with a "no further remediation letter" from the appropriate governmental agency.
3. Storm Water And Surface Water Detention Or Retention Areas: Storm water and surface water detention or retention areas will not be accepted and
will not count towards the total land dedication.
4. Wetlands And Other Natural Areas: Wetlands and other natural areas will be considered acceptable only when they are considered significant in
size, quality, uniqueness, contain endangered plant or animal species or are adjacent to existing natural areas currently owned by the city. Wetlands
or natural areas will only be accepted at the discretion of the city council, and will count towards the total land dedication in such proportion as the
city council sees fit.
5. Street Frontage: A minimum of sixty six feet (66') of street frontage is required for any park site to allow for a standard local street width access road
into the park site. Where access to park sites is by means of an open accessway between homes, the accessway is to be not less than equal to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 217/403
average lot width of the lots in the subdivision.
6. Parking: For all park sites exceeding one acre in size the developer shall provide an access road and parking spaces at the rate of three (3) spaces
per acre. Access roads and parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the local street specification.
7. Drainage: Except for storm water and surface water drainage facilities constructed for the park site, detention and retention basins for storm water
drainage from the surrounding development will not be located on park sites.
B. Improvements Required For Park Dedication: Park sites to be dedicated by the developer shall include the following improvements and shall be set
forth and delineated on a site plan or other approved drawing to be presented to and approved by the plan commission, the city engineer, the director
of building, planning and zoning and approved by the city council:
1. Utilities: Each park shall be provided with the following utilities to the property line:
a. Sanitary sewer adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter. If the sanitary sewer is across the right of way from the
park site, the developer shall provide a capped six inch (6") minimum diameter service line to the property line, accessible by a manhole where
necessary, and as approved by the city engineer.
b. Water line adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter. If the water line is across the right of way from the park site, the
developer shall provide a capped one inch (1") minimum diameter water line to the property line, as approved by the city engineer, unless
otherwise requested for a special facility.
c. Storm sewers shall be provided at appropriate locations to properly drain the park site.
d. Other utilities, such as electric, gas and telephone shallbe provided adjacent to, or at the property line at the developer's expense.
2. Grading: Each dedicated park site shall be graded to drain at a minimum of two percent (2%) for open areas. Slopes on berms, where berms are
required, shall not exceed a four to one (4:1) ratio. Grading shall include, but not be limited to, berms for separation, screening or aesthetics and
placement of six inches (6") of topsoil and fine grading. Grading and berming shall be in accordance with the approved plans.
3. Seeding: The entire park site shall be seeded with a seed blend approved by the city engineer. Seeding shall include placement, watering as
necessary, and mowing until such time as a full stand of turf is established and accepted by the city engineer, but not less than one full growing
season.
4. Landscaping: Developer shall purchase and install park landscape materials as approved by the city. Landscape materials shall include (per 2 acres)
at a minimum:
5 shade trees, 21/2 inch caliper, B&B
3 evergreen trees, 7 feet in height, B&B
6 deciduous ornamentals, 6 feet in height, B&B
20 deciduous shrubs, 30 inch or 7 gallon pot
15 evergreen shrubs, 18 inch spread or 5 gallon pot
As an alternative to the landscaping requirements set forth herein, the developer may, upon concurrence of the city, make a cash contribution of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre in lieu of the required improvement.
5. Walks, Utilities, And Sewers: Developer shall install all public walks, curbs, pavement, bike trails, sewers, and utilities along all park site frontages as
per city subdivision regulations.
6. Lighting Allowance: Developer shall make a cash contribution of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per acre for the provision and
installation of park site lighting fixtures.
7. Completion: Unless otherwise agreed, the above listed park improvements shall be completed at such time as the development reaches thirty
percent (30%) completion or at such time that thirty percent (30%) of the building permits have been issued.
a. Storage Of Overburden: The storage of overburden on a park site or the use of a park site as a borrow pit is prohibited.
C. Description Of Park Lands:
Park Classifications Size Requirements
Play lot Minimum 8,000 square feet
Neighborhood park Minimum 31/2 acres
Citywide park or play field Minimum of 4 up to 30 acres
Regional recreation park Minimum of 12 up to 40 acres
(Ord. 2004-5, 2-23-2004)
6-3-14: STORM DRAINAGE:
Storm sewers or acceptable surface drainage system utilizing one of the following shall be provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 218/403
A. Grass Waterways: Grassed waterways and/or swales having a cross section slope not steeper than two feet (2') of width for each one foot (1') of depth,
and a minimum longitudinal profile or grade of not less than five-tenths foot (0.5') per one hundred feet (100') of longitudinal length.
B. Paved Waterways: Paved waterways having a cross section slope not steeper than two to one (2:1) and a minimum longitudinal profile of one-tenth
percent (0.1%).
C. Storm Water Sewer System: There will be provided storm water sewers or a surface drainage system to serve adequately the area being platted,
considering, but not limited to, the following:
1. The results and recommendations of the flood insurance study and flood boundary maps.
2. The use of existing drainage channels whenever possible.
3. The design of the drainage system shall consider and show:
a. Storm drainage area of which the subdivision is a part, expressed in acreage or square feet.
b. Calculations as to volume and frequency of water to be handled after a 10-year rainstorm.
c. A scheme of culverts sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or ponding of water.
d. Elimination of grades which may result in erosion or ponding of storm water, and to eliminate problems.
e. Existing watercourses.
f. A plan of the subdivision's grading to prevent ponding of storm water and to eliminate problems.
4. Storm sewers are required to meet the following minimum specifications:
a. The sewers shall not be less than twelve inches (12")inside diameter.
b. The sewers shall be designed in such a way as to ensure a minimum velocity flow of two feet (2') per second and a maximum velocity flow of ten
feet (10') per second. These requirements could be varied if adequate data is provided for City review.
c. Manholes shall be provided at all changes in direction of pipe and pipe size, and shall be of the type specified in State of Illinois Standard
Specifications. Inlets shall be located in accordance with engineer's design and not more than four hundred feet (400') apart, and shall be of the
type specified in the State of Illinois Standard Specifications and Design Manual.
5. In any subdivisions, ditches meeting the following standards may be used:
a. With grades to four percent (4%), ditches may have grass bottoms and banks.
b. With grades from four (4) to eight percent (8%), ditches may have ditch checks.
c. With greater than eight percent (8%) grades, ditches must have riprap.
d. Culverts must be provided at all street or driveway intersections, sized to eliminate flooding or ponding of water, and with a minimum cover of
thirteen inches (13"). The location of culverts is to be determined by the City Engineer and/or the State Highway Department or County Highway
Commissioner. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-15: WATER SUPPLY:
A. A complete water supply and distribution system including all appurtenances and stubs to each lot is to be provided in any subdivision within one
thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of an existing water main.
B. Private restrictions are filed with the final plat and incorporated in each deed so that as soon as a public water supply system is available, connections
to the system will be made at property owner's expense within one year, and so that owners shall bear their fair, proportionate share of the cost of the
public water main as determined by agreement, special assessment proceedings, or other means authorized by law to finance construction of a water
system.
C. Public or community water supply and distribution systems, including water stub terminals to each lot, shall be installed to serve all lots under thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet in area in a subdivision or lot subdivision. Where a communitysanitary sewer system serves each lot, the thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet minimum may be reduced to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Individual wells may be permitted in subdivision or lot divisions
annexed to the City after the effective date hereof only after the City Council shall find that connection with a public or community water system is not
practicable, or there is an agreement between the subdivider and the City and a guarantee by the subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will be
served with a public or community water system within a specified period of time.
D. All water distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by the State EPA and the following:
1. Anti-syphoning and/or RPZ valves shall be installed in commercial or industrial buildings for the purpose of conservation and relief of demands on
existing residential water supplies;
2. Consideration shall be given to water reclamation and reuse in commercial and industrial tracts for the purpose of conservation and relief of
demands on existing residential supply;
3. Evidence shall be presented by the subdivider that an adequate water supply is available, or will be, in advance of occupancy for development of
individual lots and that the local utilities can satisfactorily serve the area by the utility easements shown; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 219/403
4. Water transmission mains shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter and shall include installation of shut-off valves and fire hydrants. Fire
hydrants shall be installed at maximum intervals of four hundred feet (400') in a direct line in the parkway. The hydrants shall have a minimum of a
seven inch (7") barrel and two (2) 21/2-inch hose connections and an individual auxiliary valve. Hydrants within four hundred feet (400') of
commercial, industrial, public, multiple-family and church buildings shall also be equipped with a steamer connection.
E. Where water mains of larger capacity are required, as directed by the City Council to serve the future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, the
subdivider shall be required to pay for the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision as established by the City Council. (Ord. 1998-23,
8-24-1998)
6-3-16: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS:
A. Systems Required: A sanitary sewer system shall be provided for the following:
1. All lots within one thousand three hundred twenty feet(1,320') of an existing sanitary sewer system;
2. All lots of less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet;
3. All lots which are unable to comply with the requirements of the County Sewerage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance with reference to individual
septic tank filter fields; and
4. Those lots to which sanitary sewers are unable to be extended due to EPA restrictions or similar hardships. Such variation can be granted by the
City upon proof of unique hardship only.
There shall be provided a complete sanitary sewer system including a service connection for each lot in a subdivision within one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') of an existing sanitary sewer system.
In any subdivision not within one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') of an existing sanitary sewer, individual sewage disposal systems
may be installed in accordance with the Illinois EPA and County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance; provided, that private restrictions are
filed with the final plat and incorporated in each deed requiring that as soon as public sewers are available, connections to the public sewers will be
made within one year at the property owner's expense, and that owners shall bear their fair, proportionate share of the cost of the public sewer as
determined by agreement, special assessment, or other means authorized to finance construction of a sewer system.
Public or community sanitary sewerage systems, including sewer stub terminals at the outside of the curb line or edge of the pavement for each
lot, shall be installed to serve all lots under thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in area in a subdivision or lot division. Where community water
serves each lot, the thirty thousand (30,000) square feet minimum may be reduced to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Individual sewerage
disposal systems may be permitted in subdivisions or lot divisions annexed to the City after the effective date hereof only after the City Council shall
find that connection with a public or community system is not practicable, or there is an agreement between the subdivider that all lots in the
subdivision will be served with a public or community sewerage system within a specified period of time.
B. Construction Specifications: All sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by the City and the State EPA. All
sewer design, plan and specifications shall be submitted to the Plan Commission, City Engineer and the State EPA for approval and file. Each lot
platted for the subdivision shall be served by the sanitary sewer system. All sanitary sewer manholes shall be precastconcrete. Wherever two (2) sewer
lines connect and there is a difference of vertical elevation of more than two feet (2'), there shall be constructed a precast, drop-type manhole as
specified by the City Engineer.
Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are required, as directed by the City Council, to serve the subdivision as delineated in
the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as established by the City
Council. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-17: HOUSE SERVICES:
House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot or building site with the utility service mains for each utility required in the
provisions of this Title as follows:
A. Such house services shall extend from the main to the property line.
B. House water service for each single-family residence shall be a minimum of one inch (1") type K copper or approved equal and shall be terminated at a
shut-off valve and box of a type approved by the City Engineer and located four feet six inches (4'6") beyond the outside curb lines of the proposed
roadway pavement. In no case shall the buffalo box be located in the sidewalk or driveway, or buried underground.
C. Upon completion of the construction of all such house sewer and water service connections of all such house mains, three (3) accurate maps showing
the exact location of all such sewer and water mains, together with manholes, shut-off valves and similar facilities being part thereof, by distances in
feet from street lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in feet from side lot lines approved by the City Engineer, shall be filed with
the City Clerk and the Plan Commission.
D. The connection from the main to the sanitary house drain shall be six inches (6") vitrified tile. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-18: MONUMENTS:
All permanent and other monuments required under this Title shall be placed prior to the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 220/403
6-3-19: DIAGRAMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 221/403
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 222/403
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 223/403
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 224/403
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 225/403
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 226/403
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-3-20: SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX ANTIMONOTONY STANDARDS:
A. Single-Family Neighborhoods: The following antimonotony standards shall apply to all single-family neighborhoods:
1. Builder(s)/developer(s) are required to offer a minimum of three (3) front elevation options on all models.
2. The same model may be built next to or directly across the street from itself if the elevations are substantially different.
3. A model on a corner lot shall not be considered substantially similar to the same model in the same block if the front elevations of the buildings face
different streets.
4. The same siding color may not be built next to or directly across the street from itself.
5. The same model may be built around the bulb of a cul-de-sac if the elevations are substantially different.
6. A model shall not be considered substantially similar to the same model if a preponderance of the front elevations of the two (2) models are of
different color and the front elevations of the two (2) models differ as to two (2) or more of the characteristics set forth below:
a. Shape of the front elevation silhouette;
b. Relative locations and sizes of windows in the front elevation. Single, ganged or bay windows;
c. Siding type (e.g., brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, half timber, board and batten, shakes, etc.) on the front elevation;
d. Front porch size full across entire front elevation of house (garage not included). Half porch extended less than half the length of the porch
elevation. None, no covered entry;
e. Relative locations and dimensions of garage door(s), if included on the front elevation.
7. A newly constructed single-family detached or duplex home may not be located next to or across the street from another such newly constructed or
existing residential structure which has substantially similar front elevation, facing the public street. If a lot overlaps another lot across the street by
twenty five percent (25%) or more, it will be considered as being across the street.
8. Prior to final plat approval, a matrix will be submitted for city approval that will identify which elevations may be constructed next to each other,
pursuant to the foregoing standards.
9. All single-family homes sold in the development will offer at least one elevation per model that includes masonry elements in the front elevation.
B. Townhomes: Consistent design, color schemes and elevations are desirable for townhome neighborhoods and therefore, townhomes shall not be
subject to antimonotony provisions. (Ord. 2004-52, 10-25-2004)
6-3-21: WARNING SIRENS:
A. New developments or subdivisions are required to pay a warning siren construction and maintenance fee. Developments meeting or exceeding two
hundred (200) gross acres shall provide and install or pay cash funds, at the city's option, the total cost of one warning siren. Developments less than
two hundred (200) gross acres shall contribute to the city equivalent cash funds in proportion to the size (gross acreage) of their development, said
funds to be used by the city for the construction and maintenance of warning sirens.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 227/403
B. If a development opts to install the specified warning siren, it shall be installed on public property, at a location approved by the city. "Public property" is
herein defined as property owned by the fire district, school district, or the city of Plano.
C. The city engineer shall make available, upon the developer's request, the exact specifications, and requirements of installation of the warning siren.
Location and details of construction shall be included in the improvement plans and specifications required by section 6-2-4 of this title.
D. For developments paying cash funds, the cost of provision and installation and maintenance of one warning siren is hereby established as forty five
thousand dollars ($45,000.00). Said fee shall be due and payable prior to the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 2005-6, 2-28-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-17, 2-
27-2006)
6-3-22: COORDINATION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Improvements along all subdivision streets with a sixty six foot (66') right of way or less shall be coordinated such that fire hydrants, mail boxes and all
other improvements requiring regular access shall be located on the same side of the street.
B. This side of the street shall be designated as "No Parking" and shall be signed by the developer accordingly. (Ord. 2005-57, 11-28-2005)
Chapter 4
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
6-4-1: FILING OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND REQUIRED INFORMATION:
As soon after preliminary plat approval as practicable and in any case, not more than ten (10) months, five (5) copies of the proposed improvement
construction plans and specifications, engineer's estimates prepared and sealed by a professional engineer currently registered with the state of Illinois,
and subdivision bond agreement, shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall provide all necessary information for the following, if applicable:
Streets.
Curbs and gutters.
Storm drainage including storm sewers.
Comprehensive drainage plan including grades of surface drainageways.
Sanitary sewerage system.
Water supply and distribution.
Public utility locations.
Streetlights.
Sidewalks.
Street signs and guardrails.
Parkway trees.
Site development plan for permit. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-4-2: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Upon approval of both the preliminary plat and the plans and specifications for the required subdivision improvements by the plat committee and the city
engineer, and upon approvalof the appropriate agencies as evidenced by state and county permits where required, the subdivider may construct and
install the required subdivision improvements. A final plat should be filed and approved prior to beginning construction. No final plat shall be filed for
record with the recorder of deeds until all subdivision improvements shall have been installed and accepted by the city, or appropriate performance
bonds and/or letters of credit have been issued in favor of the city to ensure the satisfactory installation, completion and guarantee of all subdivision
improvements.
B. Prior to starting any work covered by the approved plans and specifications for the improvements, listed in section 6-4-1 of this chapter, written authority
to start the work shall be obtained from the city engineer. Authorization to begin work will be given upon receipt of all necessary permits, including all
culvert permits required when proposed new or changed subdivision roads intersect any presently existing road, and work must proceed in accordance
with construction methods of this title.
C. All construction of improvements covered by this title shall be in accord with, and materials used shall be in compliance with, the methods and materials
required in the appropriate section of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", as amended from time to time, published by the
division of highways, state of Illinois. When, in the opinion of the city, any phase of the construction requires quality control reports, the subdivider shall
furnish said reports of the necessary tests as run and certified by an independent testing laboratory, i.e., compaction, thickness, proportioning, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 228/403
D. Construction of all improvements required by this Title must be completed within two (2) years from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat by
the City unless good cause can be shown for granting an extension of time by the City. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-4-3: INSPECTIONS:
During the course of construction, at such times as shall be deemed necessary within customary good practices of engineering and construction,
inspection of the work shall be made by the engineer employed by the subdivider to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as approved.
Occupancy permits for all structures will not be issued until all of improvements required hereinabove are completed and operable, with the exception of
the surface course of asphalt if a two (2) layer construction is used. This surface course must be completed prior to acceptance of the subdivision.
Temporary occupancy permits may be issued if the surface of the pavement, sidewalk and trees are not complete or if the surface course of the pavement
and/or sidewalk is not completedue to anticipated settlement of utility trenches. Such temporary occupancy permits shall be valid for a maximum of six (6)
months. In the case of sidewalks, if concrete drive approaches are provided, the six (6) month period can be extended to two (2) years, or when the drive
approach is installed, whichever is sooner. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-4-4: SUBDIVISION BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT:
A. Bond Or Letter Of Credit In Lieu Of Construction: In lieu of construction in subsection 6-4-2A of this Chapter, the subdivider shall post with the City
Engineer a subdivision bond or letter of credit, payable to the City, sufficient to cover the full cost plus ten percent (10%) of the said improvements as
estimated by the engineer employed by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer to assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements
as outlined herein and contained in the approved plans and specifications.
The following form must be used for all irrevocable letters of credit:
Plano City Council
Plano, Illinois
Dear City of Plano:
This letter of credit from , an Illinois corporation, to the City of Plano, Illinois, effective as of the
day of , 19 , is issued for the purposes of facilitating the construction of subdivision improvements including but not limited to streets, curbs,
sidewalks, storm sewers and water detention facilities as set forth on drawings, specifications and engineering as required by Title 6 of the Plano City
Code and as approved by the City of Plano, in the subdivision known as , Unit No. located in Plano, Illinois. This letter of credit covers uncompleted
work up to the total amount of , which is 110% of the estimated costs of completing improvements.
If for any cause any or all of the public improvements required to be installed in said subdivision shall not be constructed within two (2) years in
conformance with said drawings, specifications and engineering, the funds included in this letter may be used by the City of Plano to complete the
construction and installation of the same and may be drawn in whole or in part by the City of Plano and will be paid immediately upon written demand
therefore given by the City of Plano.
This letter of credit shall be fully, irrevocably and unconditionally in effect until the installation and construction of said streets, curbs, sidewalks,
storm sewers and water detention facilities shall be completed and approved by the City of Plano and the City Engineeror for a period not to exceed
twenty seven (27) months, whichever is later. The consideration for this irrevocable commitment is provided by agreements between this financial
institution and the developer and the approval of , Unit No. , plat by the City of Plano.
It is hereby represented that the undersigned are officers of this and they are duly authorized by the Board of Directors to execute this Letter of
Credit.
Yours very truly,
ATTEST:BY:
Vice PresidentPresident
cc: City Plan Commission, Engineer, and Planner
B. Payment Of Bond: The subdivision bond may be made in two (2) stages or one "split", with the approval of the City in writing, with the review and
recommendation by the City Engineer.
C. Release Of Bond: Said bond shall be released by the City and the City Engineer, either upon receipt in writing from the City Engineer as to the
acceptance and inclusion into the City system of the streets and drainage facilities, including acceptance by the appropriate utility agency operating the
sanitary sewer and water distribution facilities, or by letter of certificate as to the complete compliance of the public works with this Title by the City
Engineer, and upon the filing with the City two (2) sets of "as-built" drawings of the subdivision improvement, certified by the subdivider's engineer.
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-4-5: AS-BUILT PLANS:
After completion of all public improvements, and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make, or cause to be made, a map
showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewer and water mains, and such other facilities as the City Engineer shall require. This map
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 229/403
shall be a complete set of prints, and shall bear the signature and seal of an Illinois registered professional engineer. The presentation of this map shall be
a condition of final acceptance of the improvements, and release of the subdivision bond assuring their completion. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-4-6: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the maintenance of all open space and public areas, and all subdivision improvements until final
acceptance of open spaces and public areas to be dedicated to the City and final acceptance of subdivision improvements. After dedication and
acceptance, maintenance is the responsibility of the City.
B. Approval of the final plat shall be dependent on presentation of proof of responsibility for the maintenance of all community improvements. (Ord. 1998-
23, 8-24-1998)
Chapter 5
FLOOD CONTROL
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and
5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this city's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to
periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and
to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g) rivers, lakes and streams act;
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended;
H. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; and
I. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval from city of Plano of a development
or permit to carry out construction of a development.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in subsection 6-5-7B of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 6-5-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood expressed in a numeric value relative to North
American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 230/403
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.
"Channelization" is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving relocation
of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change
to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is
constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones,
flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and
approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire
and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching
stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples of
critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase
in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Kendall County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA and dated February 4,
2009. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Kendall County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may be annexed into the
city are designated for Big Rock Creek, Fox River, Little Rock Creek and the east branch of Little Rock Creek on the countywide flood insurance rate
map prepared by FEMA and dated February 4, 2009.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it must be
fully licensed and ready for highway use.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 231/403
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
H. Substantial improvement of an existing building.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water, wave action, or wind.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units
of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded. For example, the 2-year flood frequency has a fifty percent (50%) chance of occurring in any given year, the 10-year flood frequency has a ten
percent (10%) chance of occurring in any given year, and the 100-year flood frequency has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway. See definition of Designated Floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency floods plus two feet (2') of freeboard at any given
location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
A. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0010G, 0015G, 0020G and 0040G of the countywide flood insurance rate map
of the city prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated February 4, 2009.
B. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Kendall County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city are generally identified as such on panel numbers 0005G, 0100G, and 0125G of the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared for Kendall
County by the federal emergency management agency and dated February 4, 2009.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Designated Floodway.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 232/403
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation agency;
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determines expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an
effective FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding.
NAVD 88: North American vertical datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without intervention by man. When used in reference to channels,
means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a
meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil
and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A
modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified
channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected
with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 233/403
REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing condition prior to the effective date hereof is a nonagricultural land use and
includes infrastructure associated with nonagricultural activities. Widening of an existing street by a unit of local government, including, but not limited to,
the Kendall County highway department and township road districts, may be considered redevelopment.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Regional permits are offered for preapproved projects which are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR
part 3708 rules for northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from
the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering
practice act2.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to over bank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of Floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Statewide permits are offered for preapproved projects that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the
IDNR/OWR part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of
this chapter during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless
of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings. See
definition of Repetitive Loss.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter during a ten (10) year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started.
A. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
B. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
A. The city engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 6-5-4 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 234/403
B. To fulfill those duties, the city engineer should first use the criteria listed in section 6-5-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether
the development site is located within a floodplain.
C. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the city engineer must determine whether the development site is within a flood
fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.
1. If the site is within a flood fringe, the city engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 6-5-6 of this chapter be met.
2. If the site is within a floodway, the city engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 6-5-7 of this chapter be met.
3. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the city engineer shall require that
the minimum requirements of section 6-5-8 of this chapter be met.
D. In addition, the general requirements of section 6-5-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 6-5-6, 6-5-7,
or 6-5-8 of this chapter.
E. The city engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 6-5-10 of this chapter.
F. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the city engineer shall review the requirements of section 6-5-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met.
In addition, the city engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
G. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the city engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in section
6-5-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-4: DUTIES OF THE CITY ENGINEER:
A. Determining The Floodplain Designation:
1. Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA).
2. If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted
and which drains more than one square mile.
3. Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the
development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to
delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.
B. Professional Engineer Review:
1. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the
development meets section 6-5-7 or 6-5-8 of this chapter.
2. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 6-5-7 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements:
1. Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential in the event of failure.
2. The construction or major modification of all class I (high hazard) and class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
3. Some class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins that have an embankment are nonjurisdictional class III dams. It is not
required that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all nonjurisdictional class III dams.
4. A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is required.
5. A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
6. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
1. Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter, and
2. Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 235/403
1. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; and
2. Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and document the results of the inspection.
G. Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection 6-5-9C3 of this chapter.
H. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files including:
1. An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject to section 6-
5-9 of this chapter, and/or
2. The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 6-5-9 of
this chapter.
I. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of
federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
J. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 6-5-7 and 6-5-8
of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the city. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city
and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
2. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 6-5-7B1 of this
chapter;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, per subsection 6-5-7B3e of this chapter;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 6-5-7B3d of this chapter;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 6-5-7B3a, B3b, and B3h of this
chapter;
6. Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
K. Cooperation With Other Agencies:
1. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to
improve the administration of this chapter;
2. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map;
3. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program; and
4. Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
L. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to the
review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
A. Flood Insurance Study: This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the city.
1. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to
the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources.
2. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any development of the site.
B. Big Rock Creek, Fox River, Little Rock Creek: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Big Rock Creek, Fox River, Little
Rock Creek and the east branch of Little Rock Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the county of
Kendall prepared by FEMA dated February 4, 2009, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. Annexed Land: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Kendall County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 236/403
study of Kendall County prepared by FEMA and dated February 4, 2009, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
D. AH Or AO Zone: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation
(or depth) delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Kendall County, Illinois.
E. A Zone: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Kendall County shall be according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data
exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
1. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP.
2. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
3. For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering
study.
4. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile) which has been identified by the city engineer pursuant to
subsection 6-5-4A3 of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved in this subsection E.
F. Floodway:
1. The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on the current effective regulatory maps maintained by the city. The location of the
regulatory floodway boundary shall be scaled onto the site plan using references common to both the map and the plan (typically the centerlines of
adjacent roadways). Where an interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be
contacted.
Note: If an area of the site is located in the regulatory floodway that is higher than the BFE, that area is subject to the floodway standards of section
404 until such time as an LOMR is received from FEMA with concurrence by IDNR/OWR.
General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory floodway are as follows:
a. The flood profiles, flows, and data in the current effective FIS must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in
error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data
to use. The city shall be copied on all related correspondence.
b. If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the
proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.
c. If the applicant is informed by IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed, or modified
within the next five (5) years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing
conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built, removed or modified as applicable.
d. IDNR/OWR will review all proposed floodway modifications, including BFE, and issue permits for any work modifying the floodway. (Ord. 2016-13,
4-25-2016)
6-5-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 6-5-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit:
1. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the city engineer.
2. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the city engineer.
a. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988,
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
b. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans
and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 6-5-9 of this chapter.
3. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the city engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
a. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 237/403
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on the current
flood insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
b. The city engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
4. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
5. The city engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required for this type of activity. The city engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been
obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
1. Fill: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and
obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
2. Compensatory Storage:
a. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
b. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
c. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
d. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain
storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
e. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
f. Compensatory storage volume for development in a nonriverine regulatory floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to the
storage volume displaced.
g. Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a nonriverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be replaced
in accordance with the requirements for the loss of depressional storage.
h. A recorded covenant or easement running with the land is required to maintain the compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide
compensatory storage volume.
C. Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE): A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that
removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to
construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The city engineer shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant
has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsections:
1. Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection B2 of this section.
2. The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e., window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation (FPE).
3. The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be met, the city engineer may waive the ten foot (10') minimum setback if
an Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has
been met. The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which shall be submitted to the city engineer for
review. The city engineer may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the
structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet (4').
4. The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if
site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the city engineer may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback distance if an
Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have
been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from
flooding, shall be submitted to the city for review. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet (4').
5. The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under the
basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of an LOMRF,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification and degree of permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML
according to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering purposes.
6. The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the same
direction.
7. All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and inspected by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the site
conditions.
8. The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five feet (5') below the BFE.
9. There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power
supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above
the BFE and away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 238/403
10. The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of preventing backflow.
11. All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
12. If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the city engineer may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and
requirements set forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared
by an Illinois licensed professional engineer.
13. In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot exceed
eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of
excavation, if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of
mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated
floodway for Big Rock Creek, Fox River, Little Rock Creek and the east branch of Little Rock Creek shall be as delineated on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Kendall County and referenced in the definition of "flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" in section 6-5-2 of this chapter. Only those
uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the
purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 6-5-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway
without first obtaining a development permit from the city engineer and IDNR/OWR.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the city engineer. The application shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
h. Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure
or work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when
the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency
flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
(4) A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
(5) A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location;
m. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development;
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of
this section;
o. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application
will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 239/403
built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed
professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 6-5-9 of this chapter;
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods (see subsection B3i of this section) to accomplish the purpose of the
proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection B3i of this section would have on the
physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
(4) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
2. The city engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity.
a. The city engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained.
b. A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
B. Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
1. Appropriate Uses: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood
elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety
and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities
and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
f. Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;
h. Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
(1) The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot; or
(2) The applicant of a short term recreational use facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during over bank flooding events and accepts
liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all over bank flooding events;
i. Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
j. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more
than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
k. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation;
l. Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation,
and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second-story additions. If the building
is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
2. Exclusions: Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting
designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.
3. Engineering And Mitigation Requirements: Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible
provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data by a licensed professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 6-5-9 of this
chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 240/403
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:
(1) Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics", [McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959].)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that
more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding:
(1) Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
(2) Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
(3) Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
(4) The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year
flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year
flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year
flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(5) If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through
a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
(6) There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structure.
(7) A recorded covenant or easement running with the land is required to maintain the compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide
compensatory storage volume.
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights:
(1) For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average
channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
(2) In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design
measures.
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches:
(1) The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements.
(2) If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
(A) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 6-5-5 of this chapter.
Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
(B) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B3b of this section.
(C) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B3c of this section.
(D) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 241/403
(E) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this subsection B.
(F) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection B3h of this section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source
of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
(1) Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 feet when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements.
(2) A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
(3) All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
administrative code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or
floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
(A) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
(B) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
(C) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin;
(D) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;
(E) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures:
(1) If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall
be placed no farther than ten feet (10') from the outside of the building.
(2) Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
h. Excavation In The Floodway:
(1) When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge
and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
(2) The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length; and
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used; and
(D) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
i. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of
water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a streamside buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is
acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
(2) Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 242/403
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions
of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated
into channel modification design, where practical.
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
(C) One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side
of the channel where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(D) Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization.
Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or
riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion
of water into the new channel.
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time
soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of
eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection B3p of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion.
Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in section 6-5-5 of this chapter, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval
and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
(2) If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 243/403
(A) The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
(B) Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(3) If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next
five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions
and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
(1) If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map
revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued.
(2) The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or
excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
(3) In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given.
(4) No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued.
(5) After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA
with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer.
p. Required Criteria For Construction In Floodway: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel,
the following criteria shall be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established
upon completion of construction.
q. Construction To Proceed With Conditional Approval: After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a
permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or
structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final
letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of
the "as built" plans.
4. Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.
a. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection B3d of this section.
b. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed
flood profile, pursuant to subsection B3e of this section.
c. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections B3a, B3b, and B3h of this section.
d. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter) and all other federal, state, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
e. An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
f. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
g. Projects in public bodies of water.
5. Other Permits:
a. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5
et seq.
b. No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project meets the requirements of regional permit 3.
c. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the city.
6. Permits For Dams:
a. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative
code part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.
b. If the city engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the city engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
c. If the city engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the city engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 244/403
7. Activities That Do Not Require A Licensed Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a licensed professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
a. Regional permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic
fields, playground equipment and stream bank protection activities. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHAs WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHAs or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Development Permit:
1. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a development permit from the city engineer.
2. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the city engineer.
a. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of section 6-5-9 of this chapter.
b. The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
(1) A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
(2) Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
(3) Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
(4) Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(A) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
(B) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially
navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
(C) Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year
frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
(D) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description
of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
c. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection B of this
section.
d. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
3. Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state or other sources, the city engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
a. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 6-5-5E of this
chapter.
b. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
c. The city engineer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
d. The city engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required for this type of activity. The city engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
B. Preventing Increased Damages:
1. Floodway Development: No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods
as called for in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 245/403
2. Floodway Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
a. Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 6-5-7B3a through B3i of this chapter for the entire
floodplain as calculated under the provisions of subsection 6-5-5E of this chapter.
(1) As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
(2) Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
section 6-5-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition of "designated floodway" in
section 6-5-2 of this chapter.
b. IDNR/OWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been
made that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.
c. Permits For Dams:
(1) Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative
code part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam.
(2) If the city engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the city engineer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
office.
(3) If the city engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the city engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the
IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA).
3. Floodway Activities: The following activities may be permitted without a licensed professional engineer's review or calculation of base flood elevation
and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter.
a. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 2;
b. Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 3;
c. Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 4;
d. Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 5;
e. Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit;
f. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 7;
g. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 8;
h. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 9;
i. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 10;
j. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 11;
k. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 12;
l. Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 13;
m. Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 14; and
n. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
4. Flood Carrying Capacity: The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
5. Compensatory Storage:
a. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
b. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
c. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
d. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain
storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
e. Compensatory storage volume for development in a nonriverine regulatory floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be equal to the
storage volume displaced.
f. Compensatory storage volume requirements for development in a nonriverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a lake shall be replaced
in accordance with the requirements for the loss of depressional storage.
g. A recorded covenant or easement running with the land is required to maintain the compensatory storage volume in areas modified to provide
compensatory storage volume. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 246/403
6-5-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 6-5-6, 6-5-7 and 6-5-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA
or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following requirements shall be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of subsection
C of this section.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
4. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
5. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification:
1. For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
2. In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings:
1. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or seventy (70) square feet.
b. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or
equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter during
a ten (10) year period. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
c. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter during a
ten (10) year period. If substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
d. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply
to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
e. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
f. "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods.
2. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
a. Lowest Floor: The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation; and
b. Fill Requirements:
(1) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation; and
(2) The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer
certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures; and
(3) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and
(4) The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris or refuse materials; and
(5) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
3. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and
consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 247/403
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris; and
c. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be
located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the
flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and
d. The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
e. In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
f. Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code part 870. In addition, all manufactured
homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:
(1) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved: a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or d) in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor
shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36")
in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less.
g. Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection C3f of this section unless:
(1) They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
(2) They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(3) The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four hundred (400) square feet.
4. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:
a. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood.
b. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy,
and impacts from debris or ice.
c. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
5. A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
c. The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade; and
d. The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four
feet (4') at any point; and
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event; and
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
g. Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
6. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above the level of the
100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not
be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical
facilities.
7. Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 248/403
a. The building is not used for human habitation; and
b. All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a
designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the
appropriate use criteria of section 6-5-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections 6-5-6, 6-5-7 and 6-5-8 of this chapter must be
met; and
c. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and
d. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation; and
e. The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size; and
f. The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses and
cannot be modified later into another use; and
g. The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of subsection C3a of this section; and
h. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
i. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance implications.
8. Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 6-5-7 of
this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with subsection 6-5-7B of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade
disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to
this chapter.
D. LOMR: If the proposed development would result in a change in the BFE and regulatory floodplain, the applicant shall obtain an LOMR from FEMA. No
buildings may be built in the existing or proposed regulatory floodplain until the LOMR receives concurrence from IDNR/OWR and is issued by FEMA
and the building meets all the building protection standards of this chapter. Proposed changes to the regulatory floodway delineation and the BFE must
also be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence.
E. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the floodplain management standards will be considered met if the applicant can
demonstrate to IDNR/OWR and the city that each of the following conditions are met:
1. Demonstrate by hydraulic and hydrologic modeling that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights
outside the project site or demonstrate that any increases will be contained in easements for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event.
2. Demonstrate that the project will be operated and maintained by a public agency.
3. Demonstrate that the project will reduce flood damage to an existing building or structure. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The city council of the city of Plano shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land
management, use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 6-5-6, 6-5-7, 6-5-8 and 6-5-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a licensed
professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act3.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
1. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 6-5-5E of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition of "designated floodway" in
section 6-5-2 of this chapter.
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The city council of the city of Plano shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits
unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-
2016)
6-5-11: VARIANCES:
A. Purpose And Application:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 249/403
1. In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this section.
2. Where the city engineer finds that extraordinary hardships may result from the strict compliance with this chapter, he may, after written application
and documentation by the developer, recommend in writing to the streets and utilities committee variations or exceptions to the regulations.
Recommendation may be subject to specific conditions, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variations or exceptions shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
3. An application for a variance to this chapter, signed by the owner or developer of the development shall be filed with the city. No application for a
variance will be accepted for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed application for a permit. Applications for a variance
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. No action will be taken on an application for a variance unless it, and the
corresponding application for a permit to which it relates, are complete as determined by the city.
4. All appeals to the city engineer's decisions regarding the interpretation of this chapter shall be heard by the city of Plano streets and utilities
committee.
5. From the streets and utilities committee, the recommendations shall be communicated to the city council in writing with reasons therefor. The city
council may approve the variations, as set forth herein, from these regulations in specific cases, which in their opinion do not affect the general plan
or the spirit of this chapter.
a. Variances to Kendall County stormwater management ordinance requirements or any variance of floodplain and/or flood control regulations
require approval by the city, the Kendall County stormwater director and the Kendall County board in accordance with the procedures set forth
herein.
b. Variances to city requirements which are more stringent than this chapter do not require approval by the Kendall County stormwater director or the
Kendall County board provided they result in full compliance with the Kendall County stormwater management ordinance.
6. The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city determination of compliance related to
city and Kendall County stormwater ordinance requirements. The city shall also send a copy of the complete application to all other certified
communities within the same watershed.
7. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific form, but shall contain the information set forth herein:
a. The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising the development;
b. The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title of all lands comprising the development;
c. If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
d. The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different from the owner;
e. The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the developer in connection with the application for a variance;
f. The names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the development;
g. The specific feature or features of the development that require a variance;
h. The specific provision of the city ordinance from which a variance is sought and the precise extent of the variance therefrom;
i. The specific provision of the Kendall County stormwater ordinance from which a variance is sought and the precise extent of the variance
therefrom;
j. A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
k. A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to permit the development;
l. A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards set forth in subsection B of this section.
8. With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay all fees prescribed by the city and Kendall County.
9. When the application is deemed complete and acceptable by city a public hearing on the application before the streets and utilities committee may
be scheduled and the applicant notified. Not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to the Kendall County stormwater director, to all property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the development as disclosed in the application, and to each certified community within the same watershed as the development and to
the streets and utilities committee. Within the same time period, notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper published
within the city. If no newspaper is published within the city, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper with a general circulation within the city,
which is published in the county. The notices given under this section shall set forth the common name, address and legal description of the
development and a brief description of the variance is requested.
B. Granting Of Variances:
1. The city engineer shall not recommend nor shall the city grant a variance for a project from the provisions of this chapter unless the variance is
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence submitted with the variance
application or at the hearing:
a. No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory floodway, the effect of which would be to create regulation less restrictive than
the federal or state minimum standards applicable to development in such areas;
b. The variance will not increase the probability of flood damage or create an additional threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or be injurious to
other property or improvements in the locale in which the property is located;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 250/403
c. The variance requested is the minimum relief necessary to accomplish the objectives of the development without compromising the objectives of
this chapter;
d. The variance will not result in a reduction of water quality benefits as compared to compliance with chapter requirements;
e. The variance shall not cause conveyance of stormwater from the project to increase peak discharges beyond design capacity of existing off site
conveyance facilities for any storm event from the 2-year to the 100-year recurrence frequency;
f. The variance shall seek to preserve valuable environmental and biological resources including, but not limited to, stands of native trees, existing
wetlands and natural floodplain storage;
g. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographic conditions of the specific property involved a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations was carried out;
h. The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property, and have not been created by any person having an interest in the property;
i. The purpose of the variation is not based upon economic feasibility;
j. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; and
k. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing,
or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and
l. The provisions of subsections 6-5-6B and 6-5-8B of this chapter shall still be met; and
m. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
n. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
o. All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been obtained.
2. The city engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection
to a building will:
a. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage; and
b. Increase the risks to life and property; and
c. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
3. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or "historic structure" as defined in section 6-5-2 of this chapter, may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection A of this section and this subsection B subject to the conditions that:
a. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and
b. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure.
C. Procedure And Recommendations:
1. Local Variance: The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city determination of
compliance with the Kendall County stormwater ordinance.
The city shall review the application for a variance and present the recommendations to the streets and utilities committee at the public hearing with
a copy to the Kendall County stormwater director.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the streets and utilities committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the city council and the Kendall County stormwater director. The written recommendations of the streets and utilities committee,
when forwarded, shall be accompanied by written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in this chapter with citations to
the evidence taken at the public hearing.
The city council shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five (45) days
after receipt of the written recommendations of the streets and utilities committee and shall forward its final decision to the Kendall County
stormwater director. In the event the city council does not act on the recommendations of the streets and utilities committee then the
recommendation from the streets and utilities committee is considered to be endorsed and adopted by the city council.
2. County And Floodplain Variance: The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city
determination of noncompliance with the Kendall County stormwater ordinance.
The city shall review the application for a variance and present their written recommendations to the streets and utilities committee at the public
hearing with a copy to the Kendall County stormwater director.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the streets and utilities committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the city council.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall forward the application with its written recommendations to the
Kendall County board and the Kendall County stormwater director. The written recommendations of the city, when forwarded, shall be accompanied
by written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in subsection B of this section with citations to the evidence taken at the
public hearing.
The Kendall County board shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 251/403
(45) days after receipt of the written recommendations of the city and shall forward its final decision to the Kendall County stormwater director. In the
event the Kendall County board does not act on the recommendations of the city then the recommendation from the city is considered to be
endorsed and adopted by the city.
D. Conditions:
1. A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the relief
requested.
2. In granting a variance, the city of Plano or Kendall County board may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating
to the purposes and objectives of this chapter on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
3. Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or limitation to be met by the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, the applicant shall
file evidence to that effect with the city. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-12: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Security Requirements:
1. As security to the city for the performance by the applicant to complete the construction of any requirements of this chapter, to pay all costs, fees and
charges due from the applicant pursuant to the permitting authorities of this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform the applicant's/developer's
undertakings pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall post:
a. Construction performance security as provided in subsection B of this section prior to issuance of a permit; and
b. Sediment and erosion control security as provided in subsection C of this section, prior to issuance of a permit if a sediment and erosion control
plan is required pursuant this chapter.
c. Maintenance security as provided in subsection D of this section prior to acceptance of improvements by any public or private entity.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the applicant from submitting financial security that combines purposes set forth above so long as that
security is acceptable by the city.
2. The applicant/developer or their agent shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing and maintaining the securities required by this section.
B. Performance Security:
1. A construction performance security shall be posted and shall include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the applicant/developer and the city, for the completion of the construction of any improvements required by the
permit; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city may approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any improvements required by the permit, which estimated probable
cost shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the city; and
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to complete
required work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city until the conditions
set forth in this section or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
3. The city may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent (90%) of
the security provided for in this section may be released prior to approval of record drawings and final inspection.
C. Sediment And Erosion Control Security:
1. If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be required. Such a
security shall include:
a. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city shall approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to install and maintain the sediment and erosion control measures, which estimated probable cost
shall be approved by the city; and
b. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to
complete or maintain sediment and erosion control measures in the event that such measures are not installed and/or maintained according to the
established schedule.
c. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city, as applicable, until
the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied.
3. The city may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent (90%) of
the security provided for in this section may be released prior to completion of all construction, establishment of vegetation, removal of all sediment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 252/403
from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval by the city.
D. Maintenance Security:
1. Maintenance security shall be posted and shall include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the applicant/developer and the city, for the follow up inspection and maintenance repair of any improvements
required by the permit. Generally the maintenance period will be a minimum of one year; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city may approve, in an amount equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of
the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any improvements required by the permit, which estimated probable cost shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the city; and
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to complete
required work in the event that any improvements require maintenance according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this section shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city until the conditions
set forth in this section or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
E. Letters Of Credit:
1. Letters of credit posted pursuant to this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the city, as applicable.
2. Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution: a) acceptable to the city, as applicable; b) having capital resources of at least ten million
dollars ($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the city; c) with an office in the city of Plano or Kendall County or an adjacent county or
within the Chicago metropolitan area; and d) insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
3. Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
a. It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the city; and shall not expire without written notification of the city at least forty five (45)
days prior to expiration; and
b. It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw on it by the city; and
c. If at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the city,
and if any applicable obligation of the developer for which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the city may, without notice,
and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter either hold all
proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of all such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and reimburse
the city for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the city, as the city shall determine.
4. If at any time the city determines that the funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining unpaid
cost of all improvements or sediment and erosion control measures, then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the city, the developer shall
increase the amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs. Failure to so increase the
amount of the security shall be grounds for the city to draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of credit.
5. If at any time the city determines that the bank issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00),
is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is otherwise in danger
of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the city otherwise reasonably deems the bank to be insecure, then the
city shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to the city. Such replacement
letter of credit shall be deposited with the city not later than ten (10) days following such demand. Upon such deposit, the city shall surrender the
original letter of credit to the developer.
6. If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under this chapter, then the city may, in their discretion, draw on and retain all or
any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The city thereafter shall have the right to take any action they deem reasonable and appropriate to
mitigate the effects of such failure or refusal, and to reimburse the city from the proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses,
including legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result of the developer's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations
under this chapter. If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay fully the city for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a
cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time such letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the
developer shall, upon demand of the city therefor, immediately deposit with the city such additional funds as the city determines are necessary to
fully repay such costs and expenses and to establish such cash reserve. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-13: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study.
B. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
C. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
D. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 253/403
6-5-14: PENALTY:
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The city engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
1. The city engineer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, shall
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the combined plan commission and zoning board
of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and b) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue
to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
6-5-15: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
A. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
B. Where this chapter and other chapters, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
C. This chapter is intended to repeal the original chapter or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is
not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 2016-13, 4-25-2016)
Chapter 6
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
6-6-1: PURPOSE:
The city hereby finds as follows:
A. That excessive quantities of soil are eroding from areas that are undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not limited to,
the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, and the creation of recreational
facilities;
B. That the washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
C. That said soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed out fills and embankments;
D. That the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt the rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
E. That said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life, and that said sediment is
costly and difficult to remove; and
F. That said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public health and
safety.
The city therefore declares that the purpose of these requirements is to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, and to protect property and
prevent the despoliation of the environment, and to promote the public welfare, by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 254/403
materials and use and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of
earth on land situated in the city. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-2: GENERAL CONTROL STANDARDS:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth and any sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the
execution of said plan as hereinafter provided:
A. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time during development.
B. Erosion and sediment control planning shall be part of the initial site planning process. In planning the erosion and sediment control strategy, preference
shall be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling sediment.
C. Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resulting from any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond,
or wetland. Preventative measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.
D. Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is practical.
E. Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
F. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate sediment or erosion control measures shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with site clearing and grading. Measures implemented on site shall be maintained to prevent erosion and remove sediment from runoff
waters from land undergoing development.
G. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
H. Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible.
I. The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
J. The selection of erosion and sediment control measures shall be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to
contribute to erosion (and at a minimum a rainfall event with a 25 year recurrence frequency).
K. All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
L. All development shall comply with the minimum requirements of NPDES regulations for construction activities. This chapter may provide other
requirements but is not intended to relieve NPDES requirements.
M. Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is consistent with developing the site. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
6-6-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before land is cleared, graded, transported or otherwise disturbed by the movement of earth for purposes, including, but not limited to, the construction of
buildings, the mining of minerals including sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, and the construction of roads and streets by any person,
partnership or corporation within the city, a site development permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from the city, where
development comes under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted therefrom by section 6-6-3-13 of this
chapter.
A. Excavation, fill or any combination thereof, will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
B. Fill will exceed three feet (3') in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface.
C. Excavation will exceed four feet (4') in vertical depth at its deepest point.
D. Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof will exceed an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
E. Plant cover is to be removed from the area exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of
ten (10) acres. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 255/403
6-6-3-2: SAMPLE REQUIREMENTS FOR STANDARDIZATION OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS:
All plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the standards and specifications contained in the "Illinois Urban
Manual" (current edition) which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. Erosion and sediment control planning
shall be in accordance with the "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (the "Green Book", current
edition).
A. Site Development: Information shall include the following:
1. Vicinity sketch, acreage of site, boundary line survey; zoning; type of proposed sewer and water facilities; location of existing utilities, buildings and
drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site; legend; and scale.
2. A general description of the predominate soil types on the site. Soil survey information is available at the Kendall County soil and water conservation
district office.
3. Information on those areas abutting or adjacent to site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage courses that may affect the site or be
affected by the development of the site.
4. The name and address of the developer or owner.
5. The name and address of the consulting firm and the name of the person to contact.
6. Limits of natural floodplain(s). (Based on ultimate development of watershed.)
7. Location and description, including specifications, of all erosion control measures, including temporary or permanent seeding, mulching, erosion
control blanket, and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
8. Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized.
9. Areas to be left undisturbed.
B. Site Grading: Show existing topography of the site and a one hundred foot (100') adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades, and
street profiles.
1. Are cuts and fills balanced?
2. Provide measures to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff.
C. Storm Drainage Plan: Based on the competent storm drainage study. Include a drainage area map and computations. Indicate what conditions now
prevail at proposed and natural outlets such as:
1. Is it a bare earth or vegetated drainage course?
2. Will constructed outlet be in open sun, open shade or dense shade?
3. Is natural or proposed outlet subject to long term or continuous flow?
4. Is the existing outlet actively eroding?
5. Is there evidence of high water table (permanent or seasonal)?
6. Is the area subject to seepage or spring flood?
7. Show elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural outlets.
8. Profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel.
9. Cross section and profile of existing stream channels where applicable.
D. Estimated Schedule And Phasing Of Development Of The Site:
Phase I Stripping or clearing
Phase II Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV Maintenance
All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the Kendall County soil and water conservation district for approval shall show all the erosion and
sediment control measures needed to provide protection throughout all the phases of construction listed above. These plans shall also include any off site
borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines, utility lines, haul and access roads and the following:
1. Start of clearing.
2. Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 256/403
3. Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative and structural) by phase and date.
4. Installation of storm drainage by phase and date.
5. Paving of streets and parking areas by phase and date.
6. Establishment of permanent vegetative cover. Plans will show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas by providing
for permanent stabilization of these areas as soon after grading as possible. Include seeding mixes and rates, types of sod, seedbed preparation,
seeding date, lime and fertilizer application, temporary seedings, if needed, mulching, etc.
7. Include details of all structural sediment control measures.
8. Computations for sediment basins.
E. Additional Information: In addition to the above, the following must also be submitted:
1. Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization methods.
2. Provisions for construction dewatering, if needed, to address water that is pumped or discharged from the site during construction. Means shall be
provided to prevent erosion from a dewatering operation as well as filter or treat water to prevent sediment from discharging off site.
3. Provisions for maintenance of all required control measures, including type and frequency of maintenance.
F. Professional Engineer's Recommendations: Professional engineer's recommendations for clearing, grubbing, stripping, keying and undercutting for the
acceptance to fill, and allowable slope angle for cut and fill slopes, erosion control during both the construction and the life of the facility, location,
utilization, and restoration of borrow or spoil areas.
The site development permit application shall be in the following form:
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Name
Permit No.
Date
Zoning
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION
PLANO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF KENDALL)
, Being duly sworn upon his oath, in application for Site Development Permit from the Subdivision Department, Deposes and Says:
Owner Address
Phone City
Mail Permit To
Legal Description of Site
Attach a Site Development Plan with required information shown as noted on the check list provided.
Developer Address
Phone City
Consultant Address
Phone City
In consideration of this application and attached site development plan being made a part thereof, and the issuance of a permit:
1. I/We will conform to the regulations set forth in Title 6, Chapter 6 of the Plano City Code, Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
2. I/We also agree that all work performed under said permit will be in accordance with the Plans which accompany this application, except for such
changes as may be authored by the City and its Engineer.
3. I/We further state that I/We make this application in order to induce the City of Plano, Illinois to issue its permit for the uses stated herein.
SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN TO BEFORE ME
This day of , 20 .
Notary PublicSignature of Owner or Authorized Agent
Address
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 257/403
City
Issued by:
Copy: Kendall County Conservation District
(Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-3: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
This section establishes the design features and the design criteria, standards, and methods to be used in developing a soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
A. Site Design Requirements:
1. On site soil erosion and sediment control measures, as specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating
clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or fill activities on the site:
a. Disturbed areas draining less than one acre shall, at a minimum, provide filter barriers (including silt fences, or equivalent control measures) to
control all on site and off site runoff as specified in referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet (25')
located on the subject property, may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is expected.
b. Disturbed areas draining more than one but less than five (5) acres, shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment trap or equivalent control
measure and such protection shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area as specified in referenced handbooks.
c. Disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, shall, at a minimum, be protected by a sediment basin with a dewatering device or equivalent
control measure and such protection shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area as specified in referenced handbooks.
d. Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be
composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and "dry" detention storage and each shall be sized for the 2-year, 24-hour runoff from the
site under maximum runoff conditions during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be that rate required to achieve minimum detention
times of at least ten (10) hours. The elevation of the control structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage.
e. The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one year. For construction periods exceeding one year, a sediment removal
schedule shall be provided.
2. Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year frequency storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be
stabilized within forty eight (48) hours.
3. Soil disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize erosion. Areas of the development site that are not to be graded shall be
protected from construction traffic or other disturbance until final seeding is performed. Soil stabilization methods shall consider the time of year, site
conditions and use of temporary or permanent measures.
4. Properties and channels adjoining development sites shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation. At points where concentrated flow leaves a
development site, energy dissipation devices shall be placed at discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel as necessary to
provide a nonerosive velocity of flow from the drainage outlet to the watercourse.
5. Development in excess of twenty (20) acres shall provide a detailed schedule for earthwork including a time line in days for stripping, excavating,
filling, and establishment of erosion controls. Such schedule shall consider phasing of operations to limit the area of disturbance on site at any one
time. The erosion control plan must ensure temporary or permanent soil erosion and sediment control measures can be maintained.
6. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active disturbance, or
redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:
a. Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall include seeding, mulching, erosion control blanket, sodding, and/or
nonvegetative measures in accordance with the "Illinois Urban Manual".
b. Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be stabilized with turf reinforcement mat, or blanket in combination with seeding, or
equivalent.
c. The seven (7) day stabilization requirement may be precluded by snow cover or when construction activity will resume within fourteen (14) days
from when activities have ceased, then stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that portion of the site by the seventh day after
construction activity temporarily ceased given that portion of the site has appropriate soil erosion and sediment controls.
7. Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements
shall be met:
a. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
b. The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be
restabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is completed, interrupted, or stopped.
c. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be constructed dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
8. Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by an appropriate sediment control measure.
9. Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than twenty five
feet (25') to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers, including filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed immediately on the downslope side
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 258/403
of the piles.
10. If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through an effective
sediment control measure (e.g., appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent) and monitored for performance and compliance with
the approved plan.
11. Each site shall have a stabilized mat of aggregate underlain with filter cloth (or other appropriate measure) of sufficient length and width and stone
gradation to prevent sediment or stone from being tracked onto public or private roadways at any point where traffic will be entering or leaving a
construction site to or from entrance roads, access drives, and parking areas. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by
shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
12. The applicant shall provide adequate receptacles for the deposition of all construction material debris generated during the development process.
The applicant shall not cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of construction material debris upon or into
any development site, channel, watercourse or water body.
13. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance
of their intended function.
14. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be maintained until site stabilization is achieved with permanent soil stabilization
measures. In the case of bare ground seeding, erosion controls must be maintained until a minimum of seventy percent (70%) density of cover and
two inches (2") of growth is established. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
15. The condition of the construction site for the winter shutdown period shall address proper erosion and sediment control early in the fall growing
season so that slopes and other bare earth areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or permanent vegetative cover and other cover
types/stabilization methods. All open areas that are to remain idle throughout the winter shall receive temporary erosion control measures prior to the
end of the fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of the growing season must incorporate soil stabilization measures that do
not rely on vegetative cover.
B. Maintenance Of Erosion Control Measures:
1. All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained by the applicant or
subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance.
Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be inspected in accordance with NPDES requirements or at least weekly and following an
equivalent 1/2-inch rainfall event, and repaired or replaced as necessary.
2. With issuance of the permit by the city the applicant agrees to maintain the soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall execute a
maintenance agreement with future owners of the property to maintain the property's soil erosion and sediment control plan and stormwater pollution
prevention plan as applicable.
3. The applicant also specifically authorizes representatives or subcontractors of the permitting authority to enter onto the property for the purpose of
inspections and maintenance of the drainage system.
4. If the permitting authority notifies the property owner in writing, of maintenance problems that require correction, the property owner shall make such
corrections within seven (7) calendar days of such notification.
5. If the corrections are not made within this time period the permitting authority may issue a stop work order and revoke the permit. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-
25-2016)
6-6-3-4: RESTRICTIONS ON PERMIT:
No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site unless:
A. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the city, or
B. The proposed earthmoving is coordinated with any overall plan previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is situated. (Ord. 2016-12,
4-25-2016)
6-6-3-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
No site development or building permit shall be issued until said developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions required by
this chapter, and certifies that any land clearing construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such plan and
submissions.
The standards and specifications of "Erosion And Sediment Control Handbook, Kendall County, Illinois", first edition, as compiled for the Kendall County
soil and water conservation district, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by this reference for the purpose of exemplifying the
considerations and factors which should enter into the preparation of a site development plan. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-6: BONDS:
The applicant may be required to file with the city clerk a faithful performance bond or other improvement security satisfactory to the city in the amount
deemed sufficient by the city engineer to cover all the costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of landscaping for such periods as specified by
the city including engineering, inspection fees and incidental expenses. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 259/403
6-6-3-7: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from date of issue; except, that the city may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if
written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-8: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
To further the specific purposes of this chapter, the following review procedures are established:
A. Grading Work Under Five Hundred Cubic Yards: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in excess of one
hundred (100) cubic yards, but not over five hundred (500) cubic yards, the city engineer shall review the application for the proposed site development
permit. If the city engineer finds the application for the proposed grading plan in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, it may issue a permit
with such reasonable conditions as may be deemed necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter; or, in the alternative, refer the
application to the soil and water conservation district.
B. Grading Work In Excess Of Five Hundred Cubic Yards Or Removal Of Vegetation: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous
group of sites is in excess of five hundred (500) cubic yards or the proposed cuts and fills exceed five feet (5') at their maximum point, or where
approval to remove plant cover is required by this chapter:
1. The city shall refer the application to the soil and water conservation district and the city plan commission for review and recommendations. Such
recommendations shall be submitted to the city council within thirty (30) days.
2. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the city planning commission and the soil and water conservation district, and after consideration thereof,
the city shall approve, approve with such reasonable conditions as it may deem necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, or
disapprove the application for the site development.
3. Failure of the city to make a determination upon the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the application for a site development permit
within sixty (60) days after receipt of all necessary information for such action will constitute an approval of the application unless such time is
extended with the consent of the applicant. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-9: APPEALS:
The applicant, as well as any person who has received notice of the filing of the application for site development permit, may appeal the decision of the
city. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city shall schedule to hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days' notice thereof. The city shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days of the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts
by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock that, when
disturbed by the proposed grading, may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring
of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-10: INSPECTIONS:
A. The city shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein
the same fails to comply with the site development plan.
B. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in the said plan, the city may stop further work until approval is
obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions.
C. Plans for grading work bearing the stamp of approval of the city shall be maintained at the site during progress of the grading.
D. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the city at least two (2) full working days before the
said inspection is to be made:
1. Rough Grading: When all rough grading has been completed; and
2. Final Inspection: When all work, including installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord. 2016-12,
4-25-2016)
6-6-3-11: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
Failure of the city officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of said permit shall not relieve the permittee
from responsibility for the conditions or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the city, its officers or agents being responsible for any condition
or damage resulting therefrom. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 260/403
A. Authority: In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit or conducts or carries on
said site development in such a manner as to materially or adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of a person residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, or conducts or carries on said site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city shall revoke or suspend the site development permit.
B. Hearings:
1. No site development permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state:
a. The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or suspension, in clear and concise language.
b. The time when, and the place where such hearing is to be held.
Such notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any
such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon
conclusion of such hearing, the board of appeals shall determine whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
2. The zoning board of appeals shall hold the hearing to consider recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been
temporarily suspended at the next regular scheduled meeting of the board of appeals at which all conditions of this subsection can be fulfilled. (Ord.
2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-3-13: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT:
A site development permit shall not be required in the following cases:
A. Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drainfields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools, cellars or footings of
building or structures for which a building permit shall have been issued by the city, unless part of a development which would otherwise require such a
permit.
B. Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities.
C. Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes.
D. Engaging in the following, but only if in connection with a farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise and upon property zoned solely for
farming or agricultural purposes and uses:
1. The construction of sod waterways; or
2. The construction of terraces; or
3. The construction of surface water diversions; or
4. The construction of grade stabilization structures; or
5. The tilling of the soil. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-4: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Of Provisions: All earthmoving and grading operations not specifically exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the
applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
B. County Regulations Adopted: The standards and specifications of "Erosion And Sediment Control Handbook, Kendall County, Illinois", first edition, as
compiled for the Kendall County soil and water conservation district are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by this reference, three (3)
copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under development plans
approved in section 6-6-3 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of the said "handbook" and other provisions of this chapter, the
said provisions of this chapter shall govern.
C. Special Precautions:
1. If at any stage of the grading, the city determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing
permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the city may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be
done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as it considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may
include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Specifying a more level exposed slope;
b. Construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing;
c. Installation of plant materials for erosion control; and
d. Reports of registered soils engineer and/or of a registered engineering geologist whose recommendations may be made requirements for further
work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 261/403
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or
the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the city may specify the time of starting grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to
the advent of seasonal rains. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-5: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
B. Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the application and
the facts relied upon by petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application.
C. Standards For Exceptions: In order for the land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the
zoning board of appeals find all of the following facts with respect thereto:
1. That the land is of such shape or size, or is affected by such physical conditions, or is subject to such title limitations or record, that it is impossible or
impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of the regulations of this chapter.
2. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
3. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
D. Action On Proposed Exception:
1. Each proposed exception shall be referred to the officers or agencies involved, and such officers or departments shall transmit to the zoning board of
appeals their recommendations, which recommendations shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception.
2. After public hearing thereon, the zoning board of appeals, by resolution, may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions
and conditions it deems necessary, or it may disapprove such site development permit application and exception application, or it may take such
other action as is appropriate, The decision shall then be forwarded to the city council for final action. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
6-6-6: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form by the city. (Ord. 2016-12, 4-25-2016)
Chapter 7
CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY
6-7-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
For provisions regulating condominium property, see 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 605/2 et seq. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
Chapter 8
SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-8-1: ADMINISTRATION OF TITLE:
A. City Clerk: The City Clerk shall administer the provisions of this Title, and in addition thereto, the furtherance of said authority shall:
1. Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these regulations, including amendments hereto.
2. Receive and file all sketch plats, environmental plans, preliminary plats, site development plans for permit, construction improvement plans,
subdivision bonds and final plats, together with applications therefor.
3. Forward the sketch plats to the City Planning Consultant for review.
4. Forward the environmental plans to the representative of the health authority for review.
5. Forward the preliminary plats to the Plan Commission for evaluation.
6. Forward the following to the City Engineer for review and recommendations:
a. Preliminary plats.
b. Site development plans for permit, construction improvement plans and subdivision bond.
c. Final plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 262/403
7. Forward all plats and letters to the Zoning Board and Planning Committee when required by these regulations, together with appropriate
recommendations.
8. Receive and file transmittal letters from appropriate agencies and officials.
9. Publish all notices for public hearing, special meetings, etc.
10. Schedule all plats on the committee agenda based upon the recommendation of the City Council.
11. Make all other determinations required by the regulations herein.
B. City Council: The City Council shall have the final decision on all plats.
C. Plan Commission, Planning Consultant:
1. Plan Commission shall evaluate preliminary plat with a recommendation to the City Council.
2. The City Planning Consultant shall:
a. Meet with any owner or representative of the owner to review the sketch plat and make appropriate recommendations to the Plan Commission of
the sketch plat with regard to:
(1) The General Plan and related planning considerations;
(2) The existing conditions; and
(3) The location map.
b. Make other determinations required of him by the regulations herein.
D. Zoning Board Of Appeals: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider zoning change applications with recommendations to be forwarded to the full
City Council for action.
E. City Planner And City Engineer:
1. The Planner and Engineer shall review the following:
a. All preliminary plats to determine whether such plats comply with these regulations.
b. All construction improvement plans to determine whether such plans comply with these regulations.
c. All subdivision bonds to determine whether such bonds comply with these regulations.
d. All final plats to determine whether such plats comply with the preliminary plat and these regulations.
e. All improvement plans with special consideration for flood damage prevention such as:
(1) Interpret the flood hazard maps.
(2) Review technical submissions for flood hazard map amendments.
(3) Review the comprehensive drainage plans.
(4) Require new and replacement water and sewer systems when necessary.
(5) Determine whether the proposed development site is located wholly or partially in the floodway or flood fringe.
(6) Determine the engineering risk of flood damage for any proposed use.
(7) Determine the adequacy of the improvement plans for flood damage prevention and other technical matters.
(8) Review the allowable release rates and other detail hydrologic calculations.
(9) Review all improvement plans, specifications and calculations for storm water detention facilities and compensatory storage requirements.
f. All site development plans for permit, with special consideration for grading, sediment and erosion control such as:
(1) Review detail calculations for sediment basins.
(2) Review the grading plan.
(3) Review specifications and reports.
(4) Inspect the completed work when properly notified.
(5) Issue site development permits.
2. The Planner and Engineer shall also:
a. Report directly to the City Council and Plan Commission Committee with appropriate recommendations on all plats.
b. Inspect all construction work when properly notified at completion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 263/403
c. Make all other determinations required of him by the regulations herein.
F. Administrative Zoning Officer: The Administrative Zoning Officer shall:
1. Report directly to the City Council, Zoning Board and Plan Commission with regard to the existing zoning of the proposed development site and
report the status of any pending application for rezoning before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Make other determinations required of him by the regulations herein.
G. Director Of Public Works: The Director of Public Works shall:
1. Review preliminary plats, construction improvement plans, subdivision bonds and final plats when requested by the City.
2. Review and establish improvement requirements for compliance with the current Illinois Department of Transportation Highway Design
Specifications and Revised Standards.
3. Establish pavement widths and center line radii of major and secondary streets in the City.
4. Evaluate traffic data and may recommend additional width and thickness of pavements of City streets and entrances to County and State highways
when required.
5. Perform quality control of all construction of improvements and entrances to City streets based upon the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, as amended.
6. Make other determinations required of him by the regulations herein.
H. Soil And Water Conservation District: The Kendall County Soil and Water Conservation District shall prepare a natural resource report of the preliminary
plat.
I. Health Authority Representative, Illinois EPA: The representative of health authority shall:
1. Meet with any owner or representative of the owner to review the environmental plan and make appropriate recommendations to the City with regard
to the type of sanitary sewerage system and water system the proposed site will probably require.
2. Make other determinations required of by EPA regulations. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-2: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Recorder's office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in a manner prescribed in
this Title. The City Council, by resolution, shall appoint the enforcing officer of this Title, and it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The
enforcing officer may call upon any department or official of the City to furnish him with such information and assistance as he may deem necessary for the
observance or enforcement of this Title. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-3: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use of any building or structure within a subdivision or lot division approved under
this Title until required land improvements have been installed and accepted by the City Council; except, street and alley improvements as herein required
may be in the process of installation, provided that roadway pavement base course has been installed and is suitable for vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-
24-1998)
6-8-4: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The Plan Commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this Title in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not adversely
affect the Comprehensive Plan or intent of this Title. Such recommendations shall be communicated to the City Council or governing County authorities
in writing, substantiating the recommended variation. The City Council may approve variations from the requirements of this Title when, in its opinion,
such variations will not adversely affect the Comprehensive Plan or the intent of this Title.
B. Standards For Variations:
1. Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties may result from the strict compliance with this Title it may,
after written application by the subdivider, recommend in writing to the City Council, variations or exceptions to the regulations, subject to specified
conditions, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variations or exceptions shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Title or the Comprehensive Plan.
2. The Plan Commission shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations of this Title unless it shall make findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in each specific case, that:
a. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topography conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations was carried out.
b. The conditions upon which the request for a variation is sought are not applicable, generally, to other property, and have not been created by any
person having an interest in the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 264/403
c. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property.
d. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-5: AMENDMENTS:
A. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Mayor and City Council, the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, any
resident of the City, or any person residing within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City.
B. Application For Amendment: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or
data, and such other information, as specified by the Plan Commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate
evidence showing that the proposed amendments will conform to the standards set forth herein. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the
City Council to the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals with the request to hold a public hearing.
C. Hearing: Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to above, the Plan Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on
the proposed amendment. The City Clerk shall cause a notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper published
within the City not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. However, the Plan Commission may continue
from time to time the hearing without further notice being published.
D. Plan Commission Findings Of Fact And Recommendations: Within forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the
Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same, together with its recommendations to the Mayor and City Council.
E. Decisions: The Mayor and City Council, upon receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
If an application submitted by the Plan Commission to the City Council for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the City Council within
forty five (45) days of the date upon which such application is received by the Mayor and City Council, it shall be deemed to have been approved. (Ord.
1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The standards and requirements of this Title may be modified in the case of the large scale developments when the City Council finds that a plan and a
program for a new village, complete community, shopping center, industrial park or neighborhood unit provides adequate public open spaces and
improvements for the circulations, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed, and which also provides such covenants or
other legal provisions as will assure conformity and achievement of the plat.
In planned unit developments, all improvements within or without proposed dedications to the public shall conform to this Title, unless modified by the City
Council.
All proposals for a planned unit development (PUD) shall be governed by the planned unit development (PUD) requirements outlined within the Zoning
Title and hereby adopted by reference to be a part of these subdivision regulations1. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-7: FEES:
A. Subdivision Plats: No plat shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review without a receipt from the City Clerk being exhibited showing full
payment of the fee. Payment of the fee is in no way contingent on whether the plat of subdivision submitted is approved or disapproved.
1. Preliminary Plat: Before the preliminary plat is presented to the Plan Commission for its action, the subdivider shall pay the City Clerk for the General
Corporate Fund of the City, a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each lot and/or parcel. But in no case shall the total aggregate fee be less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
2. Final Plat: Before the final plat is signed by the Mayor, the subdivider shall pay to the City for the General Corporate Fund, a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each lot and/or parcel. But in no case shall the total aggregate fee be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
3. Base Fees: The foregoing fees for preliminary plat and final plat are base fees, are nonrefundable, and are intended to offset and defray the
incidental indirect costs incurred by the City in connection with the consideration of and approval of preliminary plat and final plat. These fees are in
addition to all other fees imposed by this title or imposed otherwise under the provisions of this Code.
B. Cost Of City Planner's And Engineer's Services; Legal Fees:
1. The costs incurred by the City for the review of plans and specifications by the City Planner, consulting engineer and resident engineer and attorney,
and other experts or consultants retained by the City, shall be paid by the owner, developer or subdivider. At the time of filing, there shall be paid to
the City a preliminary engineering fee estimate in the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Costs incurred by the City for the review
of plans and specifications shall be charged against the initial deposit. The City shall periodically account to the applicant for the use of said funds in
the review of the project. When the initial deposit is exhausted, the City shall bill the applicant for an additional deposit(s) in such sums deemed by
the City Engineer to be sufficient to defray the additional costs to be incurred, from time to time, in the review of the project. Such costs shall be paid
to the City Clerk at the time of application for approval of a final plat and shall be based upon estimates to be provided by the resident City Engineer.
Prior to execution of the final plat by the City Council, all fees and costs incident to the approval of the preliminary and final plat shall be paid in full.
All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer or other City employee duly appointed by the City Council, or by the City's consulting engineers as directed by the City Council. The cost of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 265/403
such inspections shall be at a rate determined by the City Council in consultation with its resident engineer and consulting engineer and shall be paid
by the owner or subdivider or developer to the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the rendition of statements for inspection services. The City
shall be under no obligation to provide continuing inspection services in the event of a delinquency in the payment of inspection charges and the
installation of public improvements shall cease upon notification by the City to the owner, developer or subdivider, of a delinquency in the payment of
inspection fees.
2. At the request of the City, the estimated cost to be incurred by the City for the review of the plans and specifications by the City Planner, consulting
engineer and resident engineer and attorney, and other experts hired or employed by the City, shall be deposited into an escrow account with the
City to be used to pay for the services as they are rendered and to ensure that as bills are tendered for such services that funds are available, from
the applicant, to pay the same. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow shall be refunded to the applicant at the conclusion of the project upon
determination by the City Engineer that no additional funds are required. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
C. Impact Fees:
1. Amounts: The following fees imposed shall be effective for building permits issued on or after January 1, 2016:
a. To the City for:
Public Works $ 700.00
Police Department 300.00
Municipal public buildings 1,500.00
(Ord. 2015-29, 12-14-2015)
All impact fees shall be paid to the City at the time a building permit is applied for and issued by the City. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
2. Real Property Affected2:
a. Residential: The City impact fees herein imposed shall apply to all residential zoned lots platted after the effective date hereof. The base amount
of such impact fee shall be the amount set forth in subsection C1a of this section. An additional impact fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the base
amount is hereby imposed for each additional dwelling unit contained within any residential structure. (Ord. 2008-47, 10-27-2008; amd. Ord. 2015-
29, 12-14-2015)
b. Business And Manufacturing: Any lot or lots zoned for business, office or manufacturing purposes platted after the effective date hereof shall be
required to pay the impact fees imposed herein. However, any business, office or manufacturing facility located on said lot shall be entitled to a
credit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) against said impact fees for each job estimated to be created by the establishment of the building on
such lot. The person or entity requesting such credit shall certify under oath to the City the estimated number of jobs for employees working at
least twenty (20) hours per week. In the event the actual number of employees is not as great as the number estimated, within one (1) year from
the date of issuance of the building occupancy permit, the City shall have the right to collect the balance of the impact fees.
c. Exception: No lot platted prior to the effective date hereof shall be subject to or encumbered by the terms of this subsection C.
3. Use Of Impact Fees: The impact fees collected by the City under the terms of this subsection C shall be used as follows:
a. All funds collected hereunder shall be paid to the City Treasurer who shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt thereof, transfer to the City Fire
Department fire protection district its portion thereof and shall deposit to the credit of the respective departments of the City into an account or
accounts to be used solely for the purposes enumerated herein.
b. Each department of the City receiving funds hereunder shall be fully bound by all of the terms, conditions and covenants herein contained.
c. All funds paid hereunder shall be held in an encumbered account by the department receiving the same for the purpose of making only capital
expenditures.
d. "Capital expenditures" are defined as expenditures for the purchase of equipment with an estimated useful life in excess of three (3) years, the
purchase of land, the construction of permanent structures on land, the extension of water mains, sewer mains, storm sewers or other permanent
public improvements. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-8-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be illegal to sell or offer to sell any lot, tract or property which does not conform to the requirements and regulations of this title and every such
sale or attempt to sell shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot or tract as provided by the Illinois Statutes.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. "Capital expenditures" are defined as expenditures for the purchase of equipment with an estimated useful life in excess of three (3) years, the
purchase of land, the construction of permanent structures on land, the extension of water mains, sewer mains, storm sewers or other permanent
public improvements. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 266/403
Chapter 9
DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR A PAYMENT IN LIEU OF A DEDICATION
6-9-1: CALCULATION OF LAND REQUIRED FOR SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to
dedicate land for school sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the City with advice from the school district, in accordance with the following criteria:
A. Student To Land Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly upon the
amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1) estimated
number of students from the development to be served in each school classification; times 2) the minimum recommended acres per school
classification; over 3) the maximum recommended number of students per classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land
deemed necessary to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased number of students in each such school classification. For
purposes of the following examples/computation it is presumed that each single-family home will have four (4) bedrooms. For other dwelling units, such
as townhouses, apartments, it is presumed that each unit will have two (2) bedrooms.
Example: Development A will generate 60 elementary students.
Minimum recommended
acres per classification
of school size
Estimated students per school
classification
Acres to be dedicated from the
development
x
________________ =
Maximum recommended number of students per school
classification
9 acres
60 students x
___________________ =
1.35 acres
400 acres
B. School Classification And Site Size: Classifications and size of school sites within the City shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria,
which is consistent with the minimum site recommendations of the Illinois Office of Education Standards as adopted by the Illinois State Board of
Education:
Classificat ion
By Grade Group
Number
Of Students
Minimum Acres Of Land
Per Student Population
Elementary
grades K_5
400 9
Junior high
grades 6_8
500 25
High school
grades 9_12
1,000 40
C. Population Density: The estimated number of students generated by a development shall be determined by application of the population density table
as set out in Section 6-9-8 of this Chapter. This population density table is generally indicative of current and short-range projected trends in family size
for new construction. The student populations listed in said table shall be used for all calculations required by this Chapter unless a written objection is
filed by the subdivider or developer with the City Clerk and the superintendent of the school district prior to approval of the final plat. In the event a
written objection is filed, the subdivider or developer shall file a demographic study showing the estimated additional student population to be
generated from the subdivision or planned unit development. The final determination of the student population density to be used in the calculations
shall be made by the city council based upon the demographic information submitted by the subdivider or developer and upon such other demographic
information as may be submitted by the school district or others. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-9-2: LOCATION OF SITE:
School sites dedicated pursuant to this chapter shall be located in accordance with plans and/or standards adopted by the city with advice from the school
district. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-9-3: CONVEYANCE OF SITE:
Any lands to be conveyed as a school site pursuant to this chapter shall be conveyed to the school district within thirty (30) days of the recording of the
final plat. Said conveyance shall be in accordance with the following criteria:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 267/403
A. Title To Site: All sites shall be conveyed to the school district either by warranty or trustee's deed. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for
conveying good, merchantable title, free of encumbrances, unless the encumbrances are waived by the school district, to the school district. The
subdivider or developer shall be responsible for the payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance.
B. Topography, Grading And General Suitability: The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its immediate surroundings must be
suitable for its intended purpose. The site must be free of environmental and archaeological concerns.
C. Site Improvements: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer, drainage and streets as applicable to the
location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor.
D. Sale Of Land: When, in the opinion of the school district, any parcel of land conveyed pursuant to this chapter becomes unnecessary, unsuitable, or
inconvenient for the uses of the school district, such parcel may be sold as provided by applicable law. The proceeds of such sale shall be used in a
manner consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
E. Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued until said conveyance has been made. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-9-4: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF A SCHOOL SITE:
When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a school site, as
recommended by the school district, the city shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. Said
cash contribution shall be paid to and held in trust by the school district for school grounds as permitted by law to serve the immediate or future needs of
children from that subdivision or development or for improvements to anyexisting school site which already serves such needs. Improvement under this
section shall be liberally construed and shall include, but not be limited to, the development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets;
collector streets; internal roadways; connections with sewer, water and electrical lines; playgrounds; recreation grounds; and athletic fields. Improvement
shall also include the purchase of any materials, goods or equipment necessary to said development and construction. Improvement shall further include
the construction of buildings; additions to existing school buildings; remodeled or renovated instructional and noninstructional spaces in classrooms and
the purchase of prefabricated classroom units to be used at the school site. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998; amd. Ord. 2003-40, 9-8-2003)
A. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of improved, subdivided land, as platted within the
development's final plat, that otherwise would have been dedicated as school sites. The city, based upon investigation, advice and consultation with its
financial consultants, has determined that the fair market value of any particular parcel, for purposes of this chapter, shall be and is determined to be
ninety six thousand four hundred sixty three dollars ($96,463.00) per acre. The foregoing fair market value shall be used in the determination of cash
contributions unless the subdivider, developer, or any other subdivider or developer, or any public body files a written objection thereto. In the event of
any such objection, the objecting party shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of the development.
Final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the city council based upon such information submitted
by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the city council by affected parties, and by information, reports and
analysis provided to the city council by its own consultants. (Ord. 2006-20, 4-10-2006)
B. Time And Manner Of Payment: The cash contribution required herein shall be paid at the time of the approval of the final plat. No building permit shall
be issued until said payment has been made. Payments hereunder shall be payable to the school district serving the subdivision or planned unit
development, shall be received by the city clerk and shall be immediately remitted to the appropriate school district. Set out in subsection 6-9-8C of this
chapter is an example of the computation of the cash contribution. (Ord. 2004-9, 3-8-2004)
C. Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within
the school locationshall be dedicated as site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would
have to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The
remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
D. Age Restricted Residential Units: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to "age restricted housing", defined as any residential structure subject
to a deed restriction requiring at least one occupant to be fifty five (55) years of age or older.
E. Developer Requirements For Proposed School Site: Dedicated school sites shall be improved by the developer, prior to the issuance of building
permits, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city and school district, in accordance with the minimum specifications contained in appendix A
attached to the ordinance codified herein entitled: "developer requirements for proposed school site", as amended by action of the city council, from
time to time. (Ord. 2008-24, 3-24-2008)
6-9-5: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where the plans of the city call for a larger school site in a particular proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the city council, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the
school district; provided, that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-9-6: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 268/403
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, a school site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable school sites without hardship on a particular developer. (Ord. 1998-23,
8-24-1998)
6-9-7: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS/INDEMNITY:
Upon request of the city and within thirty (30) days thereof, and prior to receiving a dedication of land or a cash contribution in lieu of land pursuant to
section 6-9-1 of this chapter, the school district shall execute an intergovernmental agreement with the city in which the schooldistrict agrees to indemnify
and hold the city harmless, including all associated costs and reasonable attorney fees incident to any suits filed in which the validity or application of any
section of this chapter is challenged. The selection of counsel to defend any such action shall be by the mutual agreement and consent of the city and the
school district. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-9-8: TABLES:
A.Table Of Acreage Requirements Per Grade Grouping:
(Grade Grouping: K-5, 6-8, 9-12)
Elementary Junior High High School
Minimum acres (A) 9 25 40
Maximum students (S) 400 500 1,000
B.Table Of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit:
(Source: 1996 Illinois School Consulting Service, Naperville, IL.)
Type Of
Unit
Elementary Junior High Total K_8
Detached single-family
2
bedroom
0
.136
0
.048
.184
3
bedroom
0
.369
0
.173
.542
4
bedroom
0
.530
0
.298
.828
5
bedroom
0
.345
0
.248
.593
Attached single-family (townhouse, row house, quadriplex, etc.)
1
bedroom
-0- -0- -0-
2
bedroom
0
.088
0
.048
.136
3
bedroom
0
.234
0
.058
.292
4
bedroom
0
.322
0
.154
.476
Apartments
Efficiency
-0- -0- -0-
1
bedroom
0
.002
0
.001
.003
2
bedroom
0
.086
0
.042
.128
3
bedroom
0
.234
0
.123
.357
(Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998) C.School land cash contribution in lieu of land computation: Based on fair market value (FMV) of ninety six thousand four
hundred sixty three dollars ($96,463.00) per acre (current 2006). This figure is an example only. See subsection 6-9-4A of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-21, 4-
10-2006)
Formula: Contribution = grade factor (D) x minimum acres (A)/maximum students (S) x FMV
Type Of
Unit
Elementary Junior High High School
Total Per Unit
D A
S FMV Total D A
S FMV Total D A S FMV Total
Detached single-family
2- 0.136 18 600 $96,463.00 $ 393.57 0.048 40 650 $96,463.00 $ 284.94 0.020 108 1,600 $96,463.00 $
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 269/403
bedroom 130.23 .73
3-
bedroom
0.369
18
600
96,463.00 1,067.85
0.173
40
650
96,463.00 1,026.96
0.184
108
1,600
96,463.00 1,198.07
.88
4-
bedroom
0.530
18
600
96,463.00 1,533.76
0.298
40
650
96,463.00 1,768.98
0.360
108
1,600
96,463.00 2,344.05
.80
5-
bedroom
0.345
18
600
96,463.00 998.39 0.248
40
650
96,463.00 1,472.17
0.593
108
1,600
96,463.00 3,861.17
.74
Attached single-family (townhouse, row house,
quadriplex, etc.)
2-
bedroom
0.000
18
600
$96,463.00
$ 0.00 0.000
40
650
$96,463.00
$ 0.00 0.000
108
1,600
$96,463.00
$ 0.00
.00
3-
bedroom
0.088
18
600
96,463.00 254.66 0.048
40
650
96,463.00 284.94 0.038
108
1,600
96,463.00 247.43
.03
4-
bedroom
0.234
18
600
96,463.00 677.17 0.058
40
650
96,463.00 344.30 0.059
108
1,600
96,463.00 384.16
.63
5-
bedroom
0.322
18
600
96,463.00 931.83 0.145
40
650
96,463.00 860.75 0.173
108
1,600
96,463.00 1,126.45
.03
Apartments
2-
bedroom
0.000
18
600
$96,463.00
$ 0.00 0.000
40
650
$96,463.00
$ 0.00 0.000
108
1,600
$96,463.00
$ 0.00
.00
3-
bedroom
0.002
18
600
96,463.00 5.79 0.001
40
650
96,463.00 5.94 0.001
108
1,600
96,463.00 6.51
4-
bedroom
0.086
18
600
96,463.00 248.87 0.042
40
650
96,463.00 249.32 0.046
108
1,600
96,463.00 299.52
.71
5-
bedroom
0.234
18
600
96,463.00 677.17 0.123
40
650
96,463.00 730.15 0.118
108
1,600
96,463.00 768.33
.65
(Ord. 2008-24, 3-24-2008)
Chapter 10
DEDICATION OF PARK SITES OR A CASH PAYMENT IN LIEU OF A DEDICATION
6-10-1: CALCULATION OF LAND REQUIRED FOR PARK SITE DEDICATION:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of a residential subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development any part or portion of which is
residential, each subdivider or planned unit developer shall be required to dedicate land for park sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the development, or shall be required to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of
the City, in accordance with the following criteria and formula:
A. Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development bears directly upon the amount of land required for dedication for
park and recreation sites. The total acreage requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) people of ultimate population. Total
ultimate population is determined by multiplying the estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit as established by the Table Of Estimated Ultimate
Population Per Dwelling Unit1 by the projected number of respective residential units in the development. The product thus obtained for total ultimate
population shall be multiplied by 10/1,000 to arrive at the number of acres required for park dedication for the development. For purposes of the
examples/computations contained in this Chapter, it is presumed that each single-family home will have four (4) bedrooms. For other dwelling units,
such as townhouses, apartments, etc., it is presumed that each unit will have two (2) bedrooms.
B. Population Density: The estimated number of people generated by a development shall be determined by application of the Table Of Estimated Ultimate
Population Per Dwelling Unit2. The Table is generally indicative of current and short-range projected trends in family size for new construction. The
populations listed in said Table shall be used for all calculations required by this Chapter unless a written objection is filed by the subdivider or
developer with the City Clerk prior to approval of the final plat. In the event a written objection is filed, the subdivider or developer shall file a
demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development. The final determination of the
total ultimate population density to be used in the calculations shall be made by the City Council based upon the demographic information submitted by
the subdivider or developer and upon such other demographic information as may be provided to the City or developed by the City. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-
24-1998)
6-10-2: LOCATION OF SITE:
Park sites dedicated pursuant to this Chapter shall be located in accordance with plans and/or standards adopted by the City with advice from the Plan
Commission and from the subdivider or developer. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-10-3: CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SPACES AND RECREATION AREAS:
When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. Depending on the size of the development a portion of the park and recreational area in subdivisions or planned unit developments
may, at the option of the City Council, be provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of the same
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 270/403
shall be determined by the City Council based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the
general area. In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as a part of the developer's obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the city, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or
developer must guarantee by the execution of the appropriate legal documents that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such
use. Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute
the total park land dedication that would have been required under this chapter from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the
credit to be given. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-10-4: CONVEYANCE OF SITE:
Any lands to be conveyed as a park site pursuant to this chapter shall be conveyed to the city simultaneously with the recording of the final plat. Said
conveyance shall be in accordance with the following criteria:
A. Title To Site: All sites shall be conveyed to the city of Plano, a municipal corporation, either by warranty or trustee's deed. The subdivider or developer
shall be responsible for conveying good, merchantable title, free of encumbrances. The conveyance shall be accompanied by a commitment for title
insurance issued by a reputable title insurance company licensed to do business in the state. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for the
payment of all real estate taxes levied and assessed against the site for the tax year in which the conveyance occurs and not just through the date of
conveyance. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
B. Topography, Grading And General Suitability: (Rep. by Ord. 2004-5, 2-23-2004)
C. Site Improvements: (Rep. by Ord. 2004-5, 2-23-2004)
D. Sale Of Land: When, in the opinion of the city, any parcel of land conveyed pursuant to this chapter becomes unnecessary, unsuitable, or inconvenient
for the uses of the city, such parcel may be sold as provided by applicable law. The proceeds of such sale shall be used in a manner consistent with the
purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-10-5: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF A PARK SITE:
When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for a park site, the city shall
require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation
land dedication shall be held in trust by the city, or other public body designated by the city, for the acquisition of park and recreation land and for the
improvements to the same, as set forth herein, which said park and recreation land shall be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing local parks and recreational land already serving such needs and
dedicated for park use subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. Improvements under this section shall be liberally construed and shall include, but not
be limited to, the development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic control devices; arterial streets; collector streets; internal roadways; connections with
sewer, water and electrical lines. Improvement shall also include the purchase of any materials, goods or equipment necessary to said development and
construction. Improvement shall further include the construction of buildings and improvements to existingbuildings in parks established subsequent to the
date of adoption hereof. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
A. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of improved, subdivided land, as platted within the
development's final plat, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park sites. The city, based upon investigation, advice and consultation with its
financial consultants, has determined that the fair market value of any particular parcel, for purposes of this chapter, shall be and is determined to be
ninety six thousand four hundred sixty three dollars ($96,463.00) per acre. The foregoing fair market value shall be used in the determination of cash
contributions unless the subdivider, developer, or any other subdivider or developer, or any public body files a written objection thereto. In the event of
any such objection, the objecting party shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of the development.
Final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the city council based upon such information submitted
by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the city council by affected parties, and by information, reports and
analysis provided to the city council by its own consultants. (Ord. 2006-21, 4-10-2006)
B. Time And Manner Of Payment: The cash contribution required herein shall be paid at the time of the approval of the final plat. No building permit shall
be issued until said payment has been made. Set out in subsection 6-10-8B of this chapter is an example of the computation of the cash contribution.
C. Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land
dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the
park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would
have to be dedicated.
2. A major part of the park or recreational site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete
the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-10-6: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where the plans of the city call for a larger park site in a particular proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land neededbeyond the developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the city council, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the city;
provided, that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 271/403
6-10-7: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, a park site or recreational area which is to be designated should, where
possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable park sites and recreational areas without hardship on a
particular developer. (Ord. 1998-23, 8-24-1998)
6-10-8: TABLES:
A. Table Of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit:
Type Of Unit Preschool Elementary Junior High Total K_8 High School Adults Total/Unit
Detached single-family
2-bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3-bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4-bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5-bedroom 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Attached single-family (townhouse, row house, quadriplex, etc.)
1-bedroom -0- -0- -0- -0- -0- 1.193 1.193
2-bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.926
3-bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4-bedroom 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments
Efficiency -0- -0- -0- -0- -0- 1.294 1.294
1-bedroom -0- 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2-bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3-bedroom 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
B. Formula: Total family population x 10/1,000 + # acres required x FMV = cash contribution
Type Of
Unit
Family
Population
10/1,000
# Acres
Required
FMV1 Cash Contribution
Detached single-family
2-
bedroom
2.017 0.01 0.020 $96,463
.00
$1,929
.26
3-
bedroom
2.899 0.01 0.029 96,463
.00
2,797
.43
4-
bedroom
3.764 0.01 0.038 96,463
.00
3,665
.59
5-
bedroom
4.770 0.01 0.048 96,463
.00
4,630
.22
Attached single-family (townhouse, row house, quadriplex, etc.)
1-
bedroom
1.193 0.01 0.012 $96,463
.00
$1,157
.56
2-
bedroom
1.990 0.01 0.019 96,463
.00
1,832
.80
3-
bedroom
2.392 0.01 0.024 96,463
.00
2,315
.11
4-
bedroom
3.145 0.01 0.031 96,463
.00
2,990
.35
Apartments
Efficiency
1.294 0.01 0.013 $96,463
.00
$1,254
.02
2-
bedroom
1.758 0.01 0.018 96,463
.00
1,736
.33
3-
bedroom
1.914 0.01 0.019 96,463
.00
1,832
.80
4-
bedroom
3.053 0.01 0.031 96,463
.00
2,990
.35
Note:
1. Fair market value of $96,463.00 per acre is current 2006. Actual values may vary.
(Ord. 2006-21, 4-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 272/403
Chapter 11
LIBRARY TRANSITION FEE
6-11-1: INTENT:
There is hereby imposed a library transition fee in connection with the issuance of each and every permit for the construction of residential dwelling units
within the City of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, which said fee shall provide for the current level and quality of library services benefiting the City and
being maintained by the Plano Community Library District and provision for the payment of said fees shall be incorporated into any annexation agreement
for land to be annexed into the City, in any planned unit development agreement for lands already annexed into the City of Plano, and into any plat of
subdivision prepared and recorded in compliance with the terms and provisions of the City's subdivision control ordinance, for lands currently within or
hereafter annexed into the City. (Ord. 2001-11, 6-25-2001)
6-11-2: USE OF FUNDS:
The library transition fee shall be used solely by the Library District for the funding and financing of library services. (Ord. 2001-11, 6-25-2001)
6-11-3: FEE AND PAYMENT:
A. Fees: Effective for building permits issued on or after January 1, 2016, the following library transition fee shall apply for all residential dwelling units for
which permits are issued: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2015-29, 12-14-2015)
B. Payment: All library transition fees shall be paid directly to the Library District Treasurer, and the City shall not receive any library transition fees. The
Library District Treasurer shall issue a written receipt for the payment of the transition fee identifying, specifically, the residential dwelling unit or units
for which the fee is paid. No building permit shall be issued by the City of Plano unless and until a receipt for the payment of the library transition fee is
delivered to the City of Plano. (Ord. 2001-11, 6-25-2001)
6-11-4: REAL ESTATE AFFECTED:
A. Definition: "Dwelling unit", as used in this chapter, shall be defined and shall be deemed to include each individual single-family home, each individual
unit of a duplex, and each individual unit of any multi-family structure, intended for residential use.
B. Dwelling Unit: Any residential dwelling unit hereafter constructed on real estate platted after the effective date hereof, whether single-family, duplex, or
multi-family, shall be required to pay the library transition fee set forth herein. In the case of a duplex or multi-family building, the fees imposed by this
chapter shall be payable, as to all units in the structure, prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any part of a duplex or any
part of any multi-family structure. Said fee is imposed on all dwelling units hereafter constructed on real estate hereafter annexed into the City, real
estate currently within the City and developed pursuant to the terms and provisions of a planned unit development agreement, and any real estate
currently within the City of Plano hereafter platted pursuant to a final plat of subdivision prepared and recorded in accordance with the subdivision
control ordinance of the City.
C. Exemption: Lots zoned for business, office or manufacturing use, shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter, unless the dwelling unit or units is or
are constructed thereon.
D. Previously Platted Lots: No lot platted prior to the effective date hereof shall be encumbered by the terms of this chapter unless it is the subject of a
planned unit development agreement incident to the replatting or development thereof. (Ord. 2001-11, 6-25-2001)
6-11-5: EXEMPTION:
In the event that real estate is annexed into the City of Plano that is not served by the Plano Community Library District, then and in that event transition
fees imposed by this chapter shall not be required to be paid, unless this chapter is amended to include the Library District serving said real estate. (Ord.
2001-11, 6-25-2001)
6-11-6: HOLD HARMLESS:
The Plano Community Library District has agreed to and shall hold the City of Plano harmless and shall defend the City of Plano in any action or
proceeding which may hereafter be commenced challenging the imposition and collection of said transition fees by the Plano Community Library District.
Prior to the adoption of this chapter, the Plano Community Library District has executed and delivered to the City its indemnification and hold harmless
agreement. (Ord. 2001-11, 6-25-2001)
Chapter 12
SCHOOL TRANSITION FEE
6-12-1: FEE IMPOSED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 273/403
There is hereby imposed a school transition fee in connection with the issuance of each and every permit for the construction of residential structures
within the City of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, which said fee shall provide for the current level and quality of educational services benefiting the City and
being maintained by the Plano Community Unit School District 88, Sandwich Community Unit School District 430 or Yorkville Community Unit School
District 115 and provision for the payment of said fees shall be incorporated into any annexation agreement for land to be annexed into the City, in any
planned unit development agreement for lands already annexed into the City of Plano, and into any plat of subdivision prepared and recorded in
compliance with the terms and provisions of the City's subdivision control ordinance, for lands currently within or hereafter annexed into the City based
upon the fee schedule and criteria in section 6-12-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-8-2004)
6-12-2: AMOUNT OF FEES:
A school transition fee in the sum of five thousand four hundred dollars ($5,400.00) per "dwelling unit", as herein defined, is hereby imposed effective for
building permits issued on or after March 3, 2016. (Ord. 2016-4, 2-22-2016)
6-12-3: USE OF FUNDS:
The school transition fees shall be allocated to and used by the school district only for purposes allowed by law. (Ord. 2010-11, 5-24-2010)
6-12-4: REAL ESTATE AFFECTED:
A. Dwelling Unit: Any residential dwelling unit hereafter constructed on real estate platted after the effective date hereof, whether single-family, duplex or
multi-family, shall be required to pay the school transition fee set forth herein. In the case of a duplex or multi-family building, the fees imposed by this
chapter shall be payable, as to all units in the structure, prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any part of a duplex or any
part of any multi-family structure. Said fee is imposed on all dwelling units hereafter constructed on real estate hereafter annexed into the City, real
estate currently within the City and developed pursuant to the terms and provisions of a planned unit development agreement, and any real estate
currently within the City of Plano hereafter platted pursuant to a final plat of subdivision prepared and recorded in accordance with the subdivision
control ordinance of the City.
B. Defined: "Dwelling unit", as used in this chapter, shall be defined and shall be deemed to include each individual single-family home, each individual unit
of a duplex, and each individual unit of any multi-family structure, intended for residential use. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-8-2004)
C. Exempt Lots: Lots zoned for business, office or manufacturing use shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter and the imposition of the school
transition fee, unless a dwelling unit or dwelling units is or are constructed thereon, in which case, the school transition fee shall apply to each of the
dwelling units. "Age restricted housing", defined as any residential structure subject to a deed restriction requiring at least one (1) occupant to be fifty
five (55) years of age or older are exempt from the imposition of the school transition fee. (Ord. 2008-23, 3-24-2008)
D. Effective: No lot platted prior to the effective date hereof shall be encumbered by the terms of this chapter, unless it is the subject of a planned unit
development agreement incident to the replatting or development thereof. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-8-2004)
6-12-5: HOLD HARMLESS:
This chapter is adopted by the city of Plano at the request of and as an accommodation to the Plano community unit school district 88, Sandwich
community unit school district 430 and Yorkville community school district 115. All funds collected pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be paid to the
school district and are to be used and disbursed solely by the school district for the purposes herein stated.
The Plano community unit school district 88, Sandwich community unit school district 430 and Yorkville community school district 115 have agreed to and
shall hold the city of Plano harmless and shall defend the city of Plano in any action or proceeding which may hereafter be commenced challenging the
imposition and collection of said transition fees by the Plano community unit school district 88, Sandwich community unit school district 430 and Yorkville
community school district 115. Prior to the adoption of this chapter, the Plano community unit school district 88, Sandwich community unit school district
430 and Yorkville community school district 115 has executed and delivered to the city its indemnification and hold harmless agreement. (Ord. 2004-8, 3-8-
2004)
Chapter 13
INFRASTRUCTURE PARTICIPATION FEE
6-13-1: IMPOSITION OF FEE:
There is hereby established an infrastructure participation fee in the amount of four thousand eight hundred sixty two dollars ($4,862.00) per gross acre for
each acre currently annexed and within the territorial limits of the city and not yet subdivided pursuant to final plat of subdivision approved by the city and
in the amount of four thousand eight hundred sixty two dollars ($4,862.00) per gross acre for each acre hereafter annexed to the city payable as follows:
(Ord. 2001-25, 12-10-2001; amd. Ord. 2005-9, 2-28-2005; Ord. 2006-14, 2-27-2006; Ord. 2007-4, 2-12-2007; Ord. 2008-4, 1-28-2008; Ord. 2009-7, 2-23-
2009; Ord. 2010-6, 3-22-2010)
A. For real estate currently within the territorial limits of the city, the fee shall be payable at the time of approval of the final plat of subdivision for such real
estate, or part thereof, based upon the number of gross acres contained within the subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 274/403
B. For real estate hereafter annexed, the fee shall be payable at the adoption, by the city council, of the ordinance annexing territory based upon the
number of gross acres contained within the annexation.
C. In any and all events, the fee shall be payable prior to the signing of the Illinois EPA construction permit application for on site sanitary sewer
improvements as determined by the city, or at such other time as the city may by agreement with the developer or owner so determine. (Ord. 2001-25,
12-10-2001)
6-13-2: USE OF FEE:
The city shall at its sole discretion, from time to time, construct permanent pump stations, permanent force mains and sixteen inch (16") and larger
interceptor sewers and other infrastructure improvements with such funds as are then available, including, but not limited to, fees derived from the
infrastructure participation fees imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2002-7, 3-11-2002)
6-13-3: IMPROVEMENTS; OBLIGATION AND COSTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as obligating the city to install improvements other than those scheduled by the city and financed by available
funds. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person or persons requesting additional improvements including interceptor extensions from being required
to pay all or any of the cost of such improvements as required by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2001-25, 12-10-2001)
Chapter 14
FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT TRANSITION FEE
6-14-1: FEE IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed a fire protection district transition fee in connection with the issuance of each and every permit for the construction of residential
structures within the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, and commercial and industrial structures within the city of Plano, Kendall County, Illinois, which
said fee shall provide for the current level and quality of fire protection services benefiting the city and being maintained by the fire protection district, and
provision for the payment of said fees shall be incorporated into any annexation agreement for land to be annexed into the city, in any planned unit
development agreement for lands already annexed into the city of Plano, and into any plat of subdivision prepared and recorded in compliance with the
terms and provisions of the city's subdivision control ordinance, for lands currently within or hereafter annexed into the city based upon the following fee
schedule and criteria. (Ord. 2002-32, 9-23-2002)
6-14-2: AMOUNT OF FEES:
A. The following fire protection district transition fee shall apply to all single-family residential units for which permits are issued on or after January 12,
2016: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. The following fire protection district transition fee shall apply to all duplex and multi-family residential units for which permits are issued on or after
January 12, 2016: Five hundred thirty one dollars seven cents ($531.07) per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2016-1, 1-11-2016)
C. The following schedule of fire protection district transition fees shall apply for all commercial and industrial structures. The transition fee shall be
charged based upon the gross square footage of the building as determined during the plan review for the building permit, using the same square
footage calculation used in determining the building permit fee:
Calendar Year Of
Issuance Of Building Permit
Transition
Fee Amount
(Per Square Foot)
2007 $0.105
2008 0.116
2009 0.127
2010 0.134
2011 0.145
2012 0.156
(Ord. 2007-18, 4-23-2007)
D. Unless subsequently modified by amendment to this section, fire protection district transition fees for commercial and industrial buildings shall
automatically increase by six percent (6%) per year commencing January 1, 2013. (Ord. 2016-1, 1-11-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 275/403
E. The fire protection district transition fees shall be paid directly to the Little Rock-Fox fire protection district, which shall issue a written receipt for the
payment of the transition fee identifying, specifically, the residential dwelling unit or units for which the fee is paid or the commercial or industrial units or
structures for which the fee is paid. No building permit shall be issued by the city of Plano unless and until a receipt for the payment of the fire
protection district transition fees is delivered to the city of Plano. (Ord. 2007-18, 4-23-2007)
6-14-3: USE OF FUNDS:
The fire protection district transition fees shall be allocated to and used by and solely for the benefit of the Little Rock-Fox fire protection district. (Ord.
2002-32, 9-23-2002)
6-14-4: PAYMENT:
All fire protection district transition fees shall be paid directly to the fire protection district, and the city shall not receive any fire protection district transition
fees. (Ord. 2002-32, 9-23-2002)
6-14-5: REAL ESTATE AFFECTED:
A. Dwelling Unit: Any residential dwelling unit hereafter constructed on real estate platted after the effective date hereof, whether single-family, duplex, or
multi-family, shall be required to pay the fire protection district transition fee set forth herein. In the case of a duplex or multi-family building, the fees
imposed by this chapter shall be payable, as to all units in the structure, prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any part of a
duplex or any part of any multi-family structure. Said fee is imposed on all dwelling units hereafter constructed on real estate hereafter annexed into the
city, real estate currently within the city and developed pursuant to the terms and provisions of a planned unit development agreement, and any real
estate currently within the city of Plano hereafter platted pursuant to a final plat of subdivision prepared and recorded in accordance with the
subdivision control ordinance of the city.
B. Definition: "Dwelling unit", as used in this chapter, shall be defined and shall be deemed to include each individual single-family home, each individual
unit of a duplex, and each individual unit of any multi-family structure, intended for residential use.
C. Commercial/Industrial Structures: All buildings, structures and units constructed on real estate zoned and/or platted for business, office, manufacturing
or industrial use.
D. Effective: No lot platted prior to the effective date hereof shall be encumbered by the terms of this chapter unless it is the subject of a planned unit
development agreement incident to the replatting or development thereof. (Ord. 2002-32, 9-23-2002)
6-14-6: EXEMPTION:
In the event that real estate is annexed into the city of Plano that is not served by the Little Rock-Fox fire protection district, then and in that event transition
fees imposed by this chapter shall not be required to be paid, unless this chapter is amended to include the fire protection district serving said real estate.
(Ord. 2002-32, 9-23-2002)
6-14-7: HOLD HARMLESS:
The Little Rock-Fox fire protection district has agreed to and shall hold the city of Plano harmless and shall defend the city of Plano in any action or
proceeding which may hereafter be commenced challenging the imposition and collection of said transition fees by the Little Rock-Fox fire protection
district. Prior to the adoption of this chapter, the Little Rock-Fox fire protection district has executed and delivered to the city its indemnification and hold
harmless agreement. (Ord. 2002-32, 9-23-2002)
Chapter 15
LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
6-15-1: APPLICABILITY:
For all development activity requiring a building permit in all zoning districts, landscaping shall be provided as follows:
A. For single-family detached and duplex residential development:
1. New construction: Parkway landscaping.
2. Existing construction: Parkway landscaping as required by the city council for any conditional use, rezoning, or variance.
B. For all other developments, other than single-family and duplex residential, parkway landscaping, perimeter landscaping, and lot landscaping shall be
required as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2005-8, 2-28-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 276/403
6-15-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements in this section are cumulative:
A. Parkway Landscaping:
1. For all single-family detached and duplex residential developments, the minimum number of parkway trees is as follows:
Interior lots: One tree per lot.
Corner lots: Two (2) trees per lot (1 each side).
All other lots: (Such as parks and retention/detention areas) one tree per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage.
2. For all other development, the minimum required number of parkway trees is one tree per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage.
3. All parkways shall have a minimum of six inches (6") of clean, clump free topsoil neatly leveled to uniform grade from the top of curb to the top of the
sidewalk, after settling. Trees shall be planted within the public parkway between the curb and the sidewalk.
4. All parkways shall have a thick stand of grass utilizing sod or seed per IDOT specifications. All areas shall be seeded or sodded and fertilized in an
approved manner. The minimum gradient of all parkways toward the curb shall be no less than two percent (2%) nor more than eight percent (8%).
Grass watering and mowing to a maximum height of five inches (5") will be the responsibility of the developer through the one year maintenance
period following city acceptance. The developer will be required to submit to the city a maintenance letter of credit to cover the repair of settling or
grass loss during the one year maintenance period.
5. No tree shall be planted closer than thirty feet (30') of the right of way intersection.
6. Trees shall have a minimum spacing of twenty feet (20') from light poles, street signs, fire hydrants, or any other such items that in the opinion of the
city, require similar intervals.
7. Tree planting under overhead utility wires shall be avoided, but when conditions result in such a location being unavoidable, then tree species
obtaining no more than a twenty foot (20') height at maturity shall be selected.
8. Parkway trees shall be planted prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to properly water all
newly planted parkway trees at the time of the planting and periodically thereafter, to ensure their survival for a period of one year following the city's
acceptance.
9. Center medians of boulevard type streets shall be landscaped in the same manner as parkways when their width meets or exceeds four feet (4')
(measured from back of curb to back of curb). Landscaping shall consist of one ornamental or evergreen tree, and a minimum of ten (10) shrubs per
fifty (50) linear feet of center median. All other parkway requirements shall apply.
10. Center medians of cul-de-sacs shall be landscaped in the same manner as parkways. Cul-de-sac planting shall consist of one ornamental tree and
a minimum of three (3) shrubs. All other parkway requirements shall apply.
11. Only approved shade trees may be used as parkway trees.
B. Perimeter Landscaping: Perimeter landscaping shall be required for all developments, other than single-family detached and duplex residential
developments, in accordance with the following:
1. Nonresidential Development Adjacent To Residential: Where a nonresidential development is adjacent to residential property a minimum of a twenty
foot (20') wide buffer shall be provided. The buffer shall consist of a berm or an architectural masonry wall or architectural wooden fence no less than
three feet (3') high as measured from the property line. The buffer shall consist of no less than two (2) shade trees, five (5) evergreen trees, three (3)
ornamental trees and five (5) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer.
2. Nonresidential Development Adjacent To A Public Right Of Way: Where a nonresidential development is adjacent to a public right of way a buffer
shall be provided and shall be one-half (1/2) of the front setback or ten feet (10') whichever is more. The buffer shall consist of one shade tree, one
evergreen tree and thirty three (33) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer.
3. Multi-Family Residential Adjacent To Other Residential Development: Where multi-family development is adjacent to other types of residential a
buffer shall be provided and shall be one-half (1/2) of the front, side, and rear yard setbacks or ten feet (10') whichever is more. The buffer shall
consist of three (3) shade trees, three (3) evergreen trees, two (2) ornamental trees, and ten (10) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer.
C. Parking Lot Landscaping: All parking lots with ten (10) or more parking spaces shall provide landscaping in accordance with the following:
1. A minimum of one tree and three (3) shrubs for every fifteen (15) parking spaces shall be planted within the interior of the parking lot. Trees shall be
located in curbed landscape medians which shall have a minimum area of one hundred ninety (190) square feet and a minimum width of ten feet
(10'). Each median shall contain one tree at a minimum and the entire median shall be completely covered with ground cover plants, flowers, turf or
mulch in addition to the required trees and shrubs.
2. To break up long expanses of parking rows, landscape medians are required. One of the following alternatives shall be used to divide rows of twenty
(20) or more spaces.
a. A continuous curbed landscape median ten feet (10') wide may be provided in the longitudinal direction.
b. A ten foot (10') wide transverse curbed landscape median or island as deep as the parking space may be provided every twenty (20) spaces.
c. Smaller curbed landscape medians at the head of and between parking spaces may be permitted. If smaller landscape medians are appropriate,
they shall be a minimum of seven feet by seven feet (7' x 7') (measured from back of curb to back of curb) and shall be provided at the rate of two
(2) small medians for every full size island required above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 277/403
3. To ensure proper visibility within the parking lot, the branches of trees shall start no less than six feet (6') above the pavement and shrubs shall be
selected and then maintained so as to achieve a height no greater than thirty inches (30") above the pavement at maturity.
4. When a parking lot is located on nonresidential property, which is adjacent to another nonresidential property a minimum of an eight foot (8') buffer
shall be located along the parking lot. The buffer shall consist of two (2) shade trees and fifteen (15) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of
buffer.
D. Lot Landscaping: Lot landscaping shall be required for all developments other than single-family detached and duplex residential developments in
accordance with the following:
1. Multi-family: Two (2) shade trees and fifteen (15) shrubs shall be provided for every four (4) units.
2. Nonresidential: Two (2) shade trees, two (2) ornamental or evergreen trees, and fifteen (15) shrubs shall be provided for every twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet of lot area.
E. Stormwater Storage Basins: A thirty foot (30') landscape buffer shall be provided around stormwater storage basins adjacent to a public right of way and
a ten foot (10') landscape buffer shall be provided at side and rear property lines. The landscape buffer shall consist of one shade tree per fifty (50)
linear feet of buffer, planted above the high water elevation of the storage basin.
F. Service Area Screening: All nonresidential service areas shall be screened from view through the use of evergreen plant materials and/or screen walls
compatible with the proposed building design.
1. Trash dumpsters and other waste receptacles or ground mounted equipment shall be screened on three (3) sides with an architectural screen wall
and plantings at least six feet (6') high, with a solid, architectural single or double access gate on one side only. Stockade type fencing or chainlink
fence with vinyl strips is not acceptable.
2. All utility equipment (meters, transformers, etc.) shall be provided with an appropriate planting screen, consisting of no less than three (3) shrubs of
adequate height and width to obscure the view of the equipment. (Ord. 2005-8, 2-28-2005)
6-15-3: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning commission. The landscape plan as a minimum shall
include the following information:
1. The location of new and existing structures, parking lots, sidewalks, signs, service areas, fences, and utility equipment.
2. Names and locations of adjacent streets.
3. Zoning and use of adjacent property.
4. The location, size, quantity, and name (common and botanical) of new landscaping and existing landscaping to remain.
5. Topography of site with contours at one foot (1') intervals.
6. Property lines and dimensions, location of existing and proposed utilities.
B. Performance Bond: As a requirement of approval of the landscape plan, the developer shall be required to file with the city, a performance bond or letter
of credit in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per acre to be developed. Said bond or letter of credit shall be held by the city until such time
as the landscaping work is completed and in compliance with the approved landscape plan. Further, final certificates of occupancy will not be granted
until such time as the landscape work is completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
C. Quality: All trees shall be planted in accordance with the minimum standards established by the American Association Of Nurserymen. Plant material
shall be grown in nurseries in the central or northern Illinois region.
D. Size: The size of the plant material required by this chapter shall be as follows:
Shade tree: Two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper measured twenty four inches (24") above grade.
Evergreen tree: Eight foot (8') minimum height.
Ornamental tree: Six foot (6') minimum height.
Shrubs: Twenty four inches (24") in height.
E. Substitutions: For the purposes of providing flexibility in the design, substitutions may be allowed at the following rates:
One shade tree equals two (2) evergreen trees or two (2) ornamental trees.
One shade tree equals twenty (20) shrubs.
There is no substitution for parkway shade trees. (Ord. 2005-8, 2-28-2005)
For subdivision parkway trees or trees in a commercial development, a mixture of trees, selected from the list contained in subsection G of this section,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 278/403
of no more than thirty percent (30%) of the total trees planted shall be of the same genus and no more than ten percent (10%) of the total trees planted
shall be of the same genus and species. (Ord. 2013-19, 7-22-2013)
F. Credit For Existing Vegetation: Credit may be given for existing trees that are preserved. Each tree that is preserved which is greater than six inch (6")
caliper and on the approved tree list or at the discretion of the plan commission, an otherwise acceptable species, shall be credited toward the required
planting on a tree for tree basis.
G. Permitted Plantings: The plantings used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be selected from the following list of approved plant material.
Parkway trees shall only be selected from the following shade tree list. The ornamental or evergreen species listed are included to suggest the types of
flora appropriate for the intended application and local conditions and may be supplemented with additional varieties upon approval of the planning
commission. (Ord. 2005-8, 2-28-2005)
Shade Trees Common Name
Acer rubrum spp. Red maple
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Catalpa speciosa Northern catalpa
Celtis laevigata Sugar hackberry
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Fagus grandifola American beech
Fagus sylvatica European beech
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless honey locust
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky coffeetree
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip tree
Magnolia acuminata Cucumber tree
Platanus acerifolia London plane
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore
Pyrus calleryana Bradford pear
Quercus alba White oak
Quercus bicolor Swamp white oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin oak
Quercus robur English oak
Quercus shumardii Shumard oak
Taxodium distichum Bald cypress
Tilia americana American basswood
Tilia cordata Little leaf linden
Tilia heterophylla Beetree linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
Evergreen Trees Common Name
Abies concolor White fir
Picea abies Norway spruce
Picea glauca White spruce
Picea glauca "densata" Black Hills spruce
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 279/403
Picea pungens Colorado spruce
Pinus nigra Austrian pine
Pinus strobes White pine
Pinus sylvestris Scotch pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas fir
Ornamental Trees Common Name
Alnus glutinosa Alder
Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow serviceberry
Amelanchier grandiflora Apple serviceberry
Carpinus caroliniana American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis Redbud
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda dogwood
Cornus mas Cornelian cherry
Crataegus mollis Downy hawthorn
Crataegus phaenopynu Washington hawthorn
Magnolia soulangiana Saucer magnolia
Magnolia stellata Star magnolia
Malus spp. Crabapple family
Malus spp. River birch
Syringa reticulata Japanese tree lilac
Shrubs And Groundcovers
Those species and varieties hardy to USDA zone 5.
(Ord. 2005-8, 2-28-2005; amd. Ord. 2008-42, 8-25-2008)
Chapter 16
SANITARY LIFT STATIONS
6-16-1: INTRODUCTION:
The requirements presented in this chapter are in addition to the requirements of the latest addition of title 35: environmental protection; subtitle C: water
pollution; chapter II: environmental protection agency; part 370: Illinois recommended standards for sewage works. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-2: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Complete lift station plans and specifications are to be submitted as part of the development review in accordance with this chapter. The submittal is to
include at minimum:
A. Typed letter of transmittal addressed to superintendent of wastewater.
B. Three (3) sets of twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") to scale plans minimum one-fourth inch equals one foot (1/4" = 1'0"), marked and dated
"For City Review". Include a plan view of the building, a plan view of the wet well, a section view of the building and a section view of the wet well.
C. Architectural color rendering of building for review by city director of building and zoning.
D. Forcemain plans/section to scale minimum one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). Air release valves are to be placed at high points, and drain manholes at
low points at city's discretion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 280/403
E. Three (3) sets of design calculations including system head curve and pump curve, wet well cycle time, and forcemain surge/pressure analysis. (Ord.
2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-3: SITE REQUIREMENTS:
Location of lift station subject to review and approval by city.Asphalt paving is to be provided to access wet well. Concrete sidewalk to be provided to doors
of pump station. Bollards are to be placed in front of rolling metal service door. A five and one-fourth inch (51/4") hydrant to be provided within ten feet (10')
of the wet well.
Landscaping plan to be provided for review and approval by city. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-4: ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
6-16-4-1: FUNCTIONALITY:
The building is to house the generator, isolation valves, check valves, air release valves, surge valve, pump control panel/SCADA panel, ATS. Space for
odor control chemical storage tank is to be provided at city's discretion. A minimum of four feet (4') horizontal distance is to be provided around each side
of generator, in front of control panel, in front of the ATS, and between horizontal pump discharge lines. Note if odor control chemical is to be provided an
emergency eyewash station, shower and slop sink will be required.
Note a separate cast in place concrete valve vault outside of building is prohibited. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-4-2: EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS:
A. Wall Section: Double wall section, fourteen inches (14"). Face brick, air gap with polystyrene insulation, and eight inches (8") CMU. Colors to match
existing home, neighboring structures. Minimum wall height to be twelve feet (12'). All split face construction is prohibited, precast structures are
prohibited. See submittal requirements per section 6-16-2 of this chapter.
B. Roofing Materials: Wood truss with plywood sheathing minimum five-eighths inch (5/8"). Thirty (30) pound roofing felt and thirty (30) year asphalt
architectural shingles, high density polypropylene ridge vent. Shingle color to be selected by city.
C. Fascia, Eaves And Frieze: Fascia, eaves, and frieze board are to be wrapped in aluminum. Color to be selected by city.
D. Windows: Transom type with two (2) lights of one-fourth inch (1/4") tinted glass with air gap between. Minimum of four (4) windows per building.
Transom windows are to be located at height between nine feet (9') and twelve feet (12').
E. Doors: Six (6) panel insulated steel doors. A double door with keyed removable mullion is to be provided for removal of generator. If generator is too
large for removal through a standard size double door, a rolling metal service door is to be provided. The rolling metal service door is to be
manuallyactuated, fabricated from galvanized steel, and to have a baked on powder coated finish.
F. Lighting: Exterior lighting over wet well is to be operated from inside pump station. Exterior lighting above doors is to be operated by photocell. Exterior
flashing red strobe is to be provided when station is in alarm status. Number, type/architecture and location of fixtures is subject to review. (Ord. 2006-
16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-4-3: INTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS:
A. Ceiling: Steel hat channels are to be nailed to the bottom chords of the trusses. Two (2) sheets of five-eighths inch (5/8") exterior type gypsum board are
to be screwed to the hat channels/bottom chords. Access to the attic space is to be provided.
A four inch (4") wide pine trim piece is to be provided to conceal the joint between the masonry nailer and the ceiling.
B. Coatings: Hi-Build epoxy coating to be provided on all process piping; Tnemec series 66. Raw sewage to be grey. Chemical lines to be orange. Flooring
is to be coated with Tnemec series 67- Tneme-Tred. Ceiling to be sealed with Tnemec series 51-792 PVA sealer and then coated with Tnemec series
66- white. All piping is to be stenciled with service and direction of flow.
C. Lighting: Vapor tight fixtures/ceiling surface mount. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-5: MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Heating: Heat is to be provided by electric unit heater sized to maintain temperature at sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) when outside ambient
temperature is minus twenty degrees Fahrenheit (-20°F). Remote thermostat is to be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 281/403
B. Louvers And Fans: Fan is to be sized to provide a minimum of four (4) air changes per hour. Side wall propeller type fan to be provided. Fan is to be
variable speed with potentiometer readily accessible. Fan to have OSHA guard, fixed louver, motorized damper, aluminum insect screen.
Louvers over twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x 24") to also have concealed burglar bars.
C. Pumps: Pumps are to be Flygt with N type impeller. No alternates, substitution permitted. Intermediate brackets are to be spaced at maximum ten feet
(10') on center. Upper guide bracket and intermediate brackets to be fabricated from 316 SS. 316 SS lift out chain to be provided.
Constant speed, or variable speed at discretion of city.
D. Wet Well: Precast wet wells are acceptable for duplex pump stations only. Wet well is to be coated with minimum of sixty (60) mil Sauereisen
Sewergard spray applied in a controlled environment by the precaster. If influent sewer to wet well is greater than thirty inches (30") in diameter a
separate screening chamber will be required. City will dictate specifics for screening chamber.
Wet well shall be sized such that the pumps do not cycle more than eight (8) times per hour. A "cycle" is defined as the sum of fill and draw time.
Wet well hatches are to be aluminum, rated for HS-20 loading, and to have orange or yellow epoxy coated steel grate for fall through protection.
Hatches to be provided by Syracuse Castings or approved equal.
Piping in wet well to be coated with sixteen (16) mil, Tneme-Tar.
E. Valve Vault: Valving is to be incorporated in building, see subsection F of this section.
F. Valving: Check valves to be Golden Anderson or Apco air cushioned swing check valves up to one hundred feet (100') TDH. Oil cushioning to be
provided for TDHs in excess of one hundred (100) TDH.
Plug valves by DeZurik, Pratt or Valmatic to have worm gear actuators and a minimum of twelve inch (12") diameter handwheel. Plug valves are to
be used to isolate pumps and pump station.
Air release/vacuum relief valve to be by Vent-O-Mat, SS construction with flush ports.
Angle surge relief valve to be provided if required per the analysis completed and calculations provided under section 6-16-2 of this chapter.
A quick connect manhole with isolation plug valve is to be supplied to allow for temporary pump connection to the forcemain.
G. Metering And Recording: A magnetic flow meter located in the pump station building shall be provided. The magnetic flow meter shall have a 4-20 mA
output to a pen chart recorder or paperless chart recorder at the city's discretion. The paperless chart recorder shall be supplied with sixty (60) MG
PCMIA card for the transfer of data, and shall be a one hundred eighty millimeter (180 mm) model 5100V by Eurotherm or approved equal. The
paperless chart recorder shall also plot the wet well level from the 4-20 mA signal from the pressure transducer.
H. Crane: Provide portable davit crane for pump removal. Provide permanent stanchion anchored to wet well lid with stainless steel hardware. Stanchion
to be painted safety yellow.
I. Odor Control: If it is deemed by the city that a liquid odor control storage tank is required, it shall be located within the building. It shall include a fill line
with quick connect, a vent line to outside, an overflow line, a drain and a pump suction line. The tank shall have an orange gel coat and be labeled odor
control chemical. It shall have a side entry manway. Secondary containment shall be provided. A Watson-Marlow persitaltic metering pump shall be
provided.
If the odor control storage tank is provided, potable water service shall be provided to the building for emergency eyewash and shower. The potable
water service shall be isolated from system using a backflow preventer. The potable water line shall be insulated with elastomeric insulation with PVC
blue jacket. A point of use electric water heater and slop sink shall be provided. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
6-16-6: ELECTRICAL AND CONTROL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Primary Controller: Intrinsically safe duplexer which provides for automatic alternation of pumps based on 4-20 mA level.
B. Backup Controller: One pump will start when high level alarm float is reached, if pump does not turn off after a preset time delay, second pump will start
and pump down until off float is reached.
C. Primary Element: Pressure transducer Esterline pressure systems, KPSI model 735 with 4-20 mA output +/-0.05 percent accuracy.
D. Backup Floats: Flygt ENM-10 with stainless steel cable holder.
E. Conduit: No conduit in pump station building is to be exposed. Conceal in CMU wall. Conduit in CMU wall may be EMT. Where necessary to have
exposed conduit run to equipment, conduit is to be galvanized rigid steel.
There shall be no splicing in the wet well or in below grade handholes.
Outside disconnects are to be lockable and stainless steel, NEMA 4X.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 282/403
F. Generator And ATS: Generator to be natural gas and sized for full load with two (2) pumps operating for duplex stations, and two (2) pumps running for
triplex stations. Generator shall be manufactured by Caterpillar. ATS to be GE Zenith controls.
G. Telemetry And Communications: Telemetry and communication to wastewater treatment facility to be determined on a case by casebasis. At a
minimum, dedicated phone line and eight (8) channel Protalk Dialer Plus shall be provided. (Ord. 2006-16, 2-27-2006)
Chapter 17
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
6-17-1: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
A. Authority And Purpose: This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Illinois municipal code.
The purpose of this chapter is to diminish threats to public health, safety and welfare caused by excess stormwater runoff from new development and
redevelopment. This chapter seeks to establish stormwater management practices and promote sustainable planning and design to counter increases
in stormwater runoff quantity and rate and the impairment of water quality from development and land improvement.
B. Objectives: This chapter is adopted to accomplish the following objectives:
1. To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or flood hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion.
2. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage due to increased stormwater runoff.
3. To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased flooding.
4. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, correction of channel erosion
problems, and flood rescue and relief operations caused by increased stormwater runoff quantities from new development.
5. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources.
6. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats.
7. To preserve the natural characteristics of the land in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion,
protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any deleterious impact on existing drainage characteristics, water resources, or wetlands affecting their capacity, quality, and
beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval from city of Plano of a development
or permit to carry out construction of a development.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of flooding resulting from the base flood event expressed in a numeric value
relative to North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): A measure used to control the adverse stormwater related effects of development. BMPs include structural
devices (e.g., swales, filter strips, infiltration trenches, and detention basins) designed to remove pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, recharge
groundwater and protect aquatic habitats. BMPs also include nonstructural approaches, such as public education efforts to prevent the dumping of
household chemicals into storm drains.
BULLETIN 71: The document "Rainfall Frequency Atlas Of The Midwest", by Floyd Huff and James Angel of the Midwest Climate Center, Illinois state
water survey (1992).
BYPASS FLOWS: Stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary to a property's drainage system but not under its control.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.
"Channelization" is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving relocation
of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage created within the SFHA to balance the loss of existing
flood storage capacity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 283/403
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
CRITICAL DURATION: The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest peak runoff.
DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE: The volume contained below a closed contour on a one foot (1') contour interval topographic map. The upper elevation of
depressional storage shall be determined by the high water elevation of a 100-year flood through the site in the predeveloped condition.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of
this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DETENTION TIME: The mean residence time of stormwater in a detention basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real property, including:
A. Submittal to the city of a final plat of subdivision as of the effective date hereof;
B. Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or any addition to a building, with the exception of agricultural structures and accessories
thereto;
C. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
D. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
E. Construction or erection of levees, walls, dams, or culverts;
F. Channel modification, filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
G. Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; and
H. Any other activity that will alter the magnitude, frequency, deviation, direction, or velocity of stormwater or floodwater flows from a property.
DIRECTOR: The Kendall board chairman or his or her designee by resolution, charged with performing the duties specified in this chapter.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural or manmade, used for conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet from
a property. The stormwater drainage system includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and pumping stations.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary storage of stormwater flows and to normally be dry over the majority of its
bottom area.
DYNAMIC MODELING: Continuous simulation hydraulic modeling that considers gradually varied, unsteady flow hydraulics.
EROSION: The general process whereby earth is removed by the action of water, wind, or other forces of nature.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged from a developed area which is or will be in excess of that
volume and rate which pertained before development.
EXTENDED DETENTION: A volume of runoff temporarily detained and released over a long period of time to reflect predevelopment hydrology.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: Normally expressed as a period of years, based on a percent chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. For example, the 2-year flood frequency has a fifty percent (50%)
chance of occurring in any given year, the 10-year flood frequency has a ten percent (10%) chance of occurring in any given year, and the 100-year flood
frequency has a one percent (1%) chance of occurring in any given year.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: Land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation,
including detached ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA).
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated
existing and future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in flood stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage
and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
FREEBOARD: An increment of height added to the base flood elevation, groundwater table, or 100-year design water surface elevation to provide a factor
of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown local conditions, wave action, and unpredictable effects.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing, for a given location on a stream or conduit, the flow rates with respect to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 284/403
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: That area of property that is covered by materials resulting in a surface highly resistant to water infiltration, such as parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks, patios, roofs, roof extensions, and other structures, also including semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted gravel.
INFILTRATION: Passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
Where manmade, it is designed to handle the 100-year frequency runoff event.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, driveway
culverts, storm sewers, small open channels, and swales and, where manmade, is designed to handle the 10-year frequency runoff event. It also consists
of crossroad culverts which at a minimum shall be designed to handle the 30-year frequency event.
MITIGATION: Measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which stormwater drainage and development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without intervention by man.
OVERLAND FLOW PATH: A design feature of the major stormwater system which carries flows in excess of the minor stormwater system design capacity
in an open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision of overland paths for all areas of a property including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED: For property to be considered as previously developed it must have been:
A. Developed prior to 1975 and have no known flooding conditions caused by the lack of a stormwater management plan; or
B. Developed after 1975, have on file with the city a building permit or site development permit covering the development, and have no known flooding
conditions.
PROPERTY: A parcel or parcels of real estate.
REDEVELOPMENT: Development on a parcel upon which the existing condition prior to the effective date hereof is a nonagricultural land use and
includes infrastructure associated with nonagricultural activities. Widening of an existing street by a unit of local government, including, but not limited to,
the Kendall County highway department and township road districts, may be considered redevelopment.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources (IDNR-OWR), which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than
a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off
the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the
exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the IDNR-OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
RELEASE RATE: The rate at which stormwater runoff flows from the property.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or emergency bypass.
RIPARIAN AREA: Land that borders a waterway and provides habitat for wildlife or vegetation dependent on the proximity of water.
SEASONAL HIGH GROUNDWATER TABLE: The upper limits of the soil temporarily saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness
conditions. This may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of 2 chroma or less.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater
drainage systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area having special flood, mudslide or mudflow, or flood related erosion hazards, and which area is shown
on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater
drainage system, patterns, and environmental features, as well as the drainage system, patterns, and environmental features which are proposed after
development of a property.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from snowmelt, rainfall, or other precipitation within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the
infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: Elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in that watershed.
URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTANTS: Contaminants commonly found in urban runoff which have been shown to adversely affect uses in receiving water
bodies. Pollutants of concern include sediment, heavy metals, petroleum based organic compounds, nutrients, oxygen demanding organics (BOD),
pesticides, salt, and pathogens.
WATERSHED: All of the land surface area drained by or contributing runoff to the same stream, lake, stormwater facility, or given point.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 285/403
WETLAND: Land area defined in the 1987 corps of engineers "Wetland Delineation Manual", technical report Y-87-1, U.S. army engineers waterways
experiment station, Vicksburg, Mississippi (the "1987" manual) or other current federal methodology recognized by the U.S. army corps of engineers for
regulatory purposes.
WETLAND BASIN: A detention basin designed with all or a portion of its bottom area as a wetland. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-3: APPLICABILITY:
All development applications shall be accompanied by a site plan including required drawings, calculations, and supporting data as necessary to ensure
that the provisions of this chapter are met. Content of the site plan shall be determined by the criteria listed in sections 6-17-3-1 and 6-17-3-2 of this
chapter.
No site development permit, building permit, or final plat shall be issued or signed until the city has determined that the proposed development,
development application, and stormwater management plan meet all applicable requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-3-1: APPLICABILITY FOR STORMWATER RUNOFF DETENTION:
A. All developments in the city of Plano meeting the following criteria shall provide stormwater runoff storage facilities in accordance with this chapter.
1. The property being developed or redeveloped is a single-family detached residential development with five (5) or more units and having an average
lot size less than or equal to three (3) acres; or
2. The property being developed or redeveloped is not a single-family detached residential development or is a nonresidential land use, excluding
agricultural uses, totals three (3) acres or more in size, and results in forty five thousand (45,000) square feet or more of total development or thirty
two thousand (32,000) square feet or more of impervious area. The area of development and impervious surface shall be determined on an
aggregate basis from the effective date hereof; or
3. The property being developed or redeveloped is not a single-family detached residential development or is a nonresidential land use, excluding
agricultural uses, totals less than three (3) acres in size, and results in an impervious surface area of twenty five percent (25%) or more of the
development site. The area of development and impervious surface shall be determined on an aggregate basis from the effective date hereof.
4. Public roadway developments in rights of way under the ownership or control of a unit of local governments where the new impervious surface area
tributary to any drainage outlet exceeds two (2) acres. New impervious surface includes PCC and asphalt pavement, sidewalks, and paved trails, but
does not include previously paved areas. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-3-2: PLAN SUBMITTAL:
A. Requirements:
1. All development not subject to the criteria of section 6-17-3-1 of this chapter shall submit a step 1 stormwater management plan.
2. Developments subject to the criteria of section 6-17-3-1 of this chapter and being twenty (20) acres or less in size shall submit a step 2 stormwater
management plan.
3. Developments subject to the criteria of section 6-17-3-1 of this chapter and being more than twenty (20) acres in size shall submit a step 3
stormwater management plan.
4. Development proposed in a floodplain, flood fringe, floodway, or SFHA or development on a property having any portion located within a wetland
shall submit a step 3 stormwater management plan.
Submittals shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the
development on water resources both on site and downstream, and the effectiveness of the proposed stormwater management plan in managing
stormwater runoff.
Drawings or exhibits shall be dimensioned or shall be at a maximum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). Exhibits may be on more
than one drawing for clarity.
The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with city
of Plano ordinances and the approved stormwater management plan.
B. Presubmittal Meeting: It is recommended that the petitioner schedule a presubmittal meeting with the city of Plano to review the proposed project,
discuss submittal requirements, and discuss questions the petitioner may have.
Appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein includes a permit submittal checklist for use with this section. This chapter shall take precedence
over the checklist.
C. Step 1 Stormwater Management Plan: The step 1 stormwater management plan shall provide the following:
1. A written description of the proposed development and the stormwater management practices being employed.
2. A location map or description providing township, range, and nearest roadways to accurately locate the development site.
3. Acreage and zoning of property area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 286/403
4. Property area lines and dimensions including rights of way, easements, and setback lines.
5. Existing and proposed site conditions including all buildings, roads, impervious surfaces, and ground elevations where site grading is proposed.
6. Proposed limits and restoration of disturbed areas.
7. Existing and proposed drainage features such as culverts, conduits, swales, streams, ponds, wetlands, etc.
8. Location of subsurface drains and tiles within the development area only.
9. Location of wells, septic systems, water mains, and sanitary sewers.
10. Copies of other permit applications and final permits as required by other jurisdictions and agencies.
11. An erosion control and sedimentation plan meeting the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance.
D. Step 2 Stormwater Management Plan: The step 2 stormwater management plan shall provide all items from the step 1 stormwater management plan in
addition to the following:
1. Property topography at one foot (1') contours for the entire property extending to a minimum of one hundred feet (100') beyond the property lines or
as necessary to determine off site impacts of the proposed stormwater management plan.
2. Site contours shall be keyed to a USGS datum and state plane coordinate system.
3. Elevation of all building foundations and indications whether buildings have basements, lookouts, walkouts, or crawl spaces.
4. The property area's location within the major watershed.
5. Subwatershed boundaries within and across the property area.
6. Soils inventory for the property area.
7. A tile survey within the proposed development area.
8. Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and watersheds which affect or are affected by the development including depressional
areas and stormwater storage areas.
9. Delineation of proposed stormwater storage facilities, including ponds.
10. Design calculations and plans detailing existing and proposed stormwater runoff, storage, and drainage features.
11. Major and minor drainage system design plans and calculations including delineation of subdrainage areas for all conveyance features.
12. The top of banks and centerline elevations of streams and channels at maximum one hundred foot (100') intervals.
13. Cross section data and conveyance calculations for open channel and overland flow paths.
14. Delineation of floodplain, floodway, and base flood elevation and inventory of riparian areas within one hundred feet (100') of the property area.
15. Mapping and elevations of historical flooding records as available.
16. Delineation and description of designated conservation areas within one hundred feet (100') of the property area.
17. Delineation and inventory of wetlands within one hundred feet (100') of the property area.
E. Step 3 Stormwater Management Plan: The step 3 stormwater management plan shall provide all items from the step 1 stormwater management plan
and step 2 stormwater management plan in addition to the following:
1. Existing base flood elevation and profile for stream reach affected or modified by the proposed development.
2. All proposed floodplain conditions (if modified), including calculations.
3. All floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations.
4. Detailed environmental mitigation plans for disturbance of wetlands, riparian, or conservation areas.
5. Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage system.
6. A statement by the design engineer concerning the location and capacity of the complete drainage system's provisions for conveying the 100-year
storm event runoff.
7. Phasing of project including expected start and completion dates, duration of exposure of disturbed areas, and expected dates for restoration. (Ord.
2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-3-3: DETERMINATION OF PROPERTY AREA:
A. The following criteria shall be considered when determining the total area of property being developed or redeveloped and for "grandfathering" of
previously developed property:
1. The city shall review the proposed total area of the property being developed or redeveloped in order to preclude inappropriate phasing of
developments to circumvent the intent of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 287/403
2. If a portion of the property area was previously developed and is not being disturbed, developed or redeveloped, then the previously developed
property area may be excluded from the total property area.
3. If a previously developed portion of a site is proposed to be redeveloped, it must be included in the total property area. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
This section 6-17-4 establishes the design features and the design criteria, standards, and methods to be used in developing a stormwater management
plan. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-1: MINIMIZATION OF INCREASES IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES:
A. In the selection of a stormwater management plan for a particular development, the applicant shall evaluate and implement site design features that
most closely meet the goal of no change in runoff rate or volume from predevelopment conditions.
B. The applicant's stormwater management plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features that are consistent with the following hierarchy:
1. Minimize impervious surfaces on the property and establish best management practices consistent with the needs of the project.
2. Preserve, establish, and/or restore native plantings and natural areas to increase and promote infiltration and evaporation.
3. Preserve the natural infiltration characteristics of the site and incorporate designed infiltration devices (e.g., trenches and basins).
4. Preserve natural resource features of the development site, including, but not limited to, floodplain, wetlands, prairies, and woodlands.
5. Attenuate flows and promote infiltration by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions.
6. Preserve, enhance, and incorporate existing natural stream channels and quality wetlands, stream channels and drainageways.
7. The restoration of wetlands in locations where natural features (e.g., depressional areas, hydric soils, prior converted wetlands) will support such
restoration.
8. Infiltrate runoff on site.
9. Provide stormwater retention facilities.
10. Provide stormwater detention facilities to slow the rate of runoff and reduce runoff pollutants leaving the site.
11. Construct storm sewers. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-2: WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES:
A. In the selection of a stormwater management plan for a particular development, the following water quality and multiple use aspects shall be employed:
1. The stormwater management system shall be designed to minimize adverse water quality impacts downstream and on the property itself.
2. Stormwater conveyance and storage areas shall utilize native plantings to increase infiltration and evaporation.
3. Retention and infiltration of stormwater shall be promoted throughout the property's drainage system to reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and
to reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants.
4. Stormwater storage areas shall incorporate design features to capture stormwater runoff pollutants.
5. All flows from the development shall be routed through the stormwater storage areas and receive the stormwater quality benefits of the facility (i.e.,
low flows shall not be bypassed).
6. Stormwater storage design shall give preference to wet bottom and wetland designs.
7. The drainage system shall incorporate multiple uses where practicable. Uses considered compatible with stormwater management include open
space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, trails, playing fields), wetlands and water quality mitigation.
8. The applicant should avoid using portions of the property exclusively for stormwater management. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-3: RELEASE RATES:
A. Drainage systems for properties required to provide stormwater runoff storage facilities shall be designed to control the rate of discharge from the
property for the 2-year and 100-year critical duration events. The peak rate of discharge shall not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability
downstream when considered in aggregate with other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities.
B. Release rates from a property shall be as follows:
1. The peak discharge from events less than or equal to the 2-year event shall not be greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of property drained.
2. The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per acre of property drained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 288/403
3. Stormwater management shall be designed to maximize infiltration on the site so as to minimize the volume of stormwater runoff from the site. The
total volume of water released from the site, exclusive of pass-through flows, shall be calculated by an approved hydrograph method listed in section
6-17-4-8 of this chapter. The total volume of water leaving the site, calculated as the area under the hydrograph, shall be calculated for the 2-year,
24-hour storm event in both the undeveloped and developed conditions. The volume of runoff is not limited to the twenty four (24) hour duration of
the storm, but it shall include the entire duration of runoff from the site. The total volume of water leaving the site for a 2-year storm event following
development shall be equal to or less than the total volume of water leaving the site in the undeveloped condition. This may be accomplished
through application of a permanent pool volume, in a basin without, or partially without an impermeable liner, in combination with the infiltration
requirements of section 6-17-4-16 of this chapter.
4. In the event the downstream drainage facilities are inadequate to receive the release rate hereinabove provided, then the allowable release rate
shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the receiving downstream sewers, streams, and channels; additional detention shall be required to store
that portion of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the downstream facilities.
5. For sites where the undeveloped release rate is less than the maximum release rate in this section, the developed release rate and corresponding
site runoff storage volume requirement shall be based on the existing undeveloped release rate for the development. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-4: DETENTION BASIN OUTLET DESIGN:
The capacity of the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated to ensure the detention basin outlet design will not exceed this capacity. Stormwater
storage outlets shall not discharge directly into existing storm sewers or drain tiles.
Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated and considered in the design of the outlet.
The outlet design shall not require manual intervention or mechanical means to control flow, except for wet basins for maintenance drawdown. Outlets
shall be designed to allow for easy maintenance even during high runoff events. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-5: MAXIMUM BOUNCE:
The maximum depth of water from design high water level (open restrictor) to normal water level, or outlet invert shall be four feet (4'). (Ord. 2016-14, 4-
25-2016)
6-17-4-6: DETENTION STORAGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Design And Construction Characteristics: Storage facilities shall be designed and constructed with the following characteristics:
1. The site runoff storage facility shall provide one foot (1') of freeboard above the design high water elevation.
2. The storage facilities shall be accessible and easily maintained. The top width of berm shall be a minimum of five feet (5') but shall be increased to a
minimum of ten feet (10') within the access route to the outlet control structure.
3. Storage facilities shall facilitate sedimentation and catchment of floating material. Unless specifically approved by the city, concrete lined low flow
ditches shall not be used in detention basins.
4. Storage facilities shall be designed such that the existing conditions' predevelopment peak runoff rate from the 100-year critical duration rainfall will
not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is blocked.
5. The design storage to be provided in a detention basin shall be based on the peak runoff from the 100-year storm event determined through a critical
duration analysis. Detention storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods as described in this section 6-17-4.
6. The function of existing on site depressional storage shall be preserved or compensated for at a ratio of one to one (1:1) independently of storage
required for the development.
7. All site runoff storage volume shall be provided above the seasonal high groundwater table or above the invert of the groundwater control system.
8. Stormwater management basins shall have a maximum drawdown time of seventy two (72) hours for a 24-hour duration rainfall event with 100-year
recurrence frequency.
B. Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible, they should be at
opposite ends of the basin. There shall be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet and paved low flow channels shall not be used unless
specifically approved by the city.
Maximizing the distance between inlets and outlets will prevent the short circuiting of flows through a basin. Short circuiting is counterproductive to the
removal of stormwater pollutants. Short circuiting can be avoided by designing elongated basins (ideal length: width ratio of at least 3:1), or by the use
of baffles or berms in the basin bottom. Because low flows and the "first flush" of storm runoff often contain the most concentrated pollutants, it is
critical that all flows be routed through a sedimentation basin to provide opportunities for effective pollutant removal. (See NIPC model stormwater
drainage and detention ordinance pages 11 - 24.)
C. Minimum Detention Outlet Size: Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of twelve
inches (12"). If this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater than those specified in this section, and regional detention is not a practical
alternative, alternative outlet design shall be utilized that incorporates self-cleaning flow restrictors.
D. Detention Area Retaining Walls: The use of retaining walls as part of any detention system shall be discouraged. However, as a design entrance feature
or within commercial areas they may be considered by the city council subject to the following criteria which must be clearly documented in any request
for a detention area retaining wall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 289/403
1. Public safety provisions.
2. Architectural features.
3. Habitat features.
4. Maintenance plan/funding provisions.
5. Maximum height of four feet (4') above HWL.
6. Any wall shall be designed and sealed by an Illinois structural engineer.
E. Setback From Public Rights Of Way: Detention facilities shall not be located within a distance of ten feet (10') plus one and one-half (1.5) times the
depth of the detention facility from any public right of way and any earthen berm shall not be constructed such that the toe of such berm will be nearer
than ten feet (10') to any public right of way in accordance with public act 86-616. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-7: DRAINAGE SYSTEM EVALUATION AND DESIGN:
The following criteria shall be used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The underlying objective is to provide capacity to pass the 10-year
peak flow in the minor drainage system and an overland flow path for flows in excess of the design capacity to at least the 100-year storm event runoff.
A. Detention System Design Selection: Selection of the detention system design shall be based on the following hierarchy:
1. Bioinfiltration.
2. Wetland detention basin.
3. Wet bottom retention.
4. Dry detention.
5. Underground detention (commercial only).
6. Parking lot detention (commercial only).
The applicant shall first thoroughly investigate the first two (2) preferred detention system designs (bioinfiltration followed by wetland detention). If
these designs are found to be impractical, the applicant may then investigate the next detention system alternate. Underground and parking lot
detention systems will only be considered for commercial uses. All systems shall include an infiltration component in accordance with section 6-17-4-
16 of this chapter.
B. Design Methodologies:
1. Minor drainage systems may be designed using rational method provided that the tributary area is twenty (20) acres or less.
2. For all properties, major drainage systems must be designed using runoff hydrograph methods as described in section 6-17-4-8 of this chapter.
3. All detention basins must be designed using runoff hydrograph methods as described in section 6-17-4-8 of this chapter.
C. Drainage System Design And Evaluation: Storm sewers shall be designed to convey the 10-year storm in a full pipe (nonsurcharged) condition at a
minimum. Inlets shall have capacity to allow the inflow of the 10-year storm with no more than three inches (3") of ponding with fifty percent (50%) of
the opening blocked. Storm sewer in public right of way shall be reinforced concrete pipe conforming to ASTM C76 with gasketed joints conforming to
ASTM C443 with sufficient cover per IDOT specifications. Swales shall be designed to carry the 10-year storm without encroachment onto the shoulder
of the road.
D. Positive Drainage:
1. All areas of the property must be provided an overland flow path that will pass the 100-year flow from on site and off site tributary area at a stage at
least two feet (2') below the lowest structure opening of structures hydraulically connected to the flow path.
2. Overland flow routes up to the 100-year flow level shall be placed in exclusive drainage easements.
3. Street ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb height by more than one inch (1") in the 100-year, plugged inlet condition.
4. Rear yard ponding must not exceed six inches (6") in the 100-year, plugged inlet condition.
5. An exhibit showing the extent of ponding in a 100-year, plugged inlet event shall be provided as part of the stormwater design calculations.
6. If the upstream drainage area is less than twenty (20) acres, a storm sewer system and inlets sized for the base flood can be constructed in lieu of
providing an overland flow path. Such storm sewer systems shall be considered part of the major stormwater system.
7. When the 100-year flow path is to be contained within a closed conduit system, inlets to that system shall be designed for fifty percent (50%) of the
inlet flow area blocked.
8. Overland flow paths internal to the site shall be considered part of the major stormwater system and shall be designed for conveyance of the base
flood (critical duration) or at a minimum one cfs per tributary acre, without damage to structures.
E. Runoff Characteristics:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 290/403
1. In development areas, determination of ground surface runoff characteristics shall utilize soil types and hydrologic soil classifications one category
lower (degraded) than those determined by the soils investigations.
2. Stormwater runoff from a property must exit the property at the point where it exited prior to development.
3. Diversion or transfer of water between watersheds shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-8: METHODS FOR GENERATING RUNOFF HYDROGRAPHS:
Methods used for generating runoff hydrographs shall be either an appropriate corps of engineers HEC model, soil conservation service TR-20, or TR-55
tabular method. The city of Plano must approve alternative methods.
Runoff hydrographs shall be developed incorporating the following assumptions of rainfall amounts and antecedent moisture:
A. Rainfall:
1. Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois state water
survey's bulletin 71 data and isohyetal or sectional data.
2. The first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of drainage systems with critical durations less than or equal to
twelve (12) hours.
3. The third quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of detention basins and drainage systems with critical durations
greater than twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours.
4. The fourth quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with durations greater than twenty four (24) hours.
5. The first, third, and fourth quartile distributions shall be as described by Huff bulletin 71.
6. The SCS type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the Huff distributions for use in TR-55 models.
B. Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs that do not rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume
an antecedent moisture condition of two. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-9: WET DETENTION BASIN DESIGN:
Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as much as feasible to be available
for recreational use. Refer to section 6-17-4-17 of this chapter for additional requirements. A presedimentation basin, inlet/outlet orientation to avoid short
circuiting, and a planting/safety ledge with shallow wetland vegetation to limit shoreline erosion are required elements.
A. Wet Basin Depths:
1. Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep, excluding near shore banks and safety ledges.
2. If fish habitat is to be provided wet basins shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty five percent (25%) of the bottom area to prevent winter
freeze out.
B. Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes:
1. Wet basins shall be provided with stabilized shorelines.
2. Upper slopes of detention basins (higher than 1 foot above normal stage) should be no steeper than five to one (5:1). Slopes flatter than five to one
(5:1) are preferred.
3. From one foot (1') above a normal stage to two feet (2') below normal stage the slopes shall be no steeper than ten to one (10:1). Below two feet (2')
below NWL the slopes shall be no steeper than four to one (4:1).
4. Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the shoreline zone from one foot (1') above the normal pool stage to at least one foot (1') below the
normal pool stage.
5. First, compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized (i.e., to less than 275 psi). Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should
be disked to a depth of six (6) to eight inches (8") with a chisel plow before spreading topsoil.
6. Second, suitable, uncompacted topsoil at a minimum thickness of one foot (1'), shall be spread to provide a suitable growth medium for aquatic
plants. Coarse soils with minimal clay content and a high organic content are recommended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 291/403
C. Shoreline Vegetation: A planting and maintenance schedule shall be provided to the city for review and approval. Methods for stabilization such as deep
rooted vegetation, natural stone, or manufactured products shall be used as approved by the city. Water tolerant native vegetation shall be used to
landscape the shorelines of wet detention facilities. The selected plants and planting methods shall conform to the soils, hydrology, and water quality
condition present in such facilities, with plants being tolerant of highly variable hydrologic conditions and degraded water quality (e.g., high turbidity and
salinity content). A critical consideration in site preparation is the provision of an adequate growing medium for new plants. Construction of stormwater
facilities typically requires excessive grading, causing resultant soils to become highly disturbed and unsuitable for planting. The planning and
sequencing of construction activity shall minimize the negative impacts on soils and provide means for restoring soils following construction.
D. Pool Volume And Elevation:
1. The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-year critical duration
storm event.
2. The peak 100-year pool elevation shall be at least two feet (2') below the lowest structure opening of all structures hydraulically connected to the
detention basin. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-10: WETLAND AND DRY DETENTION BASIN DESIGN:
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, wetland and dry basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be
aesthetically pleasing and, as much as feasible, to be available for multiple uses.
A. Dry Basin Drainage:
1. Dry basins shall be designed so that the portion of their bottom area that is intended to be dry shall have standing water no longer than seventy two
(72) hours for any runoff event less than or equal to the 100-year event. Underdrains may be used to meet this requirement. Low flow channels are
prohibited. Paved low flow channels shall not be used unless specifically approved by the city.
2. Dry bottom ponds shall have a minimum slope of two percent (2%) and maximum side slope of four to one (4:1). However, infiltration trenches,
wetland channels with soil stabilization fabric, or other permanent erosion and silt control measures are required.
3. Direct connections of detention basin inlets to basin outlets are prohibited.
4. The dry portion of the basin may be planted with either native, deep rooted vegetation to promote infiltration or with turf grasses.
5. The peak 100-year detention elevation shall not be greater than four feet (4') above the bottom of the outlet. If turf grasses are proposed, the basin
depth from outlet to high water level shall not exceed two feet (2').
6. A planting and maintenance schedule shall be provided to the city for review and approval.
7. The peak 100-year detention elevation shall be at least two feet (2') below the lowest structure opening for all structures hydraulically connected to
the detention pond.
B. Velocity Dissipation:
1. Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize the resuspension
of pollutants and sediments.
2. A stilling basin shall be provided at each major inlet.
C. Wetland Basin Grading:
1. The side slopes of wetland basins (from 1 foot above the normal pool stage to at least 1 foot below the normal pool stage) and the basin bottom shall
not be steeper than ten to one (10:1) (horizontal to vertical). Steeper slopes are permitted in settling basins and open water zones near the basin
outlet.
2. Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the shoreline zone and basin bottom. As indicated in the guidance for wet basins, soil preparation is
critical in shoreline and shallow water zones.
3. First, compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized (i.e., to less than 275 psi). Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should
be disked to a depth of six (6) to eight inches (8") with a chisel plow before spreading topsoil.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 292/403
4. Second, suitable uncompacted topsoil at a minimum thickness of one foot (1') shall be spread to provide a suitable growth medium for aquatic
plants. Coarse soils with minimal clay content and a high organic content are recommended.
5. Upper slopes of detention basins (higher than 1 foot above normal stage) should be no steeper than five to one (5:1). Slopes flatter than five to one
(5:1) are preferred.
D. Wetland Vegetation: Water tolerant native vegetation shall be used to landscape the shorelines and bottoms (non-open water areas) of wetland
detention facilities. The selected plants and planting methods shall conform to the soils, hydrology, and water quality conditions present in such
facilities, with plants being tolerant of highly variable hydrologic conditions and degraded water quality (e.g., high turbidity and salinity content). Plant
selection should conform to the guidance in the "Native Plant Guide For Streams And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern Illinois" (NRCS et al.,
1998), which is hereby adopted by reference.
Native vegetation is required for side slopes (higher than 1 foot above normal stage) of all wet and wetland detention facilities to a point two (2) vertical
feet above the high water level during the plugged restrictor condition.
E. Stilling/Sedimentation Basins: Wetland detention basins shall be constructed with sediment basins or forebays at all major inlets to the basins. The
volume of the basins should be at least five hundred (500) cubic feet per acre of impervious surface in the drainage area. Side slopes below one foot
(1') of depth should be no steeper than five to one (5:1) (horizontal to vertical) and basin depth should be at least three feet (3') and designed to allow
access for sediment removal equipment. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-11: DETENTION IN FLOODPLAINS:
The placement of detention basins within the floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable operation during flood events.
However, the stormwater detention requirements of this chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe areas on the project site
provided the following provisions are met:
A. Detention In Flood Fringe Areas:
1. The placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood elevation
occupied by the detention basin including any berms. Along watercourses with known flooding problems, the city may, at its discretion, require
compensatory storage in excess of 1.5 times the volume occupied.
2. The release from the detention storage provided shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
3. The applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream flow and floodplain backwater conditions.
4. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention.
5. All floodplain storage lost below the 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
6. All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
B. Detention In Floodways: Detention in floodways is prohibited.
C. On Stream Detention: On stream detention basins are prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a public flood control project with a net
watershed benefit in flood control. Those streams appearing as solid blue on a USGS quadrangle map shall be assumed perennial unless better data
is obtained. All cross stream flow control structures for the purpose of impounding water to provide site runoff storage in all cases on perennial and
intermittent streams must demonstrate that they will not cause short term or long term stream channel instability. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-12: PROTECTION OF WETLANDS AND DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE AREAS:
Wetlands and other depressional storage areas shall be protected from damaging modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity
associated with land developments. The function of existing on site depressional storage shall be preserved for both on site and off site tributary flows in
addition to required detention. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose
drainage flows into wetlands and depressional storage areas:
A. Detention In Wetlands And Depressional Storage Areas:
1. When depressional storage is removed it must be compensated for in the site runoff storage facility at no less than a one to one (1:1) ratio. This
requirement is in addition to the site runoff storage required in this chapter.
2. The city may allow the function of depressional storage to be preserved if the applicant performs detailed pre- and post-project hydrologic and
hydraulic modeling to identify the effect of the depressional storage on discharges over a range of rainfall frequencies.
3. Existing wetlands shall not be modified for the purposes of stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the existing wetland is low in quality
and the proposed modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions.
a. Low quality wetlands are those that have been substantially disturbed. This disturbance is usually reflected in a low diversity of habitat and the
presence of only insensitive and/or invasive plant species (e.g., a monoculture of cattails). Certain modifications of low quality wetlands, such as
the limited excavation of open water areas, may actually enhance their value. It is important, however, that the storage functions of wetlands and
depressional storage areas be preserved, in addition to meeting the detention requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 293/403
4. Existing storage and release rate characteristics of wetlands and other depressional storage areas shall be maintained and the volume of detention
storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be in addition to this existing storage.
B. Sediment Control: The existing wetland shall be protected during construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and shall not
be filled.
C. Alteration Of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to the
wetland.
D. Detention/Sedimentation: All runoff from the development shall be routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture the
2-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least twenty four (24) hours before being discharged to the wetland. This basin shall be constructed before
property grading begins. In addition, the following drainage hierarchy should be implemented to minimize runoff volumes and rates being discharged to
the wetland.
E. Vegetated Buffer Strip: A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width, containing native plant species, shall be maintained or restored
around the periphery of existing or constructed wetlands which are not defined as wetland detention areas. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-13: SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE (DRAIN TILES):
The applicant shall submit a subsurface drainage inventory. The inventory shall locate existing farm and storm drainage tiles by means of slit trenching and
other appropriate methods performed by a qualified subsurface drainage consultant. All existing drain tile lines damaged during the investigation shall be
repaired and functional.
A. Drain Tile Investigation: The applicant shall provide a topographical boundary map locating these lines showing:
1. Location of each slit trench and identified to correspond with the tile investigation report and field staked at no less than fifty foot (50') intervals;
2. Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow, tile size and any connection to adjoining properties; a summary of the tile investigation report
showing trench identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of the tile filled with water, percentage of restrictions caused by
sitting, depth of ground cover, and soil texture at grade; and
3. Name, address and phone number of person or firm conducting tile location investigation.
B. Subsurface Drainage Design: Information collected during the drainage investigation shall be used to design and develop a stormwater management
system that will provide drainage that is appropriate for the development and connecting tile lines on adjoining properties.
Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible with existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural
systems. Designs shall not cause damage to the existing drainage system(s) or the existing adjacent or tributary land including those with agricultural
uses. The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the design:
1. Off Site Outfall: Existing downstream agricultural subsurface systems shall not be utilized for the outfall of any stormwater system. Existing
downstream surface drainage systems shall be evaluated with regard to their capacity and capability to properly convey low flow groundwater and
site runoff storage facility release without damage to downstream structures and land use on the adjacent property. If the existing outfall drainage
systems prove to be inadequate it will be necessary to modify the existing systems or construct new systems which will not conflict with the existing
systems and will not impact the existing agricultural land use.
2. On Site: Agricultural drainage systems shall be located and evaluated on site. All existing on site agricultural drain tile not serving a beneficial use
shall be abandoned by trench removal prior to other development and recorded on record plans. If any existing drain tiles continue to upland
watersheds the developer must maintain drainage service during construction until new sewers can be installed for a permanent connection.
3. Off Site Tributary: Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion capacities. All
existing tributary drain tiles shall be incorporated into the new conduits including observation structures located at the property limits, shall provide a
free flow discharge and shall not allow surface runoff to enter the system.
4. Inspection Wells: New roadway construction shall preserve existing subsurface systems within the right of way. Inspection wells shall be placed at
the right of way (ROW) and tiles found to not be flowing between inspection wells at the end of the construction shall be replaced.
5. Excavation: Existing subsurface drains shall be excavated and removed to a point not less than ten feet (10') from any proposed structure within the
development prior to the excavation of any foundation, or as a component of mass site grading, whichever is earlier and applicable to the proposed
development. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-14: EXTENDED DETENTION BASINS:
The requirements of this section will apply only when an existing agricultural land use is downstream of and adjacent to a site runoff storage facility outlet.
A. Extended Detention Requirements:
1. The runoff from not less than a 0.75-inch rainfall event over the hydraulically connected impervious area of the new development shall be stored
below the elevation of the primary gravity outlet (extended detention) of the site runoff storage facility.
2. The facility may be designed to allow for evapotranspiration or infiltration of this volume and shall not be conveyed through a direct positive
connection to downstream areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 294/403
3. The hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation of required extended detention volume may be reduced by the city if the soils
are prepared to maximize infiltration and deep rooted grasses or other plants selected for their ability to promote infiltration or water absorption are
planted in areas appropriately dedicated.
4. The reduction in hydraulically connected impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal to the area of the development meeting the above
soils/native planting requirement.
B. Subsurface Drainage For Extended Detention Basins: Subsurface drainage systems may be designed as a component of the extended detention
portion of the detention basin to assist in infiltration in accordance with the following criteria:
1. The extended detention volume shall be discharged at a rate no greater than that required to empty the calculated extended detention volume within
five (5) days of the storm event.
2. No subsurface drainage pipe shall be located within ten feet (10') of drainage pipes directly connected to the detention basin.
3. For purposes of meeting the maximum subsurface drainage discharge requirements, flow control orifices and weirs may be used.
4. All design extended detention volume shall be provided above the seasonal high groundwater table or the invert elevation of the groundwater control
system.
5. Farm field tile shall not be considered a subsurface drainage system.
6. Design infiltration from extended detention facilities will be counted toward meeting the infiltration requirements for the site. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-
2016)
6-17-4-15: STREET, PARKING LOT, CULVERT, AND PROPERTY DRAINAGE:
This section sets requirements where streets, parking lots, and culverts are proposed to be used for stormwater detention or conveyance.
A. Streets:
1. If streets are to be used as part of the minor drainage system, a maximum three feet (3') of spread onto the traveled roadway may be allowed and
inlet spacing must be sufficient to collect the entire street runoff based on a 10-year storm event.
2. Street ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb height by more than one inch (1") in the 100-year, plugged inlet condition.
3. If streets are to be used as part of the major drainage system (100-year overland flow route), ponding depths shall not exceed curb height by more
than one inch (1") in the 100-year condition and shall not remain flooded for more than eight (8) hours for any event less than or equal to the 100-
year event.
4. An exhibit showing the extent of ponding in a 100-year, plugged inlet event shall be provided as part of the stormwater design calculations.
B. Parking Lots:
1. The use of parking lots to provide stormwater detention will be limited by the storage volume and detention time requirements of this chapter.
2. As parking lot detention provides little or no water quality benefits, it is, therefore, discouraged as a primary source of detention. However, parking lot
storage may be useful in providing supplementary storage for a traditional detention basin.
3. The parking lot may be located at a higher elevation than the detention basin bottom and would only store water for more extreme events (e.g.,
greater than a 10 year recurrence interval).
4. Where allowed, parking lot detention shall be accompanied by measures to promote water quality.
5. Release from parking lot detention systems shall be directed through sedimentation basins, vegetated swales, or buffer strips.
6. An exhibit showing the extent of ponding in a 100-year, plugged inlet event shall be provided as part of the stormwater design calculations.
7. The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed six inches (6") in a plugged inlet condition.
8. The maximum duration of ponding in any parking area shall not exceed eight (8) hours.
C. Underground Detention: Use of underground detention shall be reviewed and approved on a case by case basis. Underground detention systems shall
provide for easy access and low maintenance. Design of underground facilities shall include measures to collect sediment and floatable debris,
designed with regards to access and maintenance. Fifty percent (50%) of the void space in an aggregate base (voids are typically 30 to 33 percent of
the base volume) shall be allowed as detention volume provided that approved infiltration calculations reveal that the 2-year 24-hour storm will be fully
infiltrated within twenty four (24) hours. All designs of underground facilities shall be signed and sealed by an Illinois licensed structural engineer.
D. Culvert Road And Driveway Crossings:
1. All culverts, including driveway culverts, shall be sized to convey the minor drainage system using federal highway administration culvert
nomographs or more sophisticated backwater models.
2. Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 295/403
E. Property Drainage: Drainage from a property within a development for which a stormwater management plan exists shall not cross property lines,
except under the following conditions and restrictions:
1. The drainage is contained within a drainage easement.
2. The drainage is consistent with the approved overall grading plan of the development.
3. Any downspout or sump pump discharge line must outlet:
a. At least two feet (2') from the foundation of the structure being drained,
b. At least two feet (2') from any adjacent property line,
c. Perpendicular to any adjacent property line and/or along the flow line of the drainage easement. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-16: INFILTRATION PRACTICES:
A. Generally:
1. To effectively reduce runoff volumes, infiltration practices should be located on soils in hydrologic soil groups "A" or "B" as designated by the U.S.
soil conservation service.
2. Sites should be designed to maximize the use of vegetated filter strips and swales.
3. Wherever practicable, runoff from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter strips and swales before being routed to a storm sewer or
detention basin.
4. Infiltration basins and trenches designed to recharge groundwater shall not be located within seventy five feet (75') of a water supply well or a
building foundation. For well drained sand and gravel soils this separation shall be extended to one hundred feet (100').
5. A sediment settling basin shall be provided to remove coarse sediment from stormwater flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches.
6. Stormwater shall not be allowed to stand more than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of a dry basin's bottom area for the maximum
design event to be exfiltrated.
7. The bottom of infiltration facilities shall be a minimum of four feet (4') above seasonally high groundwater and bedrock.
8. Reference the "Illinois Urban Drainage Manual" for determining feasibility and sizing of infiltration facilities.
B. Applicability: BMPs shall be designed, installed and maintained to infiltrate runoff to the maximum extent practicable in accordance with the following,
except for:
1. Storage and loading areas from industrial properties, although rooftops and parking areas shall be infiltrated.
2. Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas.
3. Areas with less than two feet (2') separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the
top of bedrock.
4. Areas with runoff from industrial, commercial and institutional parking lots and roads and residential arterial roads with less than four feet (4')
separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of seasonal high groundwater or the top of bedrock.
5. Areas within four hundred feet (400') of a community water system well or within one hundred feet (100') of a private well except for residential
infiltration devices capturing less than one acre of tributary acreage.
6. Any area where the soil does not exhibit one of the following characteristics between the bottom of the infiltration system and the seasonal high
groundwater and top of bedrock:
a. At least a two foot (2') soil layer with twenty percent (20%) fines or greater; or
b. At least a four foot (4') soil layer with ten percent (10%) fines or greater.
This exclusion does not apply where the soil medium within the infiltration system provides an equivalent level of protection and does not prohibit
infiltration of roof runoff.
C. Exemptions: The following are not required to meet the requirements of this section:
1. Areas where the infiltration rate of the soil is less than 0.4 inch/hour measured at the bottom of the infiltration system.
2. Parking areas and access roads less than five thousand (5,000) square feet for commercial and industrial development.
3. Roads in commercial, industrial and institutional land uses and arterial residential roads.
D. Residential Requirements: For residential developments one of the following shall be met:
1. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume so that the postdevelopment infiltration volume shall be at least ninety percent (90%) of the predevelopment
infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent (1%) of the project site is required as
an effective infiltration area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 296/403
2. Infiltrate twenty five percent (25%) of the postdevelopment runoff volume from the 2-year, 24-hour design storm with a type II distribution.
3. Separate curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers as
defined in TR-55. However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than one percent (1%) of the project
site is required as an effective infiltration area.
4. Design infiltration from extended detention facilities will be counted toward meeting the infiltration requirements for the site.
E. Nonresidential Requirements: For nonresidential development, including commercial, industrial and institutional development, one of the following shall
be met:
1. Infiltrate sufficient runoff volume from rooftop and parking areas so that the postdevelopment infiltration volume shall be at least sixty percent (60%)
of the predevelopment infiltration volume, based on an average annual rainfall over those areas.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent (2%) of the project site is required as
an effective infiltration area.
2. Infiltrate ten percent (10%) of the postdevelopment runoff volume from rooftop and parking areas for the 2-year, 24-hour design storm with a type II
distribution.
3. Separate curve numbers for pervious and impervious surfaces shall be used to calculate runoff volumes and not composite curve numbers as
defined in TR-55.
However, when designing appropriate infiltration systems to meet this requirement, no more than two percent (2%) of the project site is required as
an effective infiltration area.
4. Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required for parking lot runoff and for runoff from new road construction in commercial, industrial and
institutional areas that will enter an infiltration system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system from clogging prior to
scheduled maintenance and to protect groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation,
sedimentation, bioinfiltration, filtration, swales and/or filter strips.
5. Design infiltration from extended detention facilities will be counted toward meeting the infiltration requirements for the site.
F. Soils: To effectively reduce runoff volumes, infiltration practices including basins, trenches, and porous pavement should be located on soils in
hydrologic soil groups "A" or "B" as designated by the U.S. soil and water conservation district when present within the project area. A sediment settling
basin shall be provided to remove coarse sediment from stormwater flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches.
G. Bypass During Construction: While under construction, and prior to the establishment of permanent soil stabilization practices, an upstream stormwater
bypass system shall be constructed and maintained to prevent siltation and plugging of infiltration BMPs. During this period, temporary stormwater
controls shall be in place to prevent peak discharges in excess of those permitted in this chapter.
H. Vegetated Filter Strips And Swales: To effectively filter stormwater pollutants and promote infiltration of runoff, sites should be designed to maximize the
use of vegetated filter strips and swales. Runoff from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter strips and swales before being routed to a
storm sewer or detention basin. Native vegetation should be used for landscaping of filter strips and swales. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-17: SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS:
A. Generally:
1. The drainage system components, especially all detention basins, shall be designed to protect the safety of any children or adults coming in contact
with the system during runoff events.
2. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible.
B. Side Slopes:
1. The side slopes of detention basins at 100-year capacity shall be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the basin and for stability and
ease of maintenance. The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year capacity shall be a maximum six to one (6:1) (horizontal to vertical).
2. Side slopes of detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than five to one (5:1) (horizontal to vertical) above water, and four to one
(4:1) underwater.
3. At least one foot (1') of freeboard should be provided around the perimeter of the detention area.
C. Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge at least eight feet (8') in width a maximum of two feet (2') below the normal water
depth.
D. Velocity: With the exception of existing drainageways being left undisturbed, velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be controlled to
safe levels taking into consideration rates and depths of flow. Velocities shall not exceed the product of velocity, in feet per second, times depth, in feet,
equal to four (4).
E. Overflow Structures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 297/403
1. All stormwater detention basins shall be provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a stage at least two feet (2')
below the lowest structure opening for all structures hydraulically connected to the detention basin.
2. The design flow rate of the overflow structure shall be designed such that the existing conditions predevelopment peak runoff rate from the 100-year
critical duration rainfall will not be exceeded assuming the primary restrictor is blocked.
3. All detention ponds and overflow structures shall comply with IDNR dam safety requirements where applicable.
F. Inlet/Outlet Pipe Protection: The inlet and outlet pipes from all stormwater basins shall be designed to minimize the velocity of flow as it enters and exits
the basin. Inlet and outlet pipes shall be supplied with sloped grating per IDOT standards. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-18: MAINTENANCE CONSIDERATIONS:
A. The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance.
B. Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and shall require little or no attention for proper operation. Movable restrictors to meet
drawdown times are prohibited.
C. Turfed side slopes shall be designed to allow lawn mowing equipment to easily negotiate them.
D. Wet basins shall be provided with alternate outflows that can be used to completely drain the pool for sediment removal. (Pumping may be considered if
drainage by gravity is not feasible.)
E. Presedimentation basins shall be included, where feasible, for localizing sediment deposition and removal.
F. Access for heavy equipment shall be provided and located within an ingress and egress or maintenance easement.
G. On detention basin side slopes steeper than five to one (5:1), excelsior blankets or similar erosion devices shall be used during construction to minimize
erosion.
H. Long term maintenance also shall include the routine removal of excessive trash or debris and the removal of obstructions from the basin outlet
structure.
I. Periodic removal of accumulated sediment (e.g., from swales, forebays, and settling basins) also shall be done to maintain the function and aesthetics of
stormwater facilities. At a minimum, sediment shall be removed from forebays and sediment basins whenever one foot (1') or more of sediment has
accumulated in the basin bottom.
J. Naturally landscaped areas of detention and drainage facilities may be maintained via controlled burning every one to three (3) years, as needed to
control invasive weeds. Where controlled burning is not feasible, a program of mowing and application of selective herbicides shall be performed as
needed.
K. Mowing should be performed on all turfed areas on a regular basis to maintain grass height below six inches (6"). (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-4-19: NATURAL CONDITION, SOILS:
The recommendations of the "Kendall County Soil Manual" must be followed with respect to the land plan and construction details of proposed
subdivisions. Soil borings must be made to confirm the soils map information included in the USDA, NRCS soil survey of Kendall County, Illinois.
Representative soil borings must be taken to a depth at least five feet (5') below the lowest proposed foundation, two feet (2') below the lowest proposed
sewer, or the point of refusal. At least one boring must be made per ten (10) acres or more if necessary to confirm the soil survey. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-
2016)
6-17-4-20: RECORD DRAWINGS:
The developer is required to submit record drawings of all permitted stormwater management facilities including, but not limited to, storm sewers, culverts,
overland flow paths and stormwater management basins. The record drawings shall include the following:
A. The record drawings shall be in the same format and include the same sheet count as the approved permitted engineering plans. Supplemental
topographic plans may be added to better detail stormwater management basins or overland flow paths. Submittal of record drawings shall be on such
media and in such format as the certified community determines.
B. All storm sewers and culverts shall depict actual location and elevation of all pipe inverts at all manholes and end sections. Rim elevation of all storm
sewer frames and grates shall be noted. Pipe material and size shall be noted. All sump pump locations and connections shall be noted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 298/403
C. All pipe slopes shall be calculated based on constructed elevations and lengths. The approved slope shall be crossed out and the record slope noted
adjacent to the approved slope.
D. All design cross sections shall be surveyed and record elevation and widths noted. Overland flow path slopes shall be surveyed and record elevation
and locations noted. Design water surface elevations shall be calculated where cross section area or slope is less than the approved plan.
E. Stormwater management basins and floodplain compensatory storage shall be surveyed and a one foot (1') topographic map provided. The flow control
structure shall indicate type, size and elevation of the control device. Overflow measures such as control weirs, etc., shall be surveyed noting material,
location, width and elevation. The record drawings shall include calculations verifying that the volumes of detention and compensatory storage required
in the permit have been provided. The calculations shall compare proposed to actual volumes at one foot (1') elevation intervals.
F. The plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer who shall state that the project is constructed and will function in substantial
conformance with the approved and permitted plans and calculations.
G. The plans shall identify the entity with current maintenance responsibility and the entity with future maintenance responsibility for stormwater
management facilities including, but not limited to:
1. Stormwater management basins.
2. Storm sewers.
3. Drainage ditches.
4. Overland flood routes.
5. Wetlands and natural areas.
The plans shall identify a schedule for transfer of maintenance responsibility and the status of funding for maintenance activities. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-
25-2016)
6-17-5: FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS:
Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design of the property's drainage system. Whenever practicable, flows
from upstream areas that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site being developed. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-5-1: UPSTREAM AREAS NOT MEETING CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
A. When upstream property tributary to the applicant's property does not meet the stormwater runoff storage and release requirements of this chapter,
regionalized detention on the applicant's property shall be explored by the applicant. The following steps shall be followed:
1. The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his property based on the applicant's property area and the release rates and
procedures described in section 6-17-4 of this chapter.
2. Areas tributary to the applicant's property, not meeting the storage and release rate requirements of this chapter, shall be identified.
3. The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for the areas determined in subsection A2 of this section plus the applicant's property area
based on the combined properties and the release rates and procedures described in section 6-17-4 of this chapter.
4. If the tributary areas are not currently developed, a reasonable fully developed land cover, based on anticipated zoning, shall be assumed for the
purposes of computing storage.
5. Once the necessary combined storage is computed, the city may choose to pay for increasing the size of the applicant's detention basin to
accommodate the regional flows. The applicant's responsibility will then be limited to the storage for his property as computed in subsection A1 of
this section.
6. If regional storage is selected by the city then the design produced in subsection 6-17-5-2A3 of this chapter shall be implemented.
7. If regional storage is rejected by the city the applicant shall bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever practicable as
determined by the city.
8. If the city determines that the applicant may route upstream flows through his basin, the applicant must comply with the requirements of this chapter.
9. If the upstream areas being routed through the applicant's basin are conveyed by drainageways identified on USGS mapping, the applicant must
meet the provisions of subsection 6-17-4-11C of this chapter for on stream basins. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-5-2: UPSTREAM AREAS MEETING CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
A. When upstream property tributary to the applicant's property meets the storage and release requirements of this chapter, the upstream flows shall be
handled in the following hierarchy:
1. Upstream flows shall be bypassed around the applicant's detention basin, unless the applicant justifies to the city that bypassing of flows is not
feasible.
2. Upstream flows shall be routed through the applicant's detention basin if the city determines that this is the only feasible alternative.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 299/403
3. Storage needed for the applicant's property shall be computed as described in subsection 6-17-5-1A1 of this chapter. However, if the city decides to
route tributary area flows through an applicant's basin, the final design stormwater releases shall be based on the combined total of the applicant's
property plus tributary areas. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6: ADMINISTRATION:
This section 6-17-6 details the administration aspects of this chapter, including scheduling and maintenance.
A. General Security Requirements:
1. As security to the city for the performance by the applicant to complete the construction of any and all stormwater facilities required by this chapter,
to pay all costs, fees and charges due from the applicant pursuant to the permitting authorities of this chapter and to otherwise faithfully perform the
applicant's/developer's undertakings pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall post:
a. Construction performance security as provided in subsection B of this section prior to issuance of a permit; and
b. Sediment and erosion control security as provided in subsection C of this section, prior to issuance of a permit if a sediment and erosion control
plan is required pursuant this chapter;
c. Maintenance security as provided in subsection D of this section prior to acceptance of stormwater management facilities by any public or private
entity.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the applicant from submitting financial security that combines purposes set forth above so long as that
security is acceptable by the city.
2. The applicant/developer or their agent shall bear the full cost and responsibility of securing and maintaining the securities required by this
subsection.
B. Performance Security:
1. A construction performance security shall be posted and shall include:
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the applicant/developer and the city, for the completion of the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the
permit; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city may approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the permit, which estimated
probable cost shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the city; and
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to complete
required work in the event that work is not completed according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this subsection shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city until the
conditions set forth in this subsection or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
3. The city may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent (90%) of
the security provided for in this subsection may be released prior to approval of record drawings and final inspection.
C. Sediment And Erosion Control Security:
1. If a sediment and erosion control plan is required pursuant to this chapter, then a sediment and erosion control security shall be required. Such a
security shall include:
a. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city shall approve, in an amount equal to not less than one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the estimated probable cost to install and maintain the sediment and erosion control measures, which estimated probable cost
shall be approved by the city; and
b. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city, as applicable, the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to
complete or maintain sediment and erosion control measures in the event that such measures are not installed and/or maintained according to the
established schedule.
c. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this subsection shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city, as applicable,
until the conditions set forth in this subsection are satisfied.
3. The city may approve periodic reductions in the letter of credit based on progress of construction. However, not more than ninety percent (90%) of
the security provided for in this subsection may be released prior to completion of all construction, establishment of vegetation, removal of all
sediment from stormwater facilities, and final inspection and approval by the city.
D. Maintenance Security:
1. Maintenance security shall be posted and shall include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 300/403
a. A schedule, agreed upon by the applicant/developer and the city, for the follow up inspection and maintenance repair of any stormwater facilities
required by the permit. Generally the maintenance period will be a minimum of one year; and
b. An irrevocable letter of credit, or such other adequate security as the city may approve, in an amount equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of
the estimated probable cost to complete the construction of any stormwater facilities required by the permit, which estimated probable cost shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be approved by the city; and
c. A statement signed by the applicant granting the city the right to draw on the security and the right to enter the development site to complete
required work in the event that stormwater facilities require maintenance according to the work schedule; and
d. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant shall indemnify the city for any additional costs incurred attributable to the concurrent
activities of or conflicts between the applicant's contractor and the city's remedial contractor at the site.
2. The security required by this subsection shall be maintained and renewed by the applicant, and shall be held in escrow by the city until the
conditions set forth in this subsection or other applicable provisions are satisfied.
E. Letters Of Credit:
1. Letters of credit posted pursuant to this chapter shall be in a form satisfactory to the city, as applicable.
2. Each letter of credit shall be from a lending institution: a) acceptable to the city, as applicable; b) having capital resources of at least ten million
dollars ($10,000,000.00), or such other amount acceptable to the city; c) with an office in the city of Plano or Kendall County or an adjacent county or
within the Chicago metropolitan area; and d) insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
3. Each letter of credit shall, at a minimum, provide that:
a. It shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the city; and shall not expire without written notification of the city at least forty five (45)
days prior to expiration, and
b. It shall not require the consent of the developer prior to any draw on it by the city; and
c. If at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the city,
and if any applicable obligation of the developer for which its security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the city may, without notice
and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, call and draw down the letter of credit and thereafter either hold all
proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of all such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and reimburse
the city for any and all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the city, as the city shall determine.
4. If at any time the city determines that the funds remaining in the letter of credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining unpaid
cost of all stormwater facility construction or sediment and erosion control measures, then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the city, the
developer shall increase the amount of the letter of credit to an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs. Failure to so
increase the amount of the security shall be grounds for the city to draw down the entire remaining balance of the letter of credit.
5. If at any time the city determines that the bank issuing the letter of credit is without capital resources of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00),
is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is otherwise in danger
of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the city otherwise reasonably deems the bank to be insecure, then the
city shall have the right to demand that the developer provide a replacement letter of credit from a bank satisfactory to the city. Such replacement
letter of credit shall be deposited with the city not later than ten (10) days following such demand. Upon such deposit, the city shall surrender the
original letter of credit to the developer.
6. If the developer fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under this chapter, then the city may, in their discretion, draw on and retain all or
any of the funds remaining in the letter of credit. The city thereafter shall have the right to take any action they deem reasonable and appropriate to
mitigate the effects of such failure or refusal, and to reimburse the city from the proceeds of the letter of credit for all of its costs and expenses,
including legal fees and administrative expenses, resulting from or incurred as a result of the developer's failure or refusal to fully meet its obligations
under this chapter. If the funds remaining in the letter of credit are insufficient to repay fully the city for all such costs and expenses, and to maintain a
cash reserve equal to the required letter of credit during the entire time such letter of credit should have been maintained by the developer, then the
developer shall, upon demand of the city therefor, immediately deposit with the city such additional funds as the city determines are necessary to
fully repay such costs and expenses and to establish such cash reserve. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-1: EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES:
Soil erosion and sedimentation controls shall be established concurrent with the start of earthwork. Where detention, retention, or other storage areas are
to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element concurrent with the initial earthwork program.
Stormwater facilities shall be functional before building permits are issued.
Any eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of the
facilities. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-2: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Generally:
1. Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities located on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property.
2. Before a site development permit, building permit, or final plat is issued or signed by the city the applicant shall execute a maintenance agreement
with city of Plano guaranteeing that the applicant and all future owners of the property will maintain the property's stormwater drainage system.
3. The maintenance agreement shall also specifically authorize representatives or subcontractors of the city of Plano to enter onto the property for the
purpose of inspections and maintenance of the drainage system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 301/403
4. The maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of the property's stormwater drainage system and
shall provide for access to the system for inspection by authorized personnel of the city of Plano.
5. The maintenance agreement shall stipulate that if the city of Plano notifies the property owner in writing of maintenance problems that require
correction, the property owner shall make such corrections within thirty (30) calendar days of such notification.
6. If the corrections are not made within this time period the city may have the necessary work completed and assess the cost to the property owner.
7. Such maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the recorder of deeds of Kendall County.
8. City of Plano has the option of requiring a bond to be filed by the property owner for maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.
9. All permit submittals where stormwater facilities are proposed shall include a maintenance plan. The entities (public or private) responsible for
maintenance of all elements of stormwater facilities shall be identified in the maintenance plan as part of the permit application. All stormwater
elements, including, but not limited to, stormwater basins, storm sewers, swales, natural areas and wetlands shall be included.
10. All entities and their respective maintenance responsibilities shall be listed. Maintenance responsibilities proposed shall be approved by the city.
11. The maintenance plan shall include the following elements as appropriate and as determined by the designer and approved permitting agency:
a. Emergency procedure and contact list.
(1) Emergency condition procedure.
(2) Call list and protocol.
b. Subdivision information.
(1) Subdivision plat and easements.
(2) Engineering plans (record drawings - hard copy and electronic format).
(3) Stormwater management permit and calculations.
(4) Covenants and bylaws.
(5) HOA official contact list (after established).
(6) Management company contact list and tenant contact list.
c. Inspections and recordkeeping.
(1) Routine inspections.
(2) Postrainfall inspection.
(3) Incident inspection.
(4) Annual reporting format.
(5) Inspector qualifications.
(6) Inspection checklists.
d. Annual maintenance guidelines and schedule.
(1) Flushing, cleaning and sediment removal.
(2) Vegetation management.
(3) Stormwater management basin.
(4) Televising, lamping.
(5) Operations budget.
e. Maintenance and expense log.
f. Inspection/report log.
g. Appendix.
(1) Guideline copy and revision log.
(2) Applicability.
(3) Definitions.
(4) Additional contacts and resources.
(5) Quick guide/education resources.
h. Capital budget.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 302/403
B. Funding For Long Term Maintenance Of Stormwater Facilities: As a condition of approval of any application for a stormwater management permit,
unless the maintenance responsibility for the stormwater facilities in connection therewith has been accepted by a public entity, the city shall require the
establishment of a special service area pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/27-5 et seq., as a backup means of providing for the long term
maintenance of the facilities in the event the entity designated by the applicant as having primary maintenance responsibility fails to adequately carry
out its duties.
If the establishment of a special service area is required, the city shall require a good faith estimate by the applicant of the funding levels required to
support the maintenance activities identified in the maintenance plan and the tax rate and tax to be levied upon all taxable property within the area
benefited by stormwater facilities. The city shall incorporate the approved rate into its ordinances necessary for enactment and establishment of the tax
to support long term maintenance of the stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-3: INSPECTIONS:
A. Inspections During Construction:
1. A city of Plano representative shall conduct periodic inspections and surveys of the work in progress to be certain that the drainage system is being
built as designed.
2. If any violations of the provisions or requirements of this chapter are noted during such inspections, the city of Plano shall notify the property owner
in writing of the items needing correction.
3. The property owner shall have ten (10) calendar days to make such corrections unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the city of
Plano.
4. Failure to complete such corrections within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Final Inspection:
1. Upon notification by the applicant that the drainage system is completed, a city of Plano representative shall conduct a final inspection.
2. If the drainage system is found to contain deficiencies which require correction the city of Plano representative shall notify the property owner of the
necessary corrections.
3. The property owner shall correct such deficiencies within ten (10) calendar days unless given a specific extension of time in writing by the city of
Plano.
4. Failure to make necessary corrections within the specified time shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
5. Upon completion of the drainage system and all noted deficiencies, the petitioner shall perform a site survey and submit as built plans and revised
stormwater management calculations to the city. A registered professional engineer shall certify the as built plans and calculations.
6. The project letter of credit for stormwater related facilities shall not be reduced until the as built plans and calculations have been reviewed and
approved by the city.
7. Upon finding that the drainage system and as builts meet the provisions and requirements of this chapter the city of Plano shall issue in writing a
notice of drainage system completion to the property owner.
C. Routine Inspections:
1. All privately owned drainage systems may be inspected by representatives of the city of Plano.
2. A written report shall be filed of the results of any inspection and a copy sent to the property owner detailing any problems that need correction. (Ord.
2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city of Plano. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-5: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
A. Purpose And Application:
1. In order to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted when strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
impossible or impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this chapter may be granted according to the standards set forth in this section.
2. Where the city engineer finds that extraordinary hardships may result from the strict compliance with this chapter, he may, after written application
and documentation by the developer, recommend in writing to the streets and utilities committee variations or exceptions to the regulations.
Recommendation may be subject to specific conditions, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
variations or exceptions shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
3. An application for a variance to this chapter, signed by the owner or developer of the development shall be filed with the city. No application for a
variance will be accepted for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed application for a permit. Applications for a variance
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. No action will be taken on an application for a variance unless it, and the
corresponding application for a permit to which it relates, are complete as determined by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 303/403
4. All appeals to the city engineer's decisions regarding the interpretation of this chapter shall be heard by the city of Plano streets and utilities
committee.
5. From the streets and utilities committee, the recommendations shall be communicated to the city council in writing with reasons therefor. The city
council may approve the variations, as set forth herein, from these regulations in specific cases, which in their opinion do not affect the general plan
or the spirit of this chapter.
a. Variances to the requirements of this chapter, or any variance of floodplain and/or flood control regulations require approval by the city, in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
b. Variances to city requirements which are more stringent than this chapter do not require approval by the city council provided they result in full
compliance with this chapter.
6. The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city determination of compliance related to
city and Kendall County stormwater ordinance requirements. The city shall also send a copy of the complete application to all other certified
communities within the same watershed.
7. Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific form, but shall contain the information set forth herein:
a. The common addresses and legal descriptions of all lands comprising the development;
b. The names and addresses of all owners of record of the legal title of all lands comprising the development;
c. If title to any of the land comprising the development is held in trust, the names and addresses of all beneficiaries of the trust;
d. The names and addresses of the developers of the land, if different from the owner;
e. The names and addresses of all consultants retained by the developer in connection with the application for a variance;
f. The names and addresses of all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the development;
g. The specific feature or features of the development that require a variance;
h. The specific provision of the city ordinance from which a variance is sought and the precise extent of the variance therefrom;
i. The specific provision of this chapter from which a variance is sought and the precise extent of the variance therefrom;
j. A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
k. A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to permit the development;
l. A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards set forth in subsection B of this section.
8. With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay all fees prescribed by the city.
9. When the application is deemed complete and acceptable by the city a public hearing on the application before the streets and utilities committee
may be scheduled and the applicant notified. Not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall
be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the development as
disclosed in the application, and to each certified community within the same watershed as the development and to the streets and utilities
committee. Within the same time period, notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper published within the city. If no
newspaper is published within the city, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper with a general circulation within the city, which is published
in the county. The notices given under this section shall set forth the common name, address and legal description of the development and a brief
description of the variance requested.
B. Granting Of Variances:
1. The city engineer shall not recommend nor shall the city grant a variance for a project from the provisions of this chapter unless the variance is
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and meets the following standards based upon substantial evidence submitted with the variance
application or at the hearing:
a. The variance will not increase the probability of flood damage or create an additional threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or be injurious to
other property or improvements in the locale in which the property is located.
b. The variance requested is the minimum relief necessary to accomplish the objectives of the development without compromising the objectives of
this chapter.
c. The variance will not result in a reduction of water quality benefits as compared to compliance with chapter requirements.
d. The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of reducing site runoff storage requirements.
e. The variance shall not cause conveyance of stormwater from the project to increase peak discharges beyond design capacity of existing off site
conveyance facilities for any storm event from the 2-year to the 100-year recurrence frequency.
f. The variance shall seek to preserve valuable environmental and biological resources including, but not limited to, stands of native trees, existing
wetlands and natural floodplain storage.
g. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographic conditions of the specific property involved a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations was carried out.
h. The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property, and have not been created by any person having an interest in the property.
i. The purpose of the variation is not based upon economic feasibility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 304/403
2. No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory floodway, the effect of which would be to create regulation less restrictive than
the federal or state minimum standards applicable to development in such areas.
C. Procedure And Recommendations:
1. Local Variance: The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city determination of
compliance with the Kendall County stormwater ordinance.
The city shall review the application for a variance and present the recommendations to the streets and utilities committee at the public hearing with
a copy to the Kendall County stormwater director.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the streets and utilities committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the city council and the Kendall County stormwater director. The written recommendations of the streets and utilities committee,
when forwarded, shall be accompanied by written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in this chapter with citations to
the evidence taken at the public hearing.
The city council shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five (45) days
after receipt of the written recommendations of the streets and utilities committee and shall forward its final decision to the Kendall County
stormwater director. In the event the city council does not act on the recommendations of the streets and utilities committee then the
recommendation from the streets and utilities committee is considered to be endorsed and adopted by the city council.
2. County And Floodplain Variance: The city shall send a copy of the complete application to the Kendall County stormwater director with a city
determination of noncompliance with the Kendall County stormwater ordinance.
The city shall review the application for a variance and present their written recommendations to the streets and utilities committee at the public
hearing with a copy to the Kendall County stormwater director.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the streets and utilities committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the city council.
Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall forward the application with its written recommendations to the
Kendall County board and the Kendall County stormwater director. The written recommendations of the city, when forwarded, shall be accompanied
by written findings of fact with respect to each of the considerations set forth in subsection B of this section with citations to the evidence taken at the
public hearing.
The Kendall County board shall grant the variation, grant the variation with modifications or conditions, or deny the variation in writing within forty five
(45) days after receipt of the written recommendations of the city and shall forward its final decision to the Kendall County stormwater director. In the
event the Kendall County board does not act on the recommendations of the city then the recommendation from the city is considered to be
endorsed and adopted by the city.
D. Conditions:
1. A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the relief
requested.
2. In granting a variance, the city of Plano or Kendall County board may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning any matter relating
to the purposes and objectives of this chapter on the applicant as may be necessary or appropriate.
3. Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition or limitation to be met by the applicant, upon meeting such conditions, the applicant shall
file evidence to that effect with the city. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment. (Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
6-17-6-7: PENALTIES:
Any person determined to be guilty of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2016-
14, 4-25-2016)
Title 7
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
7-1-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The rules, regulations and water rents hereinafter mentioned, shall be considered a part of the contract of every person, supplied with water through the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 305/403
water system of the City; and every such person by taking water thereof, shall be held and considered as expressing his, her or its assent to be bound
thereby.
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever in this Chapter the words "water-user" or "consumer" shall be used, they shall be construed to mean the owner of the premises into or upon
which water is conveyed, and not necessarily the person who actually receives or uses such water. (Ord., 4-13-20)
7-1-3: METERS:
Subject to the provisions of Section 7-1-5 of this Chapter, from and after June 30, 1920, no water will be supplied or furnished to consumers by the City,
unless such water runs through a water meter capable of accurately measuring or registering the water supply to such customer, in liquid gallons. If any
consumer shall fail or neglect to install a water meter, furnished by the City, within a period of not less than ten (10) days, the City may at once shut off the
water service to such consumer until a water meter has been installed as herein provided. (Ord., 4-13-20; 1989 Code)
7-1-3-1: LOCATION OF METERS:
Each meter shall be placed in the cellar of the building unless special permission for a different location is given by the Water Superintendent. Meters must
be placed in a location free from obstruction, easily accessible for purposes of reading, inspection, repairing or removal, and in case of such obstruction
the City may shut off the water from the premises until such obstruction shall be removed.
7-1-3-2: METER REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
The repair and replacement of water meters shall be the responsibility of the City. In the case that a water meter freezes, the City will repair or replace the
meter for the initial occurrence. Subsequent damage of a water meter in the same location due to freezing conditions shall be the responsibility of the
occupant or owner.
7-1-3-3: TESTING METERS:
In case of a dispute over the amount of a water rent bill, or over the accuracy of a meter, the Water Superintendent shall, at the request of the consumer,
test the meter. If it is found upon such test, that the meter registers a greater amount of water than has actually passed through it, the City Collector shall
thereupon adjust such bill to conform to the correct amount due from the consumer, as nearly as the same can be ascertained, and for making such test,
said Collector shall collect the sum of fifteen dollar ($15.00) as the cost thereof, except in cases where the meter was furnished by the City. If, upon
making such test, said meter shall be found to register correctly, or registering a less amount of water than has actually passed through it, the consumer
will be required to pay the correct amount due, as nearly as the same can be ascertained, and in addition shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for
the costs of making such test.
7-1-3-4: ENTRY POWERS:
The Water Superintendent or any person authorized by him, shall, at all reasonable hours in the daytime, have the right to enter into and upon any
premises wherein a water meter may be located in the City for the purpose of reading, inspection, examination, removal, renewal, repairs or testing said
meter.
7-1-3-5: BREAKING SEAL OF WATER METER:
All meters shall be sealed. Any person or persons other than the Water Superintendent or a member of the Water Department who shall break or cause to
be broken any such seal without special permission from such Committee shall be subject to a fine of notless than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such offense.
7-1-4: CONSERVATION MEASURES:
Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City, drought or other public exigency may require it, the Mayor shall have the right and authority, by public
proclamation published in a newspaper in the City or posted in at least five (5) conspicuous places in the City where same may be easily seen and read, to
limit, in respect of time and quantity, the use of City water and, during such time, may wholly suspend and prohibit the use of City water for public or private
fountains, sprinkling or for any purpose except for immediate domestic use until such exigency has passed.
Any person using city water in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord., 4-13-1920)
7-1-5: USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
All fire hydrants or fire plugs now or hereafter installed in the city are declared to be public hydrants and no person, other than the water superintendent or
member of the water department, or a member of the volunteer fire department of the city, shall open any of said hydrants or attempt to draw any water
from them without first obtaining permission of the committee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 306/403
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less then twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord., 4-13-1920)
7-1-6: PROHIBITED ACT, SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHERS:
No water taker or consumer shall supply other persons or families with city water, or suffer them to take water from his service pipes except for temporary
use or for drinking upon the premises where furnished. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, thereby enabling any person or persons
to evade the payment of water rent, shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
upon conviction of such offense, shall have his or her water supply shut off until compliance with this title. (Ord., 4-13-1920; amd. 1989 Code)
7-1-7: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER:
The owner of the premises shall, notwithstanding any arrangement between himself and the actual occupant of the premises or theactual user of such
water, be deemed and held to be the person having taken such water, and such person only shall be held responsible to the city for all water taken or used
in or on his premises. (Ord., 4-13-1920)
7-1-8: AUTHORITY TO SHUT OFF WATER:
In case of fire or an alarm of fire, or in making repairs, or constructing new works, the city reserves the right to shut off the water supply at once without
notice, and keep it shut off as long as may be necessary. (Ord., 4-13-1920)
7-1-9: POWERS OF CITY OFFICIALS:
All powers herein granted to or conferred upon the city treasurer shall at all times be subject to the approval of the city council, and nothing herein
contained shall be construed as divesting the city council of any right or privilege which it may have or enjoy by virtue of any law of the state of Illinois or
the ordinances of the city, but said powers are herein granted for purposes of convenience both to the consumers of city water and the city. (Ord., 4-13-
1920; amd. Ord. 2002-51, 12-9-2002)
7-1-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. For a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the water may be cut off from the premises where furnished to the person so offending and the
penalty provided in this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty herein expressed. (Ord., 4-13-1920)
B. Any person who shall, without authority, turn on the supply of water to any premises from which such supply has been shut off for any of the causes
mentioned in this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (Ord., 4-13-1920; amd. 1989 Code)
Chapter 2
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Regional Administrator of Region V of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees Centigrade (20°C).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the sanitary discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service
connection. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-86)
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive a wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage. (Ord. 1986-23, 12-8-
86)
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial
degree.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and sampling of the wastewater.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS: The concentration of matter in the sewage consisting of colloidal and particulate matter one micron in diameter or less, and both
organic and inorganic molecules and ions present in solution.
FECAL COLIFORM: Organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 307/403
FLOTABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL PLANT: Any facility which discharges industrial wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
INDUSTRY: Any establishment listed in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Division A, B, D, E, or I, three
(3) copies of which are on file in the City Clerk's office.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system and service connections from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes,
pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system and service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard, and area
drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from sprints and swampy areas, manhole lids, cross connections from storm sewers and
combined sewers, catchbasins, storm water, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
INSPECTION MANHOLE: Any accessible manhole that can be used for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and installation of flow meters, and not a
control manhole.
INTERCEPTOR SEWER: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility or as otherwise defined
by the USEPA.
MAJOR INDUSTRY: An industrial user that has (a) a flow greater than fifty thousand (50,000) gpd or more per average work day; or (b) has a flow greater
than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the Municipal system receiving its waste; or (c) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in a toxic amount as defined in
standards issued under section 307 (a) of the Act; or (d) is found by the permit issuance authority in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to
the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact whether singly or in combination with other contributing industries on
that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l): A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It
has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit that is issued by the USEPA setting the limits on constituents that the
permittee may legally discharge.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: All household type discharge from places of human habitation including sanitary conveniences, kitchen and laundry
wastes. Discharge waste strength shall be considered to average 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l suspended solids at a discharge rate of one hundred (100)
gallons per capita per day. This loading equates to 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.21 pounds of suspended solids per capita per day.
pH: The term used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of the hydrogen ion, in grams per liter of solution. Neutral water for example, has a hydrogen ion
concentration of 10-7 and pH value of 7.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT (PE): A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other wastes on a treatment works or stream. One population
equivalent of normal domestic sewage is one hundred (100) gallons per day, or 0.17 pounds of BOD, or 0.21 pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a
treatment works is evaluated as the equivalent of the highest of the three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is the higher of the BOD and suspended
solids parameters.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned industrial sources prior to introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly
owned treatment works, in accordance with 40 CFR, part 128. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-86)
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. (Ord. 1986-23, 12-8-86)
SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.25 centimeters) in any dimension.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY: Any industry that will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the
treatment works.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow which exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the allowable concentration of flows during a normal working day (i.e. 1, 2 or 3 shift
operation) and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-86)
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water. (Ord. 1986-23, 12-8-86)
SURCHARGE: The additional cost over the normal charge for the treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the amounts found in normal
domestic sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in standard methods.
TOTAL SOLIDS: The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
TOXIC AMOUNT (TOXIC POLLUTANT): Concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any
organism will cause adverse effects, as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) or PL 92-500.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 308/403
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-1986)
7-2-2: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Public Purpose: The public purpose is hereby declared to be, to provide for the collection and disposal of domestic and industrial waste in the manner
provided by law for the area serviced by the city; to provide for the collection of a fair and reasonable charge, for connection to or additional use of the
Plano wastewater treatment facilities, in addition to those charges covered by other revenue known as a connection fee. The funds thus collected shall
be used by the city for its general corporate purposes with primary application thereof being made for the necessary construction, expansion,
extension, maintenance and operating costs of the wastewater treatment facilities to meet the requirements of the new users thereof.
B. Application For Connection Permit And Inspection: No connection shall be made to any public sewer and no additional use shall be made of an existing
connection thereto, until an application is properly completed and submitted to the city. Plans and specifications shall be submitted when requested for
approval by the city and the charge paid in full by the applicant to the city prior to the connection. After a connection has been made pursuant to permit
being issued as herein provided, the construction ditch shall be left open until the city has been notified of the connection and the city superintendent in
charge or city engineer has inspected and approved the sewer construction and connection. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-1986)
C. Connection Fees And Unit Charges For Sewage Treatment Plant:
1. Each applicant for connection to or additional use of such sewers shall be given credit for the number of units then being served through an existing
public sewer, at the time the reconstruction or remodeling of the building then served and/or to be served is commenced.
2. "Outlet" means each washbasin, water closet, urinal, shower or any similar plumbing fixture and orifice of any machine, vessel or tank of any kind,
manifolded or singly through which waste may flow into the wastewater facilities.
3. For residential occupancy, the connection charge shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per person ($120.00 per unit) with a minimum
charge being three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per residence.
4. For all purposes other than residential (except industrial), the connection charge shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per person ($120.00
per unit) with the minimum charge being three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per building connection. (Ord. 2003-17, 4-28-2003)
5. For all connections outside the City limits the connection charge shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the rates herein listed.
Use Of Building
Number
Of Units
Residential (Minimum Charge $350.00):
Number Of Persons At
Type Of Dwelling $100.00 Per Person
Single-family31/2
Mobile home31/2
1 bedroom apartment2
Each additional bedroom11/2
2 or more bedroom apartments31/2
Uses Other Than Industrial Or Residential (Minimum Charge $350.00):
Number Of Units At
Use Of Building $100.00 Per Unit
Stores, mercantile and office buildings:
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets2
Each additional outlet1
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets3
Each additional outlet2
Soda fountain 4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 309/403
Grocer stores and meat markets with garbage grinders 4
Drive-in eating establishments where the majority of food purchased is served to or carried to an automobile:
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Kitchens: 3
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Quasi-restaurants and light eating establishments where food and beverages are served in or on paper containers and no
automatic dishwashers are present nor automatic garbage disposals:
Food service capacity:Number Of Persons
0 _ 50
50 _ 100
100 _ 200
2
4
6
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Restaurant:
Food service capacity:Number Of Persons
0 _ 50
50 _ 100
100 _ 200
4
8
12
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Service station and garages:
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Wash rack 4
Clubs, theaters and places of entertainment:
Each public toilet:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 310/403
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Restaurant charge as above:
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Motels and hotels:
Each room with bath or shower and/or toilet 2
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Restaurant charge as above
Mobile trailer parks:
Each trailer space with sanitary sewer outlet 31/2
Each public automatic washer unit 3
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet (if permitted) 1
Each public shower:
With no more than 6 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Laundries:
Each automatic washer unit 2
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Each private toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 2
Each additional outlet 1
Self-service car wash:
Per rack (covered) 2
Per rack (uncovered) 8
Automatic car wash:
Each production line 20
Each public toilet:
With no more than 3 outlets 3
Each additional outlet 1
Nursing homes and hospitals: Resident capacity of each building determined from architect's plans and specifications multiplied by four (4).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 311/403
Dormitories, fraternities and sororities: Resident capacity of each building determined by architect's plans and specifications multiplied by six (6).
Where a building does not fall under one of the above uses, the connection charges shall be determined by combining the applicable units under the
various listings above and multiplying said sum by one hundred dollars ($100.00).
D. Industrial Charges: The industrial charge for new additional producers of industrial waste shall be determined as follows:
1. The city shall estimate the daily pounds of five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), the daily pounds of suspended solids and the daily flow
in gallons of the wastes of the industry discharged to the city sewer system of sewers tributary thereto.
2. The daily pounds of BOD so estimated shall be multiplied by six (6); the daily pounds of suspended solids so estimated shall be multiplied by five (5);
the estimated daily gallons of flow shall be divided by one hundred (100); and these figures shall be averaged to determine the estimated population
equivalent for the industry.
3. The estimated population equivalent of the industry determined as above shall be multiplied by one hundred dollars ($100.00) to determine the
charge for the industry.
4. The minimum charge for a new industry, classified under division D in the standard industrial classification manual shall be seven hundred dollars
($700.00).
5. In the case of industry, each charge shall be reviewed by the city at the end of the first year of operation of said industry and adjusted on the basis of
the annual operation experience and settlement of any additional charge therefor shall be made within three (3) months thereafter. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-
22-1986)
E. Additional City Fees: To allow for the costs primarily attributable to new and additional users and because existing facilities were constructed at the
expense of landowners heretofore connected, the following additional fees are based upon: 1) distance from the sewage disposal system and 2)
density use per acre and other reasonable factors. (Ord. 2001-8, 5-29-2001)
1. Preannexation Sewer Fee: Any land outside the city requiring sewer service that is contiguous to the city must be annexed to the city in order to
utilize the city sewer service. An annexation sewer fee of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per acre shall be charged at the time of the
approval of each final plat of subdivision for lands annexed into the city. Said funds shall be used to help pay the cost of excess capacities provided
by the city in the sewage system. The charge of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per acre is based upon development of annexed and
subdivided land at not to exceed a population equivalent of fifteen (15) people per acre. For each additional person per acre density, the charge shall
be increased one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre. (Ord. 2001-8, 5-29-2001; amd. Ord. 2006-15, 2-27-2006)
2. Building Sewer Inspection Fee: The city superintendent in charge or city engineer shall make inspections to secure compliance with this chapter. The
fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per inspection and shall be payable at the time of receiving the permit. (Ord. 2001-8, 5-29-2001)
7-2-3: SEWER CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
A. Public Purpose: The public purpose of this section is hereby declared to be that all public sewers, building drains and building sewers tributary to and/or
a part of the wastewater treatment facilities of the city will in their construction, operation and expansion be conducive to the public health, comfort and
convenience.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, extend, use, alter or disturb any public sewer without first
obtaining a permit from the City.
2. Each sewer which is designed and is to be connected so as to be an integral part of the sanitary sewer system within the boundaries of the City shall
not be constructed without a permit issued by the City and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as required.
3. An Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit and City permit is required for construction of all sewers and sewer facilities within the jurisdiction
of the City, whether such construction is on private or public property. A permit is also required for existing buildings when the use of such buildings
changes to a use requiring a permit. It is the responsibility of the superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant to administer and enforce the
Chapter within the authority granted by the Council.
4. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
C. Applicable Rules and Regulations: The rules and regulations, ordinances and policies listed herein and issued by the authorities indicated are
incorporated herein by reference.
1. The City of Plano.
a. The Sewer Use Ordinance.
b. The rules, regulations, resolutions, policies, directives, standards, specifications, instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time by
the City Council.
2. Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972 (Public Law 92-500, 33 USC 1251 et seq.).
3. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
a. Environmental Protection Act.
b. Technical releases and other rules and regulations issued from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 312/403
4. "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois", latest edition, three (3) copies of which shall be on file in the City Clerk's
office.
5. "Recommended Standards for Sewage Works", Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers. (Ten State Standards),
latest edition, three (3) copies of which shall be on file in the City Clerk's office.
D. Design Requirements:
1. Minimum Design Standard: The design and construction of sanitary sewers within the jurisdiction of the City shall conform to the most restrictive of
the minimum standards contained in subsection C of this Section.
2. Design Slopes: Minimum design slopes shall be two percent (2%) for four inch (4") sewers and one percent (1%) for six inch (6") sewers with all
other design slopes conforming to the requirements of paragraph D1 of this Section.
3. Manholes: Standard manholes shall be located as required in paragraph D1 of this Section, and for industrial building sewers at the point of
connection to the public sewer system or other place of disposal. For residential and commercial buildings, the City Engineer shall determine the
frequency and location of other manholes. In all cases, the maximum space between manholes on a six inch (6") building sewer shall not exceed two
hundred feet (200').
E. Supplemental Design Requirements:
1. Plumbing: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the building sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer. The basement floor shall be a minimum of three feet (3') above the crown of the receiving sewer for all
gravity service connections.
2. Datum: Datum shall be as indicated by the U.S. Geological Survey.
3. Connection of Building Sewer to Sewer Mains:
a. Construction of building sewers and connections shall be in compliance with the terms and provisions of applicable City ordinances.
b. No sanitary sewer service from any building or structure shall be connected to the City's sanitary sewer system until the following construction has
been completed:
(1) Grade or lower level floor or basement floor completed.
(2) Exterior walls completed including, where applicable, exterior sheathing.
(3) All windows in place including, where applicable, basement windows, if any.
(4) Roof completed including, where applicable, shingles.
c. In the event it is not known whether adequate grade is available from the invert elevation of the sanitary sewer service at the building or structure
to the proposed point of connection to the main sewer, the contractor shall locate and excavate the sanitary service connection which has
previously been extended from the main sewer and shall determine its invert elevation with respect to the proposed building or structure. However,
no connection may be made until the construction has been completed as described in paragraph 3b above.
d. Before backfilling any sanitary service the contractor shall notify the City Superintendent in charge or City Engineer for an inspection to assure
compliance with the foregoing requirements.
e. No person shall hereafter connect to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the City without having first applied for and obtained a sewer connection
permit from the City.
f. No construction permit shall be issued unless it has been determined by the City that there is capacity available in all downstream sewerage
facilities.
g. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new building only when they are found, on examination and test by the City, to meet all
requirements of this Chapter.
h. Minimum design standards and other requirements hereof governing materials, joints, infiltration, workmanship and maintenance for sewer mains
and laterals shall also apply to building sewers. Horizontal and vertical alignment of the building sewer shall be uniform and shall follow a straight
line alignment. There shall be no dips in the grade or fall in the line. Turns and bends required for the riser, if any, or necessary to connect to the
sewer wye or tee, shall be made with standard bends.
i. In those instances where the building sewer is partially constructed from the sewer lateral or main to a point other than the building to be served,
the pipe shall be tightly plugged using a manufactured plug. The plug shall be pre-wired by the manufacturer so that it can be firmly secured in
place.
j. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
k. All excavations for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and flashing lights to protect the public from hazard or
injury. The applicant for a building sewer permit shall deposit with the City Clerk a cash deposit in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) if
no street replacement is involved and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the excavation is in a paved street or alley to insure the proper
restoration of all streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed during the construction. From this deposit shall be deducted the
expense to the City, if any, of the necessary restoration to any streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property not properly restored by the
applicant and the balance amount of deposit shall be returned to the applicant without interest after said work is completed. In addition, a
nonrefundable street opening fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be payable at the time of receiving the permit when it is necessary to
excavate within the paved limits of the street or alley.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 313/403
l. Building sewers shall generally enter the sewer main or lateral by way of an existing wye or tee. If there is not an existing wye or tee than the
connection to the sewer main or lateral shall be made by one of the methods indicated below. If another method is desired, a detail shall be
submitted for review and approval by the City before the connection is made. Indiscriminate breaking of the sewer pipe is not allowed.
(1) Installation of a manhole.
(2) Circular saw-cut of sewer main by proper tools ("sewer-tap" machine or similar), and proper installation of hub wye saddle or hub tee saddle.
(3) Using pipe cutter, neatly and accurately cut out desired length of pipe for insertion of proper fitting. Use "band-seal" or similar coupling, and
shear rings and clamps to fasten the inserted fitting and hold it firmly in place.
4. Extension of Sewers:
a. To provide adequate sewer capacity for possible future connections, any building sewer to which future construction might possibly connect, will
be treated as a sewer extension requiring, at a minimum, an eight inch (8") diameter pipe.
b. Extensions of the lateral system will be constructed so as to extend to the furthest point of the lot and shall be terminated at a manhole.
5. Before any sewer service shall be provided to premises either inside or outside the City, the part requesting said service shall comply with all current
rules, regulations, standards, specifications and ordinances of the City of Plano, including provision of all improvements required therein or otherwise
required by the City.
6. In order to prevent cross-connection of water and sewage systems, and to ensure City supervision of both systems, no sewer service shall be
provided outside the City unless City water is also provided.
7. Unless otherwise decided by the City, all sanitary sewers and water mains, except services, shall become the property of the City. The City shall
have the right to extend lines to serve others without obligation to the previous developer.
8. Infiltration: The maximum allowable infiltration shall in no case exceed two hundred gallons (200) per inch of diameter per mile of sewer per day and
shall not be exceeded between any two (2) manholes. In addition, an air test of the same severity shall be required for all sewers.
9. T.V. Inspection: All sewers constructed under City or EPA permit (8" diameter or larger) shall be subject to closed circuit television inspection upon
completion of the project sewer, witnessed by the Superintendent.
10. Request for Television Inspection: The City shall be notified by the applicant that the system is completed and properly cleaned and prepared for
televising. Two (2) sets of the plan and profile drawings will be required by the City for the purpose of preparing the final T.V. report.
11. Repairs: All defects in materials and/or workmanship noted during inspection shall be repaired by the contractor before release is granted and the
sewer accepted.
12. As-Built Drawings: After final inspection five (5) sets of as-built drawings shall be furnished to the City before final acceptance by the City.
13. Oversize Design: Where required by the City to conform with overall planning of future connections any sewer that is required larger than
necessary to serve the immediate property adequately, an agreement may be made to repay the owner or subdivider the construction cost resulting
from the increased design. Differences in pipe sizes required shall be determined by the City Council. No pipe less than eight inches (8") in diameter
shall be laid by the owner or subdivider. No bids shall be taken or work commenced until such agreement is arrived at in writing with the City.
7-2-4: TERMS OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. Guaranty: Before any construction is begun, or before any permit is issued under this Chapter, the applicant and any party responsible for said
construction shall provide the City with a certified or cashier's check, or a surety bond approved by the City Council in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of the cost of the improvements to assure satisfactory construction, compliance with all City requirements, compliance with the plans
and specifications, and sufficient certificates of insurance that the City will be held harmless and indemnified from all liabilities arising from the
construction. Until final acceptance of the work, the owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of improvements.
B. Approval: All work required to be done under this Chapter by an applicant, be he the owner, subdivider or contractor, shall be periodically inspected by
and approval obtained from the City Superintendent in charge, or City Engineer, as the work progresses. Before final approval can be obtained, the
Superintendent In Charge or City Engineer shall inspect all work and see that same has been completed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
7-2-5: SEWER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Public Purpose: The public purpose of this Section is hereby declared to be:
1. To prevent pollution of the waters of the State of Illinois.
2. To protect, preserve and maintain the facilities of the City by prohibiting or regulating the discharge to the City's sewerage system of inadmissible
wastes or substances toxic to biological wastewater treatment processes.
3. To render the sewage and effluent of the City harmless insofar as is reasonably possible to animal, plant and fish life.
4. To comply with City, State and Federal water quality standards as shall from time to time be in effect.
5. To preserve the public health, comfort and convenience.
B. General:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 314/403
1. No person shall connect or cause to be connected any building or facility on any property or any part thereof to any sewer unless the entire property
shall first be situated within the limits of the City.
2. Any person owning property situated within the corporate limits of the City, which is improved with one or ore residences, houses, buildings or
structures, used or intended to be used for human use, occupancy, employment or any other similar purpose whatsoever, and which property abuts
on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is located a sewer within one hundred feet (100') from the nearest property line shall, within ninety
(90) days after such sewer is in service, at his expense, install suitable toilet and waste disposal facilities therein, and connect such facilities with the
sewer in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter; provided, however, that in the event compliance with this Section causes
economic hardship to said person, he may apply to the City for variance from this Section. Such application shall state in detail the circumstances
which are claimed to cause said economic hardship. Such exemptions shall only be granted to residential users, and shall not apply to commercial
and industrial users.
3. At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the sanitary sewer system within sixty (60) days in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools or similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with a suitable material. "Available" shall be defined herein to mean within a distance of one hundred
feet (100') from said property.
C. Monitoring Requirements:
1. Any connected source, for which the City has determined it to be necessary because of volume of flow and strength or characteristics of the waste,
will be required to install and maintain a control manhole or sampling chamber on each line of discharge to measure and sample the wastewater, at
the owner's expense. Permanent, reliable monitoring equipment shall be installed for all sampling chambers; temporary or portable equipment shall
be installed for all control manholes. Flow measurement shall be recorded on a twenty four (24) hour/day basis, seven (7) days/week/quarterly
periods. Sampling shall be done as prescribed by the City to insure representative quantities for the entire reporting period.
2. For each day that the monitoring station is operable, and sampling is required, personnel will pick up the collected samples, read the flow meter, and
visually inspect the system. Analysis of the collected samples will be done by a certified lab at owner's expense. Any samples obtained shall be
made available to City personnel as requested.
3. During periods of equipment breakdown, malfunction or any other reason, the highest daily values obtained during the previous ninety (90) days may
be applied to each day not monitored.
4. Maintenance of the equipment and operation of the station will be the sole responsibility of the owner.
D. Limitations and Charges:
1. The City shall annually determine and declare the user charge and industrial user surcharge costs for the handling of domestic and nondomestic
pollutants. Table A shall be used to establish the maximum concentration of pollutants that can be discharged. Table B shall be used to determine the
charges for pollutants which are in excess of those found in normal domestic wastes.
TABLE A
Pollutant
Storet
Number
Maximum Concentration
Allowed (mg/l)
Ammonia nitrogen as N 00610 10.00
Arsenic (total) 01002 0.75
Barium (total) 01007 6.00
BOD 00310 200.00
Boron (total) 01020 3.00
Cadmium (total) 01027 1.00
Carbon chloroform extract
(CCE)
32005 200.00
Chloride 00940 300.00
Chromium (total hexavalent) 01032 1.00
Chromium (total trivalent) 01033 3.00
Copper (total) 01042 4.60
Cyanide 00720 0.100*
Fluoride (total) 00951 15.00
Iron (total) 01045 6.00
Iron (dissolved) 01046 1.50
Lead (total) 01051 0.80
Manganese (total) 01055 3.00
Mercury (total) 71900 0.0005
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 315/403
Nickel (total) 01067 3.60
Hexane solubles (total) 00550 50.00
pH 00400 Range 6.00-9.00
Phenols 32730 0.90
Phosphorous as P 00665 10.00
Selenium (total) 01145 3.00
Silver 01077 0.30
Sulfate 00945 300.00
Temperature (°F) 00011 150.00
Zinc (total) 01092 3.40
Total suspended solids 00547 250.00
Total dissolved solids 00515 3,500.00
Total Dissolved Solids (Storet 00515) shall not be increased more than 750 mg/l above background concentration levels unless caused by recycling or
other pollution abatement practices, and in no event shall exceed 3500 mg/l at any time.
The total concentration of zinc (total), copper (total), nickel (total), chromium (total hexavalent) and chromium (total trivalent) in combination shall not
exceed 7.5 mg/l.
*See Rule 703 cyanide of chapter 3, Water Pollution of the Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and Regulations.
TABLE B
Pollutant
Concentration-Domestic
Wastewater
Surcharge
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 200 mg/l See user charge rate ord.
Suspended solids 250 mg/l See user charge rate ord.
2. Compliance with the numerical standards listed in Tables A and B shall be determined on the basis of twenty four (24) hour composite samples
averaged over any consecutive thirty (30) day period. In addition, no more than five percent (5%) of the samples collected shall exceed two and onehalf
(21/2) times the numerical limits prescribed in the above tables.
3. The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be restricted in discharges to Municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment processes or equipment, will not have an adverse effect of the receiving
stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The City will set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In determining the acceptability of a
waste, the City will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated are as follows:
a. Any wastewater or liquid containing petroleum oils, cutting oils, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, products of mineral oil origin or any other
flammable or explosive liquid.
b. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose
of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
c. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City for such materials.
d. Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the City.
e. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
f. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
g. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
h. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 316/403
i. Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or waste in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
E. Pretreatment:
1. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this Section, and which have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
a. Reject the waters or wastes.
b. Require pretreatment to at least the level of normal domestic sewage.
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
d. Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
subsection D of this Section.
2. If the City permits or requires the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the City.
3. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing flotable grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal
of appropriate means of the captured material.
4. Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
F. Measurements and Analyses:
1. Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined by
using the approved method listed in Table 1 of 40 CFR 136.3 which is hereby adopted as the regulation governing all measurements, tests or
analysis of waters and wastes in the City; and it shall be unlawful to perform any measurements, tests or analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes in violation of, or without complying with, those regulations. Copies of such regulations shall be kept on file in the City's office for inspection.
The reference books referred to by the Federal Register are as follows:
a. Standard Methods: Shall mean "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, latest edition, three (3) copies of which are on file in the City Clerk's office.
b. American Society of Testing Materials: Shall mean Annual Book Standards, part 23, Water, Atmospheric Analyses, 1972, available from American
Society of Testing Materials, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19103.
c. EPA Methods: Shall mean Methods for Chemical Analyses of Water Wastes, EPA, Analytical Quality Control Laboratory, Cincinnati, Ohio. This
publication available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C. 20402 (Stock #5501-0067).
G. Sewer Discharge Permits:
1. Requirements, General:
a. Any connected source, discharging a waste to the sewerage system which exceeds one or more of the limits set forth in Table A (subsection D1),
or which discharges twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day, is required to obtain a sewer discharge permit.
b. Any connected source which is required to obtain a sewer discharge permit will, along with the completed application forms, furnish the City with
plans, specifications for treatment works, summaries of design criteria and any other information as the City may reasonably require in order to
determine that the discharge or proposed discharge will be in compliance with all applicable requirements.
c. There shall be no fee for sewer discharge permits.
d. An applicant for a sewer discharge permit shall file an application in accordance with paragraph G2 hereof, on forms provided by the City. Such
forms shall comprise the sewer discharge application forms promulgated by the City for the type of discharge for which a sewer discharge permit is
being sought and such additional information as the City may reasonably require.
2. Application:
a. All applications for a sewer discharge permit as required in paragraph G1 shall contain, where appropriate, the following information and
documents:
(1) A complete description of the volume and nature of the wastewater to be treated, transported or discharged, including a statement as to
presence or absence of all pollutants for which discharge water quality standards are set by this Section.
(2) A statement as to any projected changes in the volume or nature of the wastewater which the applicant desires to have included within the
terms of the permit.
(3) A description of the geographic location of the facility of source, and its interrelation with any existing treatment works, sewer or wastewater
source which will transport, treat or discharge the same wastewater.
(4) Plans and specifications fully describing the design, nature, function and interrelationship of each individual component of the facility or source,
except that the City may waive this requirement for plans and specifications when the application is for a routine renewal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 317/403
(5) A statement identifying and justifying any departure from current design criteria promulgated by the City.
b. The City may adopt procedures requiring such additional information as is necessary to determine whether the wastewater source will meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
c. The City may prescribe the form in which all information required under this Section shall be submitted.
d. Any source required under this Chapter to have a permit must file an application with the City at least ninety (90) days before the date on which
the permit is required.
e. The City shall send written notice of final action taken.
3. Duration of Permits:
a. Sewer discharge permits will be issued for a period of three (3) years commencing on the first day after the applicant has been notified of permit
issuance.
b. The City shall annually review each permit, and may issue automatic renewal permits to those permittees whose wastes and operations have not
significantly changed from the time of the original permit.
4. Tentative Determination and Draft Permit: Following the receipt of a completed application for a sewer discharge permit, the City shall prepare a
tentative determination. Such determination shall include at least the following:
a. A statement regarding whether a sewer discharge permit is to be issued or denied.
b. If the determination is to issue the permit, a draft permit containing the following shall be prepared:
(1) Proposed effluent limitations, consistent with City requirements.
(2) A proposed schedule of compliance, if the applicant is not in compliance with applicable requirements including interim dates and requirements
for meeting the proposed effluent limitations.
(3) A brief description of other proposed special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge.
(4) A statement of the basis for each of the permit conditions listed in paragraph G4b.
(5) If the determination is to deny the permit, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the tentative determination; such notice shall include a
statement for the reason(s) of denial.
(6) A grant of a variance by the City may set forth such conditions, exceptions, time limitations, durations and expirations as the City Council
deems necessary and proper.
5. Permit Removal: Any permittee who wishes to continue to discharge after the expiration date of his sewer discharge permit shall apply for
reissuance of the permit not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the permit. Prior to renewal, the City shall determine:
a. That the permittee is in compliance with or has substantially complied with all terms, conditions, requirements and schedules of compliance of the
expiring sewer discharge permit.
b. That the City has up-to-date information on the permittee's waste treatment practices, the nature, contents and frequency of the permittee's
discharge, either pursuant to the submission of new forms and applications or pursuant to monitoring records and reports submitted to the City by
the permittee.
c. That the discharge is consistent with applicable standards and requirements during the term of the permit.
6. Authority to Deny Permits: No sewer discharge permit may be issued in any case in which:
a. The permit would authorize the discharge of a radiological, chemical or biological warfare agent or high level radioactive waste.
b. The proposed permit is objected to in writing by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to any right to object
given to the administrator under section 402(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Administration.
c. The applicant has not provided proof to the City that he will meet any of the schedules of compliance which may be established in accordance with
this Chapter as a condition of his permit.
d. Any applicant whose discharge of material to the sewer system whether shown upon the application, or determined after inspection and testing by
the City, is not in conformance with Federal, State or City laws, ordinances or rules and regulations unless a variance of such standards and
requirements is granted by the City. The City Council shall state the reason or reasons for denial, or requirement for variance in writing, mailed or
personally delivered to the applicant within five (5) days after denial.
H. Access to Facilities and Further Information: If the City determines that either further information or a site visit is necessary for the City to evaluate a
sewer discharge permit application, it shall notify the applicant and make arrangements to secure the additional information or make a site visit. If
adequate information is not received within the period of time specified by the City, the permit shall either be issued on the basis of the information
currently before the City or be denied, and the applicant so notified. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-86)
The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and USEPA, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The City Engineer or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment. (Ord. 1986-23, 12-8-86)
7-2-6: APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL; VARIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 318/403
A. Any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling on any matter covered by this Chapter and shall be entitled to a
written reply from the City.
B. Any decision of the enforcing officers in the enforcement of this Chapter may be appealed and a request for a variance therefrom made to the Board of
Zoning Appeals by filing a written petition with the Clerk of the City within thirty (30) days of the enforcement officer's ruling. Said petition shall specify in
detail the matter or matters involved and the hardship or practical difficulty causing the need for variance. The filing of a petition in accordance with the
requirements herein shall stay all proceedings.
C. The city council shall direct the board of zoning appeals to fix a reasonable time for hearing of the petition or appeal and give due notice of the time and
place of said hearing to parties named in the petition as attorney or spokesman.
D. The hearing shall be open to the public. Petitioners shall be given full opportunity to present evidence in support of their petition after which the city
superintendent in charge or city engineer may present evidence in support of his decision.
E. The board of zoning appeals shall recommend the granting or denial of the appeal or variance to the city council in the manner provided by law. (Ord.
1986-16, 9-22-1986)
7-2-7: VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this agreement when it has been determined that the
permittee has violated the connections or provisions of such permit or of this chapter.
B. Any violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter is hereby declared by the city council to be a public nuisance.
C. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense; and for each
subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) to be recovered in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
D. For each and every day that any person shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter, such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense.
E. The attorney for the city is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all proceedings, suits and actions necessary to collect
any and all fines and penalties herein provided for and is also hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all suits at law or in
equity as may be appropriate or necessary to prevent unlawful connections to the city wastewater treatment facilities in violation of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 1986-16, 9-22-1986)
Chapter 3
STORMWATER DRAINAGE; DRIVEWAYS AND CULVERTS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-14, 4-25-2016)
Chapter 4
RATES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE
SYSTEM
7-4-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. Waterworks And Sewerage System Rates And Charges: There shall be and there are hereby established rates or charges for the use of and service
supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city based upon the amount of water consumed, as shown by the water meters, as
follows: (Ord. 1996-6, 3-18-1996; amd. Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011)
STANDARD WATER AND SEWER
BIMONTHLY RATES/CHARGES
Water Sewer1
March 1, 2011, through February 29, 2012 (bill issued May 1, 2011, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) $14.42 $23.69
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 319/403
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 3.11 3.87
March 1, 2012, through February 28, 2013 (bill issued May 1, 2012, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 14.85 24.40
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 3.55 4.57
March 1, 2013, through February 28, 2014 (bill issued May 1, 2013, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 15.30 25.13
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 4.05 5.26
March 1, 2014, through February 28, 2015 (bill issued May 1, 2014, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 15.30 25.13
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 4.05 5.26
March 1, 2015, through February 29, 2016 (bill issued May 1, 2015, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 16.23 26.66
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 5.18 5.74
March 1, 2016, through February 28, 2017 (bill issued May 1, 2016, or thereafter):
First 2,000 gallons (minimum charge) 16.72 27.46
Over 2,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 5.85 5.97
Note:
1.The rates and charges for sewer service are based upon the number of gallons of water used.
(Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-9, 3-24-2014)
SENIOR CITIZENS' (AGE 62 AND OVER1) WATER
AND SEWER BIMONTHLY RATES/CHARGES
Water Sewer1
March 1, 2011, through February 29, 2012 (bill issued May 1, 2011, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) $14.42 $23.69
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 3.11 3.87
March 1, 2012, through February 28, 2013 (bill issued May 1, 2012, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 14.85 24.40
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 3.55 4.57
March 1, 2013, through February 28, 2014 (bill issued May 1, 2013, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 15.30 25.13
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 4.05 5.26
March 1, 2014, through February 28, 2015 (bill issued May 1, 2014, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 15.30 25.13
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 4.05 5.26
March 1, 2015, through February 29, 2016 (bill issued May 1, 2015, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 16.23 26.66
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 5.18 5.74
March 1, 2016, through February 28, 2017 (bill issued May 1, 2016, or thereafter):
First 4,000 gallons (minimum charge) 16.72 27.46
Over 4,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallons, or part thereof 5.85 5.97
Note:
1.The rates and charges for sewer service are based upon the number of gallons of water used.
(Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-9, 3-24-2014; Ord. 2014-12, 4-14-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 320/403
B. Rates Commencing March 1, 2017: In the event that the city council has not taken action to amend or revise by ordinance the water and sewer rates
set forth above, the rates or charges set forth for the period March 1, 2016 through February 28, 2017, in subsection A of this section shall apply
commencing March 1, 2017 and thereafter. (Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011)
C. Qualifications For Senior Citizens' Rates And Charges: To qualify for the senior citizens' (age 62 and over) rates and charges, the user must present to
the city clerk evidence of the following:
1. Age (62 years of age or older);
2. Proof of residence in the city of Plano, Illinois;
3. Proof of occupancy of the residence in the city of Plano, Illinois.
Proof of age shall be in the form of a birth certificate, a valid Illinois driver's license showing the Plano residence address or a current Illinois issued
picture identification showing the Plano residence address.
Proof of residency shall be in the form of a current bill from another utility company showing the user's name and the Plano address or a current
statement from a credit card company, bank or similar business, showing the user's name and Plano residence address.
The reduced senior citizens' rate shall apply only to residential users and shall not apply to any commercial or industrial users. (Ord. 2014-12, 4-14-
2014)
D. Outside Corporate Limits: Users of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city whose premises are located outside of the corporate
limits of the city shall have fifty percent (50%) added to their bills.
E. Amendment Of Rates By Ordinance: Said rates or charges may hereafter be amended, from time to time, by ordinance duly adopted by the city council
amending the same. (Ord. 1996-6, 3-18-1996; amd. Ord. 2007-12, 3-12-2007; Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011)
F. Charge For Construction Use Of Water: For construction water usage for all new construction there shall be a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per month from the time of excavation until such time that the meter is installed and actual water usage can be determined. This fee shall be billed to
the building permit applicant or property owner. No certificate of final occupancy shall be issued until the aforementioned charges are paid in full. (Ord.
2002-51, 12-9-2002; amd. Ord. 2007-12, 3-12-2007; Ord. 2011-1, 1-10-2011)
7-4-2: LIABILITY FOR SERVICE; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
A. Said rates or charges for the use of and service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city shall be payable bimonthly on
the twentieth day following the mailing of the bill. Water service accounts shall be kept in the name of the owner of the property serviced and only such
owner shall be recognized as the consumer. All property owners who hold property out for lease shall notify the city of any properties they hold out for
lease and shall ensure that all water service accounts for those properties are in the property owner's name.
Property owners who hold property out for lease at the time of passage hereof shall notify the city before April 1, 2009, of any properties they hold out
for lease and shall make arrangements to move the water service accounts for said properties into the property owner's name before that date. (Ord.
2009-6, 2-9-2009)
All bills for service shall be rendered as the first day of the second month succeeding the period for which the service is supplied, and shall be payable
not later than the twentieth day following the mailing of said bill to the owner as reflected by the records of the office of the city collector of the city. If
payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within said twenty (20) day period, then a penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the amount
billed shall be added to the bill. (Ord. 2017-1, 1-9-2017)
B. In the event that the payment of the user charge, after having been billed in accordance with this chapter, remains unpaid, termination procedures as
required by section 7-6-19 of this title shall be followed.
C. No person, either owner or tenant, who, in changing his residence from one location to any other location served by the water department, shall be
given water service until any and all delinquent water charges which are charged against him at his former place of residence shall have been paid in
full, and no water at the new location shall be turned on and, if so, the same shall be turned off until settlement of such delinquent water charges at the
former location is made. A charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for turning on water and renewing service shall be made, in addition to the payment of the
delinquent water charges.
D. Rates for services described herein shall be applicable for all services supplied, at the specified rates, as more fully set forth in this chapter, and as
amended from time to time. (Ord. 2004-26, 6-28-2004)
7-4-3: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
A. In the event the charges for the service are not paid when due, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter
such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and the city clerk is hereby authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of Kendall County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements
shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such service. (Ord. 1993-18, 6-28-1993)
B. If the rates or charges for service are not paid when due, such service shall be discontinued in accordance with the termination procedures set forth in
chapter 6 of this title, and such service shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, including all penalties thereon, shall be paid in full together with a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 321/403
reinstatement charge of a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for reinstating such service. (Ord. 1993-18, 6-28-1993; amd. Ord. 2004-26, 6-28-2004)
7-4-4: RENDITION OF BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the city collector or, in her absence, the city clerk, to render bills for service and for all rates and charges, including penalties,
in connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon. In the event a bill for services hereunder remains unpaid and is thereafter submitted to a
collection agency or collection service for collection, then there shall be added to said bill the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) representing a collection fee.
Furthermore, in the event that a check received by the city in payment of the charges imposed by this chapter is returned for insufficient funds or by reason
of the account upon which the same is drawn being closed, an additional service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be added to the unpaid bill.
(Ord. 1988-13, 6-13-1988; amd. 1989 Code; Ord. 2004-26, 6-28-2004)
7-4-5: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
A. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the city collector separate and
apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and all of said sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
delivered to the city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the city council. (Ord. 1988-13, 6-13-1988; amd. 1989 Code)
B. The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage
fund of the city of Plano", and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1988-13, 6-13-1988)
7-4-6: BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage system. (Ord. 1988-13, 6-
13-1988)
Chapter 5
WATER IMPROVEMENTS AND EXTENSIONS
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
The public purpose of this chapter is that the water well and pump systems and the water distribution systems throughout the city, in their operation and
expansion, conduce to the better preservation of the public health, comfort and convenience of the community if certain required improvements be made
to the existing plants and main line systems. (Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-2: ACCOMPLISHING PURPOSE:
The above can best be accomplished by the establishment of an improvement fund which should be acquired in a fair and equitable way from landowners
within the corporate limits of the city, taking into consideration the fact that the existing improvement facilities were constructed at the expense of certain
landowners within the city. Connection fees to the city systems should be charged in proportion to the benefits received. It is the determination of the city
council to provide for depreciation and obsolescence of the main line facilities and all other facilities and appurtenances of the city water system by the
establishment of this fund and the contributions thereto in a fair and equitable manner proportionate to the benefits gained. (Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-3: WATER CONNECTION AND INSPECTION FEES:
A. Scope: The connection and inspection fees provided herein shall include the fees of the city designated or designed to cover the cost of the issuance of
a permit and inspection of the physical connection to the city system.
B. Categories: For the public purpose announced in this chapter, it is determined by the city council that connection fees provided for in this section shall
be charged on the basis of four (4) categories, which are herewith defined asfollows:
1. Single-Family Dwelling: A "single-family dwelling" is a structure designed for occupation by any family or any number of persons related by blood or
marriage, or not to exceed five (5) persons not so related by blood or marriage, using common living facilities.
2. Multiple-Family Dwelling: A "multiple-family dwelling" is any structure designed for occupation or use by more than a single-family unit as determined
herein, whether or not said structure is divided into separate units for separate family occupation, and specifically excluding therefrom public
buildings described in subsection B4 of this section.
3. Industrial Or Commercial Establishments: An "industrial or commercial establishment" is any structure, plant, warehouse or other building designed
for the purpose of conducting business, whether the same be manufacturing, wholesale or retail, and including all those structures not defined in
subsections B1, B2 and B4 of this section.
4. Public Buildings: A "public building" is a building to be used by the public for religious, educational, or charitable purposes, including, but not limited
to, schools, churches and hospitals. (Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 322/403
C. Fees Established: No permit shall be issued by the city for the connection of any structures as described in subsection B of this section unless and until
connection fees in accordance with the schedule hereinafter following shall have been paid:
1. Water Connections:
a. Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per single-family dwelling.
b. Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) for each living unit within a multiple-family dwelling.
c. Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per each industrial or commercial establishment. For the purposes of this subsection, each
industrial or commercial unit contained within a single building or structure shall be deemed to constitute a separate industrial or commercial
establishment for which a separate or additional water connection and inspection fee shall be paid.
d. Two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) for each public building.
2. Additional Connection Charges: In lieu of the charges hereinabove set forth in subsection C1 of this section, for the installation of a water service
greater than one inch (1"), the applicant or property owner shall pay the following charge or charges:
11/2 inch water service line $2,400.00
2 inch water service line 4,800.00
3 inch water service line 7,200.00
(Ord. 2003-18, 4-28-2003)
3. Water Meter Fee:
a. Effective as of May 1, 2005, four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for all water connections specified in subsection C1 of this section, where the size
of the water line does not exceed one inch (1") diameter. Upon payment of the water meter fee, the city shall provide to the applicant or property
owner a water meter approved for use in the city. (Ord. 2004-17, 4-26-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-16, 3-28-2005)
b. For all water connections in excess of one inch (1") diameter, the fee shall be based on the city's actual cost of the water meter plus fifteen percent
(15%) to cover shipping and handling costs. (Ord. 2004-17, 4-26-2004)
4. Regular Tap Fees: For water connections where the water line does not exceed one inch (1") diameter, the city shall provide the labor and material
to complete the physical tap into the city water main and shall provide a water shutoff device (buffalo box) approved for use in the city. All labor or
machine hire incident to excavation to expose the city water main shall be at the sole expense of the applicant or property owner. All other labor and
materials, including excavation restoration and water lines from the service connection to the structure shall be at the sole cost and expense of the
applicant or property owner.
5. Additional Tap Fees: For all water connections in excess of one inch (1") diameter, the applicant or property owner shall provide all labor and
material to complete the physical tap into the city water main and shall provide, at its sole cost and expense, a water shutoff device (buffalo box)
approved for use in the city.
6. Fire Sprinkler Connections: In addition to any other charges set forth in the foregoing subsections of this subsection C or any other charges set forth
in this chapter, no permit shall be issued from the city for a fire sprinkler connection to any structure as described in subsection B of this section
unless and until a fire sprinkler connection fee in accordance with the following schedule has been paid:
6 inch fire sprinkler service $ 360.00
8 inch fire sprinkler service 600.00
10 inch fire sprinkler service 840.00
12 inch fire sprinkler service 1,080.00
7. Water Connection Inspection Fee: The director of public works or his agent shall make inspections to secure compliance with this chapter. The fee
shall be forty dollars ($40.00) and shall be payable at the time of receiving the permit. (Ord. 2003-18, 4-28-2003)
7-5-4: CONNECTIONS TO WATER SYSTEM:
A. Any connection made to the city water distribution system shall be made under a permit pursuant to reasonable rules and regulations covering
materials, manner of connection and time of connection as are set forth by the director of public works and the superintendent of streets of the city; and
in the interest of public health and the prohibition of infiltration and foreign matter, these rules shall provide for substantially watertight and rootproof
connections.
B. The director of public works or his agent shall make the physical connection, except as hereinbefore provided, but all property owners shall furnish all
materials necessary for such connections. No expense shall be incurred by the city for materials incident to such connections.
C. No water lines of the city shall be extended on private property to distribute water to or from any premises other than that for which the application has
been made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 323/403
D. For any connection larger than one inch (1") for which the applicant shall furnish the equipment for the physical connection, said connection shall not be
made unless the director of public works, or his agent, is present.
E. The city council does herewith determine the date of connection to be that date when connection is made to the existing water distribution system of the
city. (Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-5: PERFORMANCE BOND:
The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk a cash performance bond for damages to parkways and streets caused by installing water or sewer
connections in accordance with the following schedule:
A. If the connection requires a cut into or across an existing street: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. If the connection requires a cut from the property line through the parkway, but not into an existing street: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. All cuts shall be made in accordance with the recommendations and guidelines of the city council and the director of public works of the city. All cuts
shall be waterjetted and on curb and guttered streets shall, upon restoration, be bridged with concrete eight inches (8") thick.
D. All performance bonds required herein shall be deposited in advance of making any cuts or connections and shall be returned to the applicant upon
repair to the parkway and/or street to the satisfaction of the director of public works. Provided, however, that the city shall have the right to retain any
such performance bond or performance bonds for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to completion of the connection to ensure that
all repairs made to the parkway and/or street or streets subsequent to connection have been made in a substantial and complete manner. If, upon
reinspection during said one hundred eighty (180) day period, the director of public works shall determine that additional repairs are necessary, written
notice of the necessity of such additional repairs shall be given to the applicant affording the applicant a period of thirty (30) days in which to make
additional repairs as needed. Upon completion of such additional repairs, the performance bond shall be returned to the applicant; provided, however,
that in the event such repairs are not made within said thirty (30) day period and, provided further, that no extension of time has been granted for the
making of said repairs, then the performance bond or bonds hereunder shall be forfeited and shall be retained by the city. (Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-6: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Creation, Administration: The city council does herewith create a capital improvement category within each applicable fund to establish and maintain a
reserve for capital improvements. The reserve funds shall be administered by the city treasurer in the same manner as the treasurer administers other
monies of the city, the security of which said monies shall be under appropriate bond of the treasurer.
B. Disposition Of Monies: All connection fees collected hereunder shall be kept by the treasurer within the capital improvement category of each applicable
fund and said monies shall be used only for the construction and/or maintenance of improvements to the city water and sewer plant and/or the
intercepter sewer or main lines of the city systems as it is now or shall in the future be constituted; provided, however, that in the event bonds are in the
future issued by the city council for the installation of the improvements above described, whether the bonds be issued after referendum, by order of
court of competent jurisdiction, or by order of an administrative agency of the state of Illinois or the federal government, these said bonds and interest
accruing thereon can, from time to time, be retired by the monies available in said capital improvement reserve fund by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-7: TAMPERING WITH WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city water or sewer system, or any water meter.
(Ord. 2002-48, 12-9-2002)
7-5-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
The violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter is herewith declared by the city council to be a public nuisance.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense; and for each
subsequent offense, shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be recovered by any
court of competent jurisdiction. For each and every day that any person or party shall violate or fail to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter, such person or party shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all proceedings, suits and actions necessary to collect any and
all fines and penalties herein provided for and is hereby authorized and empowered to institute and prosecute any and all suits at law or in equity as may
be appropriate or necessary to prevent unlawful connections to the city water and sewer systems in violation of the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-48,
12-9-2002)
Chapter 6
SEWER USER CHARGES
7-6-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 324/403
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to adhere to the requirements of title 40, protection of the environment chapter 1, environmental protection
agency, subchapter B, grants, part 35, state and local assistance, final grant regulation, section 35.925-11 effective February 11, 1974, issued pursuant to
the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, or such requirements as amended from time to time. References to section 35 hereinafter
refer to the appropriate subsection of these federal requirements. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM:
After the 1985 tax levy year, the City shall discontinue levying any ad valorem tax historically used for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the
works of the system, and in lieu thereof shall assess to all users in accordance with the provisions set forth below, a user charge.
7-6-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF A METHOD OF PROCEDURE:
The City Council shall continue under the applicable State of Illinois Statutes to follow the levy procedures for the revenue necessary for the retirement of
general obligation bond principal and interest payments, public benefit funds, and for any other purpose provided by law not related to the operation,
maintenance and replacement of the works of the system. Similarly, connection charges shall continue to be assessed in the manner provided, or to be
provided for in the ordinances of the City as shall all other rates, charges and fees of the City heretofore or hereafter established by the City. This Chapter
shall not affect the power of the City in respect to special assessments.
7-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in subsection 35.905 of the aforesaid Federal Regulations, are hereby incorporated herein, and specifically included as further
definitions of the terms used in this Chapter. "User Charge" for the purpose of this Chapter shall be the user charge established by this Chapter as defined
in section 35.905-26. It shall be deemed that there is no duplication of charges made hereunder or any charges made under any other ordinances of the
City which may coincidentally refer to the term "user charge". The charges assessed hereunder are specifically a substitute for that portion of ad valorem
tax revenue previously used for operation, maintenance and replacement as provided by the Federal Regulations and the Comptroller General's
interpretation thereof.
The following definitions shall apply for this Chapter:
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): That amount of oxygen expressed in milligrams per liter utilized in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Centigrade (20o C) for biochemical oxidation of the organic matter present in wastewater.
CITY: The City of Plano and all territory within the perimeter of the City's service and jurisdictional boundaries.
COMPOSITE TWENTY FOUR HOUR SAMPLER: A sampling device approved by the City capable of being installed in a sampling manhole and capable
of taking flow proportioned wastewater samples over a continuous twenty four (24) hour period.
FLAT RATE ESTIMATES: The water estimated to be used, or to have been used, by a structure not equipped with a water meter. Such estimate shall be
based upon the City's analysis of comparable structures with similar uses and similar number of occupants.
FLOW METER: A fluid measuring device approved by the City capable of being installed in a sampling manhole and capableof registering continuous flow
rates over a seven (7) day period.
INFILTRATION: Extraneous waters entering a sewer system.
INFLOW: Extraneous waters discharged into a sewer system. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-86)
INDUSTRIAL USER: All users as defined in Section 7-2-1 of this Title.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary waste. (Ord. 1986-18, 9-22-86)
MAINTENANCE: All manner of activity necessary including labor, supply, contract repair work and administration requirements to maintain the works
assets and property of the City for the purpose of insuring its continued and uninterrupted operation.
NONINDUSTRIAL USER: All users not specifically defined as industrial users, and shall include the following defined categories:
A. Commercial User: Includes transit loading, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
B. Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated with Federal, State and local governments.
C. Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-86)
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTE: All household type of discharges from places of human habitation including sanitary conveniences, kitchen and laundry
wastes. Discharge waste strength shall be considered to average 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l suspended solids at a discharge rate of one hundred (100)
gallons per capita per day. This loading equates to 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.21 pounds of suspended solids per capita per day. (Ord. 1986-18, 9-22-86)
OPERATION: All manner of activity necessary including labor, electrical power, fuel chemicals, supplies and administrative requirements properly to
conduct the functions of collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of wastewater generated within the City.
PRIVATE WATER METER: An existing water meter or a meter required to be installed by this Chapter on any privately owned water supply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 325/403
PUBLIC WATER METER: The water meter installed within the water piping system of any building by a municipality as defined in section 35.905-14 having
jurisdiction over water supplies.
REPLACEMENT: The provision for and the installation of replacement equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service
life of the works of the system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
SAMPLING MANHOLE: A structure at least four feet (4') in diameter installed in the building service line accessible to City personnel and being capable of
housing a flow meter and a composite twenty four (24) hour sampler. The construction of such a manhole shall be approved by the City.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Filterable solids expressed in milligrams per liter, contained in wastewater.
USEFUL or SERVICE LIFE: The period of time that a particular component of the works of the system can reasonably be expected to perform the function
intended in its design before replacement or extensive rehabilitation is required.
WORKS OF THE SYSTEM: All intercepter sewers of the City as defined in section 35.905-12; sewage collection system of the City as defined in section
35.905-23.
7-6-5: ANTICIPATED COSTS; OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT:
A. Prior to the close of each fiscal year, the City, through its employees and staff, shall prepare an estimate of anticipated costs of operation, maintenance
and replacement and renewals of real and personal property. Such estimate of anticipated costs shall be prepared in accordance with and based upon
generally accepted accounting principles. The initial estimate of anticipated costs shall be based upon the prior year's costs of operation, maintenance
and replacement, and the initial charge shall be fixed by ordinance.
B. The estimate of anticipated costs shall be submitted to the City Council and shall be considered and amended if necessary and shall be adopted by the
City Council for the subsequent year by ordinance.
7-6-6: USE BASE:
There shall be submitted to the City Council, simultaneously with the estimate of anticipated costs, the individual components and summary total of the
following parameters determined from data recorded during the previous fiscal year:
A. The component quantities and totals of yearly water useobtained from public water meter readings and flat rate estimates.
B. The component quantities and totals of the yearly water use obtained from private water meter readings.
C. The yearly infiltration and inflow quantities received by the works of the system and processed through the wastewater treatment facilities.
D. The total water discharge to the works of the system (and percentage of total) obtained by adding the quantities determined in A and B above.
E. The yearly total quantities of BOD and suspended solids received by the works of the system and processed through the wastewater treatment
facilities.
7-6-7: DECLARATION OF COSTS:
Not less than biennially, the City Council shall determine and declare for purposes of adopting or amending the user charge rate ordinance, the following:
A. The projected yearly costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the proportion of the works of the system attributable to wastewater volume
(flow).
B. The projected yearly costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the proportion of the works of the system attributable to BOD and suspended
solids (strength).
7-6-8: DECLARATION OF USE:
A. Not less than biennially, the City Council shall determine and declare for purposes of adopting or amending the user charge rate ordinance, the use
based on volume (and percentage of total thereof) obtained by the addition of the total wastes discharged as determined in subsection 7-6-6D above.
B. Similarly, the City Council shall determine and declare the use based on strength (and percentage of total thereof) obtained by multiplying the yearly
total quantities of BOD and suspended solids (determined in subsection 7-6-6E above) by the percentage of total wastewater discharged (determined
in subsection 7-6-6D above).
7-6-9: DECLARATION OF COST DISTRIBUTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 326/403
A. Not less than biennially the City Council shall determine and declare for purposes of adopting or amending the user charge rate ordinance, the
distribution of costs obtained by multiplying the waste flow-related costs determined insubsection 7-6-7A above by the percentage of use based on
volume for each category as determined in subsection 7-6-8A above.
B. Similarly, the City shall determine and declare the distribution of costs obtained by multiplying the waste strength-related costs determined in subsection
7-6-7B above by the percentage of use based on strength for each category as determined in subsection 7-6-8A above.
C. The sum of the costs obtained in subsections A and B above shall constitute the total operation, maintenance and replacement cost for the forthcoming
fiscal year, and shall be declared as such by the City Council in the user charge rate ordinance.
7-6-10: USER RATES, UNIT COSTS:
Not less than annually, the City Council shall further determine the user charge cost per unit of measurement applicable to each user as follows:
A. The user charge unit costs shall be calculated by dividing the yearly total operation, maintenance and replacement costs (determined in subsection 7-6-
9C above) by the total water used (the sum of subsections 7-6-6A and 6B above) and shall be expressed in dollars per thousand gallons ($/1,000 gal.)
of water use.
B. Application of the rates determined in subsection A above shall be based on the assumption that wastes discharged by an individual user shall have, as
a minimum, the characteristics of normal domestic sewage (see Section 7-6-4, Definitions), thereby precluding negative or less than base charges for
weak strength wastes.
If the new rate or rates determined in subsection A above are different from the then current rate(s), the City Council shall amend the user charge
rate ordinance by rescinding the applicable current rate(s) and establishing the new rate(s).
7-6-11: COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
The wastewater service charge can be computed by the following formula:
CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X) CU + CS
Where CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period.
CD = Debt Service Charge
CM = Minimum Charge for Operation, Maintenance and Replacement
Vu = Wastewater Volume for the billing period
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
CU = Basic User Rate for Operation, Maintenance and Replacement
CS = Amount of Surcharge.
7-6-12: SURVEILLANCE AND ACCOUNTING:
Under the provisions of this Chapter and the applicable provisions contained within the sewer user ordinance, the City shall:
A. Exclude certain industrial contaminants or wastes from the works of the system.
B. Require industrial waste pretreatment where necessary.
C. Establish permits with industries to control discharges limited by the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit(s).
D. Establish permits with industries to maintain discharge controls.
E. Verify industrial waste data furnished by industries.
7-6-13: REVENUES:
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All such
revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart from her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City
and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and Council. The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to her and deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the City of Plano". Said Treasurer shall administer such Fund in every respect in the manner
provided by statute.
7-6-14: ACCOUNTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 327/403
The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals she shall cause to be made an audit by anindependent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this report, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
A. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for current fiscal year.
B. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
C. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
D. Number of users connected to the system.
E. Number of nonmetered users.
F. A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and volume of waste discharged.
7-6-15: NOTICE OF RATES; RATES ESTABLISHED:
A. Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to
wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
B. Until such time as rescinded by amendment, there is imposed upon all users of the service of the city, including, without limitation, all users of the
sewers which are tributary to the system, a user charge rate as set forth in section 7-4-1 of this title.
C. Until such time as rescinded by amendment, there is imposed upon all industrial users of the service of the city system, including, without limitation, all
industrial users of the sewers which are tributary to the system, a user surcharge rate which shall be as follows:
$0.37 per pound of BOD over and above normal domestic waste and $0.33 per pound of suspended solids over and above normal domestic waste.
(Ord. 1986-18, 9-22-1986)
7-6-16: INSTALLATION OF SAMPLING MANHOLES, FLOW METERS AND COMPOSITE SAMPLERS:
After the effective date hereof, each industrial user and certain commercial users, where required by the city and within ninety (90) days of notice, shall
install a sampling manhole and/or sampling station complete with flow meter and composite twenty four (24) hour sampler on each building service line so
designated by the city. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-17: INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS ON PRIVATE SUPPLIES:
Within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof all nonindustrial users, other than single-family residences, not having a water meter in their source
of water supply shall be required to install and maintain, at their own expense, a water meter approved by the city between the well and/or other source of
supply and the plumbing system of such building.
Any single-family user on a flat rate may, at his own expense, install and maintain a water meter approved by the city and thereafter shall be charged on
the basis of the meter, and not the flat rate. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-18: MANNER OF COLLECTION:
All user charges levied under the provisions herein shall be liens upon the real estate upon or for which sewage service is supplied, as provided by Illinois
statute; provided, however, such liens shall not attach to such real estate until such charges have become delinquent, as provided by this chapter. For
purposes of this provision, a charge shall be determined delinquent twenty (20) days after the billing has been mailed.
In addition to any other method of collection as herein provided or as is provided by law, the city shall also have the power, from time to time, to sue the
occupant or user of the real estate involved in a civil action to recover money due for sewerage services plus a reasonable attorney fee to be fixed by the
court.
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter and the user charge rate ordinance, the city shall commence implementation of the billing
procedure, wherein all users shall receive bimonthly statements indicating the water use date. Each billing shall be due upon mailing. A service charge of
ten percent (10%) shall be added to the bill if not paid within twenty (20) days after mailing. Bills for single users with multiple water meters or flow meters
shall be considered as one bill, and if any portion thereof is unpaid, the entire amount shall be considered as delinquent. In the event that any user fails to
pay the billed charge for twenty (20) days after the due date, the city may proceed to terminate service and serve termination notice upon such user, as
provided below. (Ord. 2004-26, 6-28-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 328/403
7-6-19: TERMINATION PROCEDURES:
In the event that any individual, corporation, partnership or other person or other legal entity whose residence or other building is connected to sewers
which are tributary to the works of the system fails to pay the user charges as assessed under this chapter of the city, they shall, upon due process, be
disconnected pursuant to the following procedures:
A. Bills Unpaid: In the event that the payment of the user charge, after having been billed in accordance with this chapter, remains unpaid, on the twenty
first day, a second bill will be mailed assessing the ten percent (10%) service charge.
In the event the payment of the user charge remains unpaid for thirty (30) days, a disconnection tag will be hung on the building being served by the
city with the following notice and a twenty dollar ($20.00) service charge will be assessed:
Water and Sewer User Charges billed to you under
Date:
are delinquent and service will be disconnected on
Date:
B. Reinstatement Of Service: In the event of severance of service, the service may be reinstated upon payment to the city of the full delinquency, plus
service charges and the cost to the city of the disconnection of the building service line to the works of the system. Such reconnection costs (minimum
charge $50.00); plus inspection fees for the city in accordance with city ordinances, shall be at the sole expense of the user.
C. Effective Date Of Rates: Rates for services described herein shall be applicable for all services supplied, at the specified rates, as more fully set forth in
this chapter, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 2004-26, 6-28-2004)
7-6-20: INSPECTION AND METER READING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
From and after the effective date hereof, the city shall have the right to enter upon private property to take water meter readings and to take flow meter
readings and composite samples from meters and samplers installed therein. In the event of a refusal to permit city personnel upon private property, they
shall seek the assistance of the police department and shall make the inspection accompanied by such officer. Failure to permit such meter readings to be
made shall constitute grounds for termination of service. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-21: USER CHARGE RATE ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS:
The city council, may at any time amend and increase the aforesaid charges to provide additional revenue to defer costs not known or anticipated at the
time of preparation of the latest estimate of anticipated costs; except, however, if at such time as the council has determined that funds allocated in the
latest estimate of anticipated costs will not be expended for items originally intended, either in full or in part, the unexpended funds may be allocated to the
new or increased cost to the extent possible before increasing the charges theretofore established. User charge rate ordinance amendments shall be
implemented and reflected in the next subsequent billing. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-22: CONNECTION CHARGES:
Connection charges shall continue to be collected in the manner provided for in the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
7-6-23: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The USEPA, or its authorized representative, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city whichare applicable to the city
system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
federal regulations and conditions of the federal grant. (Ord. 1986-17, 9-22-1986)
Chapter 7
UTILITY SERVICE
7-7-1: UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSIT:
A. Deposit Required: A utility service deposit of sixty dollars ($60.00) shall be made by any resident or occupant of the City who or which is not the owner
of the premises in which he or it resides or which he or it occupies as a tenant.
B. Change in Occupancy: Upon notification of a change in occupancy, the City Collector shall cause a copy of this Chapter to be presented to the tenant,
either in person or by mail, and shall require payment by the occupant or tenant of the utility service deposit prior to the occupancy of the premises.
The utility service deposit shall be held by the City Treasurer to insure the payment of water, sewer and garbage disposal fees imposed by the City and
billed to the occupant or tenant. The monies collected shall be held in a separate account and shall be used for no other purpose. All interest accrued
on this account shall be reinvested by the City Treasurer to defray uncollected accounts in excess of the deposit amount. No interest shall accrue to the
depositor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 329/403
C. Credit and Refund of Deposit: The utility service deposit, less any amount then due to the City for water, sewer or garbage disposal service, will be
refunded to the tenant or occupant upon the discontinuance of the depositor's tenancy or occupancy. In the event all water, sewer and garbage
disposal service fees are paid when due for a period of two (2) years, the said deposit will be credited to the account of the depositor in proportion to
the ratio between water and sewer rates in effect in the City at that time, notwithstanding the continuance of the depositor's tenancy or occupancy.
D. Delinquent Accounts: The City Collector is hereby authorized to apply all or so much of said deposit as shall be necessary to pay any bill for water,
sewer and garbage disposal service which shall remain delinquent for more than ninety (90) days after rendition thereof. Upon notice of such
application of the utility service deposit, the tenant or occupant shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to pay any outstanding balance and to
restore the utility service deposit to the sixty dollar ($60.00) amount and, upon failure to so do shall be subject to discontinuance of water, sewer and
garbage disposal service in accordance with this Title.
E. Change of Service Within City: It shall be under the discretion of the City Collector whether to again charge a deposit on tenants or occupants who
move within the City and whohave established a good credit history with the City. (Ord. 1987-3, 3-23-87)
Chapter 8
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLS
7-8-1: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-125-4 (2000), and 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/14.2 and 5/14.3 (2002); and in
the interest of securing the public health, safety and welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and
adequate water supply for present and future generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a potential
for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all properties located within the minimum setback zone established
under section 14.2 of the environmental protection act ("act")1 and this chapter, and the maximum setback zone established under section 14.3 of the act2
and this chapter. (Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
7-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as stated in this chapter, and unless a different meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this chapter
shall be the same as those used in the act and the Illinois groundwater protection act3.
ACT: The environmental protection act4.
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well established under section 14.3 of the act and this chapter, and shown in
section 7-8-7, "Appendix A", of this chapter.
MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well established under section 14.2 of the act and this chapter, (i.e., 200 foot
radius around each community well). (Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
7-8-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Except as provided in section 7-8-4 or 7-8-5 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or
new potential route within the minimum setback zone.
B. Except as provided otherwise in section 7-8-4 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback zone.
(Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
7-8-4: WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS, AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD:
A. If, pursuant to section 14.2(b) of the act, the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted
a waiver by the agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a waiver to the same extent from subsection 7-8-3A of this chapter.
B. If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating), new potential secondary
source, or new potential route is granted an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from
subsection 7-8-3A of this chapter.
C. If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating) is granted an exception by
the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from subsection 7-8-3B of this chapter.
D. If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the act, the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is issued a
certificate of minimal hazard by the agency, such owner shall not be subject to subsection 7-8-3A of this chapter to the same extent that such owner is
not subject to section 14.2(d) of the act. (Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 330/403
7-8-5: EXCLUSION:
Subsection 7-8-3A of this chapter shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the act and the
regulations adopted thereunder by the agency; however, no such common sources may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a
community water supply well specified by such regulations. (Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
7-8-6: COMPLIANCE/PENALTY:
It shall be the duty of the owner of each parcel of real estate and each occupant or user of each and every parcel of real estate and each and every
building or structure affected by this chapter to comply with the terms hereof. Any person, firm or corporation, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon a conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
7-8-7: APPENDIX A:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 331/403
(Ord. 2009-9, 3-23-2009)
Chapter 9
CROSS CONNECTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 332/403
7-9-1: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE INSTALLATION:
If, in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for
the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as required by the Illinois
plumbing code and local regulations. (Ord. 2003-46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
7-9-2: PRIVATE OR SECONDARY WATER SUPPLIES:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city of Plano enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 2003-46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
7-9-3: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public
water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the superintendent of water shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years. (Ord. 2003-46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
7-9-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the city of Plano for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and the water
superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the city of Plano for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the superintendent of water any information
which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall,
within the discretion of the superintendent of water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connection as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2003-
46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
7-9-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
The superintendent of water of the city of Plano is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary
measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a
reconnection fee as established by council, is paid to the city of Plano. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
superintendent of water is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed
by written notification of the cause of disconnection. (Ord. 2003-46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
7-9-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean up of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 2003-46, 9-22-2003, eff. 10-22-2003)
Chapter 10
DOMESTIC SEPTIC WASTE
7-10-1: ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations and definitions shall apply:
A. Abbreviations: The abbreviations used in this chapter are defined as follows:
CBOD: Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
COPWRF: The city of Plano water reclamation facility.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
TOC: Total organic carbon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 333/403
TSS: Total suspended solids.
B. Definitions: The terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
DOMESTIC SEPTIC WASTE: Liquid and/or solid material removed from a cesspool, septic tank, type III marine sanitation device, or similar sewage
disposal system that receives only domestic wastewater. "Domestic septic waste" does not include material that receives either commercial or
industrial wastewater, and does not include grease removed from a grease interceptor at a restaurant or similar facility.
FACILITY: The city of Plano water reclamation facility, Kendall County, Illinois. Any reference to being within the facility area shall mean all territory
within the facility planning area boundaries of the facility or under its jurisdiction.
GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
HAULER: Any permittee or other person involved in the collection, storage, and transportations of domestic septic waste from its point of origin to the
facility for disposal.
MAY: Shall be construed as being permissive.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to association clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, municipal corporations, and bodies political and corporate as
well as to individuals.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS: A treatment works defined by 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 2405/7, owned by the city of Plano. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a
liquid nature that convey wastewater to the facility regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected
to the city of Plano treatment plant.
SHALL AND MUST: Shall be construed as being mandatory. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-2: FINDINGS:
In order that the facility's sewerage system will in its operation, maintenance, replacement and expansion conduce to the public health, comfort or
convenience, it is hereby determined by the city that it shall regulate and control the discharge of domestic septic waste into the COPWRF. (Ord. 2014-35,
8-25-2014)
7-10-3: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations for the disposal of domestic septic waste into the COPWRF, were adopted July 1, 2014. By resolution of the city
council said rules and regulations may be amended and revised from time to time.
A. General Rules:
1. Permitted haulers may dump septic waste at the designated septic receiving stations only.
2. Permitted haulers can dump between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Monday through Friday. There is no dumping
allowed on federal holidays.
3. Emergency dumps after hours, may be possible with prior approval. Contact 630-669-0625 for approval. Discharges that occur outside of normal
acceptance hours will be charged at twice the current rate.
4. Only drivers and trucks that were identified and approved for the permit will be allowed to discharge. New trucks and new drivers must be submitted
for approval prior to arrival to dump. A copy of the city of Plano septic hauler permit must be available in the trucks for review at any time.
5. Haulers are expected to clean up any mess resulting from their discharge activities. Failure to do so will result in fines.
6. City of Plano reserves the right to refuse a load for any reason at any time.
7. City of Plano reserves the right to require that a load be discharged over a period of time so as not to negatively impact the plant. At no time may the
discharge rate exceed nine hundred (900) gpm. Septic receiving stations are equipped with an alarm when the rate exceeds nine hundred (900)
gpm. Setting off the alarm more than two (2) times in one month will result in a fine.
8. The discharge must have a pH between 5.0 and 10.0 or it will be refused.
9. Each permitted hauler is allowed to dump up to eight thousand five hundred (8,500) total gallons per day.
10. Loads may not contain any wastewater laden with fats, oil or grease such as waste from grease traps, grease interceptors, or oil/water separators.
11. No hazardous waste or loads contaminated with hazardous waste may be discharged.
12. Unpaid monthly bills may result in not being allowed to dump.
B. Procedures For Discharging A Load:
Haulers must contact the city of Plano water reclamation facility at 630-669-0625 prior to discharge. If there is no answer, contact 630-552-8007 or stop
at the facilities main office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 334/403
City of Plano's personnel must witness the sample collection as well as the discharge.
Haulers must fill the provided sample bottle with a representative sample from the load to the one hundred milliliters (100 ml) line.
The sample bottle must be labeled by the hauler with the manifest number, the date, and the hauler's name.
The hauler is responsible for a completely filled out manifest.
C. Sampling:
City of Plano intends to randomly analyze samples to determine the content of the load. This is done for two (2) reasons, first to track the pollutant
loading to the wastewater treatment plant, and second to assure that the load does not contain any unauthorized waste. Sample testing will also be
done if the load appears to not be only domestic waste. City of Plano reserves the right to increase or decrease, as it deems necessary, the number of
pollutants to be monitored for in response to changes in waste quality, POTW parameter limits, flow, regulatory changes, or any other factor unknown
at this time.
The following discharge quality standards are to be used as screening levels to detect possible contamination from industrial sources:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration
BOD5, carbonaceous Reserved
Cadmium 0.19 mg/l
Chromium, total 0.62 mg/l
Copper 36.8 mg/l
Iron, total 341 mg/l
Lead 1.80 mg/l
Manganese 4.13 mg/l
Nickel 1.61 mg/l
Total organic carbon Reserved
Total suspended solids Reserved
Zinc 38.7 mg/l
Unless otherwise indicated, concentrations are expressed in mg/l and refer to the total amount of the constituent present in all phases, whether
solid, suspended or dissolved, elemental or combined, including all oxidation states. Where constituents' are commonly measured as other than
total, the word total is indicated for clarity. Those indicated as reserved, city of Plano may develop technically based discharge limitations for this
parameter.
Should a sample test positive for unauthorized pollutants or contain levels of pollutants that exceed the typical characteristics of septic and
portable toilet waste, the hauler may be responsible for the cost of the analysis, and subject to fines. In addition to fines, city of Plano reserves the
right to suspend or revoke discharge privileges.
D. Recordkeeping:
All domestic septic waste being hauled to the city of Plano's water reclamation facility for disposal shall be properly documented using the city's
manifest system. The manifest must include:
1. A listing of complete individual addresses for septic tank pump outs.
2. A listing of construction site or other site addresses where portable toilets were serviced.
The hauler shall deliver a completed original manifest signed by the driver to the city's personnel prior to commencing discharge of the load. One
copy of the manifest shall be retained by the hauler for the company records.
City of Plano, hauler, and generators of domestic septic wastes shall maintain records of all information or activities required by the city of Plano for a
minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of
pollutants by the hauler or noncompliance event or enforcement remedies initiated in accordance with any district ordinance.
E. Fine Schedule:
Failure to leave a properly filled and labeled sample bottle $ 50.00
Failure to leave a properly filled out manifest 50.00
Failure to leave the discharge area clean 100.00
Discharging at a rate over 900 gpm and tripping alarm more than twice per month 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 335/403
Repeatedly clogging the receiving station 100.00
Discharging load anywhere other than the designated receiving station and a 3 month suspension of disposal privileges 500.00
Repeat violations are subject to escalating fines at the discretion of the city of Plano. "Repeat" is defined as happening more than twice in a rolling six (6)
month time frame.
Excessive violations may be cause for permit suspension or revocation.
City of Plano shall recover the costs for any investigations and additional compliance monitoring by charging the permit fee for sampling, analysis, and
reporting fees for the samples collected pursuant to any noncompliance event or discharge permit compliance evaluation.
F. Additional Regulations: Haulers must also comply with all federal and state and local regulations they are subject to.
G. Contact Information: For questions regarding these rules and regulations, your city of Plano permit to discharge, or other concerns, please contact the
water reclamation facility superintendent. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-4: DOMESTIC SEPTIC WASTE HAULER PERMITS GENERALLY:
A. No person shall discharge domestic septic waste into the facility unless he is in possession of a valid permit issued by the facility for such purpose.
B. A permit application completed by the applicant on forms provided by the facility, signed under oath, and accompanied by the applicable permit fee shall
be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of hauling of such waste.
C. Permittees shall deliver domestic septic waste to the facility for disposal only at such times and at such locations as are designated by the facility
manager, and as provided by the provisions of this chapter and the facility rules and regulations.
D. All permittees or other persons hauling domestic septic waste to the facility shall be licensed by the state of Illinois as private disposal system pumping
contractors, unless previously approved by the facility manager.
E. All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire two (2) years after the date of issuance.
F. No permit shall be sold, assigned or transferred by the permittee.
G. All permits shall terminate or be voidable at the discretion of the facility manager upon nonuse, cessation of operations, transfer of business ownership,
issuance of a new permit, or as otherwise provided in the facility's rules and regulations.
H. If a permittee shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the facility's rules and regulations, the permit shall be subject to revocation by the
facility manager and shall subject the permittee to such fines, damages and other remedies as are provided in the city of Plano and the facility's rules
and regulations. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-5: PERMIT:
The facility shall issue one type of permit for the hauling of domestic septic waste to the facility for disposal as follows:
A. Standard Permit: The holder of a valid "standard permit" shall be authorized to collect and haul to the facility for discharge such domestic septic waste
as is generated and collected either within or without the territorial boundaries of the facility subject to the provisions of this chapter and the facility's
rules and regulations. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-6: PERMIT FEES:
The initial permit fees shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a standard permit. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-7: DISCHARGE RATES:
The rate for discharging domestic septic waste into the facility shall be charged at the rate of 0.07 cents/gallon. Based upon the facility's water and waste
management software, the rate for discharging "after hours" waste into the facility shall be twice the standard permit based on the facility's water and
waste management software. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-8: DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A. No permittee or other person shall haul to or discharge into the facility domestic septic waste which may cause an inhibition or disruption of the facility's
sewerage treatment plant, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal which is a cause of or significantly contributes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 336/403
to either a violation of any requirement of the sewage treatment works ability to discharge to the waters of the state of Illinois or to be the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the sewerage treatment works in accordance with the applicable statutory and regulatory provisions.
B. Waste from grease traps, oil and flammable liquid separators, sand and grit interceptors or any other solids which could be disposed of as solid waste
shall not be accepted for discharge into the facility.
C. No permittee or other person shall haul to or discharge into the facility hazardous wastes, as defined at 40 CFR 261.
D. Wastewater resultant from any operation which is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards at its site or origin must meet those categorical
regulations whether discharged on site or transported to the facility for disposal.
E. No permittee or other person shall mix domestic septic waste with septic waste or wastewater collected from an industrial source prior to hauling to or
discharging into the facility.
F. Permittees or other persons hauling domestic septic waste to the facility for discharge shall be solely responsible for hauling such waste in an
appropriately clean vehicle and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the facility's rules and regulations.
G. No person shall add water to or in any way dilute domestic septic sewage as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment in order to achieve
compliance with criteria of domestic septic waste quality standards as set forth in this chapter and the facility's rules and regulations. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-
25-2014)
7-10-9: INSURANCE:
During the life of the permit, the permittee shall effect and maintain, with companies satisfactory to the facility, the types of insurance described herein, and
in the facility's rules and regulations. This insurance shall be provided within ten (10) days of the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-10: COMPREHENSIVE AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY:
A. Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily injury per person.
B. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury per occurrence.
C. Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) property damage per occurrence. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-11: COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL LIABILITY:
The policy shall include coverage of claims for damages for bodily injury, including accidental death as well as from claims for property damage which may
arise from operations under the permit.
The permittee shall name the city of Plano as an additional insured under the permittee's comprehensive general liability policy:
A. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury per person.
B. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury aggregate limit.
C. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) property damage aggregate limit. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-12: CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE:
Each permittee shall, no less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of hauling waste to the facility as provided in this chapter and the facility's
rules and regulations, furnish to the facility manager for filing with the city clerk certificates of insurance. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-13: INDEMNIFICATION AND SAFETY:
All permittees shall be responsible for compliance with any and all safety regulations and the adequacy of the safety measures while on the facility
premises. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
7-10-14: PERFORMANCE BOND:
Each permittee shall, not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of hauling waste to the facility as provided in this chapter and the facility's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 337/403
rules and regulations, provide the facility manager with a performance bond in such amount as the facility may, from time to time, require. (Ord. 2014-35,
8-25-2014)
7-10-15: PENALTIES; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day's continuance of such violation shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violation. The city attorney shall, upon request of the city council, bring an action for an
injunction against any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the facility's rules and regulations.
C. This section does not bar, release, or waive the facility's right to recover civil damages it may sustain because of violations by a permittee or other
person. (Ord. 2014-35, 8-25-2014)
Title 8
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-25, 6-28-2004)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate and control the accumulation, removal and disposal of refuse and to eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and
unsightly conditions in the city. (Ord. 1962-16)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply:
ASHES: All ashes from wood, coal and coke and residue resulting from the combustion of any material or substance, and soot, cinders, slag and charcoal.
GARBAGE: Refuse, organic matter, rejected or waste household food, offal, swill and carrion.
REFUSE: All garbage, ashes and all other rejected matter, rubbish, dust and miscellaneous waste, but not including manure or discarded construction or
building material, large tree limbs or brush. (Ord. 1962-16)
8-2-3: REFUSE CONTAINERS:
A. Use Of Containers: Refuse may be accumulated and stored in approved type containers as herein described for a period of not more than seven (7)
days in the residential section. Nonorganic and nonflammable debris are accepted; provided, that storage of such debris is done in a nonobjectionable
manner. (Ord. 1962-16; amd. 1989 Code)
B. Condition Of Container: Every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee or person in possession of a house, flat, or apartment or business place shall at all times
maintain in good order adequate containers for refuse. Every refuse container must be equipped with a tight fitting cover and be durably constructed of
impervious material and be watertight and rodent proof.
C. Location: All refuse containers shall be placed in an off street and nonoffensive location, except during the time between the evening preceding
collection of refuse and the evening following collection thereof, and by special permission of the city council. (Ord. 1962-16)
D. Apartment Buildings:
1. Apartment Buildings; Four Or More Units: The owner or owners of any apartment building or multi-family complex containing four (4) or more
dwelling units shall keep and maintain, at all times, a suitable garbage container or dumpster having an adequate capacity for the accumulation and
storage of garbage, refuse and debris generated from the dwelling units, adequate and sufficient to eliminate the overflowing of the garbage
container or dumpster or the accumulation and storage of garbage, refuse and debris outside of the garbage container or dumpster. Such garbage
container or dumpster shall be maintained, serviced and dumped not less than once every seven (7) days by a scavenger duly licensed to engage in
the business of scavenger or the collection or disposal of refuse within the city limits. Such scavenger shall, in all respects, comply with the licensing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 338/403
provisions of section 8-2-5 of this chapter and shall, at all times, comply with the recycling provisions of this code. Such container or dumpster shall
be enclosed in a minimum six foot (6') tall gated enclosure or fence which fully obstructs the view of the container from the public street.
2. Apartment Buildings; Three Or Less Units: The owner or owners of any apartment building or complex containing three (3) or less units shall provide,
for each unit, one refuse and one recycling container as normally provided for a single residence. All containers shall be kept and maintained in one
off street and unoffensive area not visible from the abutting street or streets. (Ord. 2012-19, 6-25-2012)
E. Commercial Buildings And Industrial Complexes: The owner or owners of any commercial building or industrial complex shall keep and maintain, at all
times, suitable garbage containers or dumpsters having an adequate capacity for the accumulation and storage of garbage, refuse and debris
generated from the commercial and/or industrial businesses or enterprises, adequate and sufficient to eliminate the overflowing of the garbage
container or dumpster or the accumulation and storage of garbage, refuse and debris outside of the garbage container or dumpster. Such garbage
container or dumpster shall be maintained, serviced and dumped not less than once every seven (7) days by a scavenger duly licensed to engage in
the business of scavenger or the collection or disposal of refuse within the city limits of the city. Such scavenger shall, in all respects, comply with the
licensing provisions of section 8-2-5 of this chapter and shall, at all times, comply with the recycling provisions of this code. (Ord. 1993-25, 9-13-1993)
8-2-4: COLLECTION RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Rates Established: All property upon which any single-family residence or duplex or three (3) unit apartment building has been or may hereafter be
erected shall pay to the city collector for refuse collection for each unit, an amount as established by contract. (Ord. 2005-27, 5-24-2005)
B. Rendition Of Bills: Bills for refuse collection shall be sent out together with bills for water and sewer service, or at such other time as may be directed by
the city council.
C. Delinquent Bills, Lien: Charges for refuse collection shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for refuse collection
remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the city clerk may file with the recorder of Kendall County, Illinois a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges for refuse collection subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the resident whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the clerk has notice of this, then the notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his address is known to the clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
The failure of the clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid refuse collection bills as hereinafter set forth.
D. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid refuse collection charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill of
equity in the name of the city.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters, against any property for which refuse collection charge has remained unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered; provided, however,
that prior to instituting a foreclosure suit, notice of intent to foreclose the lien shall be mailed to the property address and to the owner of the property, if
his address is different from the property involved and if such address is known to the clerk. (Ord. 1977-3, eff. 4-1-1977; amd. Ord. 1993-11, 4-26-1993)
8-2-5: REFUSE COLLECTION:
A. License To Collect:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger or the collection or disposal of refuse in the city without
having first secured a license therefor.
2. Refuse Collector: A person who collects garbage or refuse for hire in the city, and who is generally engaged in the business of scavenger or the
collection or disposal of refuse.
3. Application For License: Applications for such license shall be made to the city clerk and action approving or denying such license shall be taken at
the next regular city council meeting. (Ord. 1993-15, 5-24-1993)
4. License Fee And Term: Effective for all licenses issued to be effective on or after January 1, 1994, the fee for such scavenger license shall be one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. Each license granted hereunder shall be effective for a term commencing January 1 and shall terminate the
following December 31 of each year. Any applicant for a license must pay the annual fee regardless of the time when the license is issued and no
refunds will be made and no fees prorated.
There shall be one exception to the above procedure: Any applicant for such license who shall not previously have held such license and who shall
make application for the same on or after July 1 of any year, may obtain such license for the remainder of the year upon payment of a license fee of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) and compliance with the other provisions of this chapter.
The fee for licenses issued to be effective during the remainder of 1993 shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. (Ord. 1993-17, 6-28-1993)
5. Insurance Required: A certificate of insurance by duly authorized insurer in the state in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined
liability and property insurance, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) personal insurance covering licensee's operation in the city shall be filed with
the city clerk at or before the time such license is issued.
B. Refuse Storage And Disposal: It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse within the city limits, except at such locations, if
any, so designated by the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 339/403
C. Curbside Collection Of Recyclables _ Residential:
1. No refuse or garbage collector shall collect residential garbage in the city unless such garbage or refuse collector shall provide a special curbside
collection service for aluminum and bimetal cans, newspapers, glass bottles and plastic bottles on the same day as such garbage collector's regular
collection.
2. Refuse/garbage collectors shall be entitled to charge the residential customers in the city for whom they provide service an additional fee per month
as approved by the city to pay for the cost of providing such recycling service, regardless of whether such residents participate in the recycling
program.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed refuse/garbage collector, as approved by the city, to pick up any recyclable materials,
including, but not limited to, aluminum and bimetal cans, newspapers, plastic bottles and glass bottles from a recycling container. (Ord. 1993-15, 5-
24-1993)
8-2-6: COLLECTION VEHICLES:
A. No person owning or controlling any vehicles used for the carrying or transporting of any refuse shall cause or permit such vehicle, when in use for such
purposes, to stand or remain before or near any building or premises occupied by any person for an unreasonable or unnecessary length of time.
B. All refuse vehicles shall be of the totally enclosed type so that refuse being carried or transported on city streets will not be exposed and noxious fluids
will not leak out.
C. Any person owning or controlling any refuse vehicle shall regularly cause all such vehicles to be thoroughly disinfected.
D. All such refuse vehicles shall be inspected or caused to be inspected at least annually by the city council. (Ord. 1962-16)
8-2-7: OPEN BURNING:
A. Restrictions:
1. Unlawful To Burn: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to burn leaves, building materials and refuse, and other forms of
vegetation, including shrubs, branches, wood, grass, weeds, plant material and general vegetation, within the city limits of the city.
2. Campfires: Burning of campfires in connection with group outings such as boy scouts and girl scouts and other camping outings by groups, or
recreational campfires by individuals are permitted, provided that the fires are maintained in such manner so as not to constitute a hazard or
nuisance to person or property.
3. Dumpster Required: All construction sites and all commercial and nonresidential property owners must use a dumpster to remove waste and refuse
unless the property owner receives permission for special arrangements with regard to burning from the building and zoning administrator. (Ord.
2000-25, 9-25-2000)
4. Exceptions: Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the city of Plano, as a part of its corporate functions, to burn brush
during any month of the year which is collected by the city of Plano through its brush pick ups. Furthermore, nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit the Little Rock Fox fire protection district, in cooperation with the city of Plano, to burn houses and other structures in the city for
training and educational purposes in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated, from time to time, by the state fire marshall of the state
of Illinois and the environmental protection agency. (Ord. 2003-1, 1-27-2003)
B. Penalty: Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of these burning
regulations shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. The police department of the city is herewith authorized to enforce the provisions of
these burning regulations. (Ord. 2000-25, 9-25-2000)
8-2-8: STORAGE OF JUNK AND REFUSE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Definition: "Junk", "trash" and "refuse" are defined herein to include any and all waste matter, whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public
health, safety or to the aesthetics of the neighborhood, and is specifically intended to include, but not to be limited to, worn out, wrecked and/or
abandoned automobiles1, trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, any parts thereof, old iceboxes, refrigerators, stoves, bathroom fixtures and hot water
tanks.
B. Nuisance Declared: The storing of junk, trash and refuse on private property within the city where such storage is unsightly or offensive to the public
health or safety, or to the aesthetics of the neighborhood, is hereby declared a nuisance.
C. Abatement Of Nuisance:
1. Notice To Abate: Any policeman, building inspector or health officer of the city, upon observing any violation of this section, shall issue a notice
directed to the owner of record of the property on which said nuisance occurs, as shown in the records of the recorder of deeds of Kendall County, or
to the occupant of said property, or to both, which said notice shall describe the violation and shall establish a reasonable time limit for the abatement
thereof by such owner or occupant, which time shall not be less than two (2) days nor more than ten (10) days after service of such notice.
Any policeman, building inspector or health officer of the city shall serve the notice herein provided for upon the owner or occupant of the property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 340/403
where such nuisance exists, or upon both of them, and shall make his return upon a copy of such notice, showing the time of service, the person
upon whom it was served, or the manner in which it was served.
2. Duty Of Citizens: Any citizen of the city who observes a violation of this section may file his affidavit setting forth in detail the violation, its location
and the name of the owner and occupant of the property on which such nuisance is alleged, and may file said affidavit with the city clerk who shall
issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the property as provided in subsection C1 of this section.
3. Inspection: Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice for the abatement of such nuisance, the policeman, building
inspector or health officer of the city who served such notice, or any other policeman, shall investigate to determine whether or not such nuisance
has been abated.
4. Failure To Abate: In the event the owner or occupant of the property where such nuisance exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such
nuisance, then the policeman, building inspector or health officer of the city who served such notice, or the citizens of the city who filed an affidavit
with the city clerk, shall file a complaint charging violation of this section with the circuit court for the sixteenth judicial circuit, or a magistrate thereof,
charging violation of this section and directing that the owner of the property or the occupant thereof, or both, be punished as herein provided.
D. Violations And Penalties: Any property owner or any occupant of property who allows such storage on the property owned or occupied by him shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and any person who
shall neglect to abate and remove such nuisance after notice thereof shall, for each twenty four (24) hours thereafter during which said nuisance
continues, be subject to a like penalty as that originally incurred.
The city shall prosecute all persons in violation of this section. (Ord. 1964-11)
8-2-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, where there is no provision to the contrary, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 1962-16; amd. 1989 Code)
8-2-10: BRUSH PICK UP:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
BRUSH: Cut or broken branches from bushes and trees, not exceeding four feet (4') in length and not exceeding twelve inches (12") in diameter.
PARKWAY: That portion of the public right of way lying adjacent to and between the paved portion of the public street and the adjacent lot line or
property line.
All other words used in this section shall have the meaning or meanings commonly ascribed to them or as otherwise defined in this code.
B. Schedule: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, maintain or discard any brush along or upon the parkways in the city except
during the following periods of time immediately preceding the pick up of brush by the city:
1. Brush may be placed on the parkways in the city for pick up from the first through the seventh of each of the months of May through October of each
year, which brush shall then be picked up by the city starting as soon as possible on or after the eighth day of the months of May through October of
each year.
2. No brush shall be placed or discarded along or upon the parkways in the city after the seventh day of each month. Furthermore, no brush shall be
placed, maintained or discarded along or upon the parkways in the city during the months of November through April of each year.
3. Pick up trucks for the removal of brush shall make only one pass along each street.
C. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall, upon conviction of
violating any of the provisions of this section, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense
plus all applicable court costs. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1999-24, 8-23-1999)
Chapter 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
(Rep. by Ord. 1996-35, 12-9-1996)
Chapter 4
WEEDS
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
PARKWAY: The area between the edge of the pavement or curb and the property line.
WEEDS: As used in this chapter shall include the following: all grasses, burdock, ragweed (giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cockleburr, jimson, blue
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 341/403
vervain, common milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lamb's quarter, wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties),
poison hemlock and wild hemp. (Ord. 1973-8; amd. Ord. 2002-52, 12-9-2002; Ord. 2017-6, 1-23-2017)
8-4-2: DUTY TO CUT WEEDS:
A. It is hereby declared to be illegal for the owners of real estate to refuse or neglect to cut weeds when such weeds shall have reached height in excess
of eight inches (8"). (Ord. 1973-8)
B. Every owner of real estate within the city shall cut weeds on his property and on the "parkway" adjacent thereto, as herein defined, at all such times as
may be necessary so that such weeds shall not exceed eight inches (8") in height; and if said owner neglects or refuses to cut weeds so that such
weeds shall not exceed eight inches (8") in height, the city may cut the weeds on behalf of the owner. (Ord. 2017-6, 1-23-2017)
8-4-3: WEED CUTTING LIEN:
A. If the weeds are cut by the city or by someone directed to cut them on behalf of the city, a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the
city shall be recorded in the manner prescribed by this section.
B. The municipality, or the person performing the service by authority of the city, in its or his own name, may file notice of lien in the office of the recorder of
deeds of Kendall County. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
2. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
3. The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the municipality.
C. The sworn statement shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred. (Ord. 1973-8)
8-4-4: FEES FOR WEED CUTTING; PAYMENT OF COSTS AND EXPENSES, RELEASE OF LIEN:
A. When the city cuts weeds on private property as contemplated by this chapter, the city shall charge and shall be entitled to reimbursement at the rate of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first hour or part thereof and seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each hour or part thereof after the first hour, for crew
time and machinery expended by the city in the cutting of weeds on private property, as specified in this chapter.
B. Upon the payment to the city of the foregoing costs and expenses incurred by the city, and if a lien has been filed, that lien shall be released by the city
and the release shall be delivered to the owner for recording by the owner. (Ord. 2007-43, 10-8-2007)
Chapter 5
ADDRESSES
8-5-1: ADDRESSES TO BE DISPLAYED:
From and after the effective date of this Chapter, all buildings or units thereof situated within the corporate limits of the City, shall have displayed thereon
the street address of such building, such street address to be numerically displayed as follows:
A. Number Size: 3 1/2 inch minimum.
B. Color: Contrasting to background.
C. Location of Numbering: Clearly visible from street.
8-5-2: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following additional requirements apply to all multi-tenant commercial buildings and multi-family residential buildings:
A. Multi-tenant commercial buildings and multi-tenant residential structures accessed by a common entrance shall have clearly displayed, at such common
entrance, the numerical street address or addresses of the building, corresponding to the size, color and location requirements specified in Section 8-5-
1 hereof.
B. Multi-tenant commercial buildings and multi-tenant residential structures accessed through various entrances shall have clearly displayed at each
entrance facing upon the street, the address of the building and the units contained within or accessed from each access location, such street address
and unit numbers, where applicable, to be of the same size, color and location as specified in Section 8-5-1 hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 342/403
C. The individual unit entrance door contained within any multi-tenant commercial or residential building or structure shall have clearly displayed on the
unit door the unit number or unit letter assigned thereto by the building owner or building manager, said unit number or unit letter to be not less than
three one-half inches (31/2") tall.
8-5-3: FLOOR PLAN:
To further promote the health, welfare and safety of all tenants or occupants of multi-tenant commercial buildings and/or multi-family Residential Buildings,
the owner or manager thereof shall provide to the Fire Department and to the Police Department of the City on or before September 15, 1989, a floor plan,
drawn as nearly as possible to scale, setting forth the individual units contained within each building and setting forth the location of the common entrance
door or doors to the building and the specific entrance door to each of the units contained therein and setting forth the unit number assigned to each unit.
8-5-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by the police department of the City; provided, however, that enforcement hereof shall be deferred until
September 16, 1989, in order to permit all persons affected by the terms of this Chapter to comply with the terms hereof.
8-5-5: COMPLIANCE; PENALTY:
It shall be the duty of the owner of each building or structure affected by Chapter to comply with the terms hereof. Any person, firm or corporation, who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall upon a conviction
thereof be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1989-22, 6-26-89)
Chapter 6
POLLUTED OR STAGNANT WATER
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
POLLUTED: The presence of one or more contaminants in sufficient quantities of such characteristics and duration as to be injurious to human, plant or
animal life, to health or to property or to unreasonably interfere with enjoyment of life or property.
STAGNANT WATER OR STANDING WATER: Any accumulation of water including, but not limited to, ponds, drainage ditches, basins, or low surface level
areas in which water is likely to accumulate and not drain freely, which stagnant or standing water is likely to enhance or promote the breeding of
mosquitoes or other annoying insects or which is generally unhealthy or unsafe. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-24-2003)
8-6-2: NUISANCE:
A. It shall be a nuisance and therefore, unlawful for any person to cause to be polluted the atmosphere, any waterway, stream, lake, pond, storm sewer or
ground so as to render unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous to the health and well being of any person or animal, fish or fowl coming in contact with said
polluted air, water, or ground within the city.
B. It shall be a nuisance and therefore unlawful to permit standing or stagnant water to remain upon any property located within the city. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-
24-2003)
8-6-3: ABATEMENT:
A. The director of public works, or his agents, is directed to abate such nuisance by any means deemed necessary so as to prevent the breeding of
mosquitoes and other annoying insects.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, obstruct, or prohibit the city, the director of public works, or any agent of the city from abating such
nuisance in the manner provided herein. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-24-2003)
8-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall, upon conviction of violating
any provisions of this chapter, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense plus all applicable
court costs. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2003-9, 3-24-2003)
Chapter 7
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES SITING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 343/403
8-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to applications for site location approval of certain new pollution control facilities (as defined by section 3.330 of the Illinois
environmental protection act1). Specifically, it is intended to apply to applications for site location approval for a pollution control facility, including a
"transfer station" (as defined in section 3.500 of the Illinois environmental protection act2) designed and intended to accept "municipal waste" (as defined
herein) for temporary storage or consolidation, and further transfer to a waste disposal, treatment or storage facility. To the extent a facility described in an
application proposes to manage material which is not "waste" (as defined by section 3.535 of the Illinois environmental protection act3), or proposes to
conduct an activity which is excluded from the definition of a pollution control facility as defined by the Illinois environmental protection act4, or proposes to
conduct an activity which does not require a permit from the Illinois environmental protection agency, this chapter does not govern such application, and
authorization to locate such a facility shall be determined by the city's other ordinances and codes, including, but not limited to, those related to zoning,
special use, building or environmental requirements, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-2005)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words used in this chapter shall have the same meanings and definitions as the same terms are defined in the environmental protection act, 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., and the implementing and interpreting administrative rules and regulations in effect as of the date hereof, and as said
statute and regulations and rules may be amended or modified from time to time.
ACT: The Illinois environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an application for
local siting approval pursuant to this chapter.
APPLICATION: The document(s) filed by the applicant requesting local siting approval for a facility.
CITY: City of Plano, Illinois, an Illinois municipal corporation.
CLERK: The city clerk for the city of Plano, Illinois.
DAYS: Unless otherwise stated herein, reference to "day" or "days" shall mean calendar days.
FACILITY: A new pollution control facility, as defined in the act.
HEARING OFFICER: The attorney or other individual appointed by the mayor of the city, with the advice and consent of the city council to preside over the
public hearing(s) associated with a siting application.
IEPA: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Garbage, general household and commercial waste, industrial lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste, and construction or
demolition debris (as defined in section 3.290 of the act5). "Special waste", including, but not limited to, potentially infectious medical waste, hazardous
waste, industrial process or pollution control waste, and empty containers in which special waste has been stored, and as specifically defined in section
3.475 of the act6 shall be excluded from the definition of "municipal waste".
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY COMMITTEE (Sometimes Referred To As PCF COMMITTEE): The committee appointed by the mayor to conduct the
public hearing for site location approval.
TRANSFER STATION: A site or facility that accepts waste for temporary storage or consolidation, and further transfer to a waste disposal, treatment or
storage facility, as defined in section 3.500 of the act7. (Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-2005)
8-7-3: NOTICE REQUIREMENT AND FILING FEE:
A. No later than fourteen (14) days prior to submittal of anapplication for site location approval, applicant shall cause notice of intent to submit such an
application to all owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the lot line of the subject property line, and to all members of
the general assembly from the legislative district in which the site is located. Notification must be in conformance with the provisions of section 39.2 of
the act. Proof of compliance with the above stated notification requirements must be submitted with the application.
B. Each application for a new pollution control facility to be processed pursuant to this chapter shall include a two hundred fifty thousand dollar
($250,000.00) application fee. This fee shall be waived if the applicant is a duly constituted Illinois municipality in good standing. The applicable filing
fee is intended to defray the reasonable and necessary costs of addressing and processing all aspects of the application, including, but not limited to,
prefiling review matters, cost of site inspections, clerical expenses, copying costs, space rental, hearing officer compensation, court reporter expenses,
transcription costs, public notice expenses, staff review time, reasonable attorney fees, times and consultants retained by the city (such as qualified
professional engineers, planners, appraisers, environmental counsel, etc.) including test analysis, exhibit examination and other testimony (if any)
provided by such consultants and professionals, as well as all other reasonable costs and expenses incurred by city staff in review and evaluation of
the application, as well as all other relevant costs incident to consideration of all aspects of the application, the costs incident to preparing the record for
appeal, and the cost of representing the city on appeal in case of an appeal of the granting and/or denial of site location approval (the "city's costs").
Any portion of the application fee that remains unexpended upon final resolution of the siting process (including appeals to the Illinois pollution
control board, appellate courts, Illinois supreme court, federal courts and any other administrative review) shall be returned to the applicant.
In the event that, at any time prior to the conclusion of the siting approval decision, the city has expended such sums as to reduce the unspent
balance of the application fee to an amount less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the applicant will be notified in writing. The applicant
shall then have fourteen (14) days to deposit with the city clerk an additional fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), unless the city council determines that
funds in excess of the required amount are necessary based upon the status of the siting approval process. In no event shall a demand for additional
fees exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per each additional funding request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 344/403
Applicant shall further be responsible to reimburse the city for expenses and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city as a result of any
collection activity or litigationnecessarily instituted by the city to collect such additional costs.
The city council may, by adoption of appropriate resolution, reduce the application fee upon petition by the applicant setting forth the reasons why a
reduction is justified. The city council must make a finding that the reduced fee will not jeopardize the ability of the city to conduct a complete and
impartial public hearing. The applicant will be responsible for any fees or costs incurred above the reduced fee. (Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-2005)
8-7-4: CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
A. An executed host agreement must be appended to, and included as part of, any application filed with the city for site location approval.
B. The following is a listing of the minimum content of applications for site location approval for a transfer station to be located within the city of Plano. The
applicant may, at its discretion, provide additional information with its application.
WRITTEN PRESENTATION
I. The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area it is intended to serve.
A. Introduction
B. Economic benefits of facility
C. Service area identification1
D. Demographics of service area
E. Waste generation rates of service area
F. Existing waste disposal network for service area
G. Future waste disposal network for service area
H. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
II. The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
A. Introduction
B. Site legal and general description1
1. Survey plat with existing structures1
2. Aerial photographs of the site
3. Identification of property owners
4. Existing topography of site (minimum 1 foot contours)1
5. Title search of property
C. Existing conditions of site and adjacent properties1
1. Historical property uses
D. Location standards
1. Residential properties1
2. Floodplain limits1
3. Archaeological study
4. Airport study
5. Groundwater study
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 345/403
6. Endangered species study
7. List covenants recorded with the property deed
8. Identification of wetlands on property
E. Site design
1. Entrance1
2. Landscaping plan1
3. Access roads and interior traffic circulation1
4. Security measures to be implemented
5. Weight station location and design1
6. Parking on site1
7. Vehicle stacking procedures1
8. Utilities on site1
9. Office structures
10. Facility structures, including transfer station structure and detailed floor plan1
11. Water supply, water capacity, and facility's water requirements
12. Storm water management measures
a. 2-year, 24 hour design
b. 100-year, 24 hour design
c. Basin design and release rate
d. Sediment control measures
e. Erosion control measures (on site and off site)
f. Drainage flow off site1
g. Site location on USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map1
F. Operations
1. Hours of operation
2. Quantity of waste accepted
3. Anticipated quantities of waste received by waste type
4. Identification of acceptable waste types
5. Waste screening procedures
6. Waste transfer operational plan1
7. Overnight storage of waste on site
8. Waste volume throughput analysis
9. Identification of disposal sites and permits
10. Identification of proposed railroad activities
11. Recycling activities on site
12. Equipment requirements
13. Facility cleaning procedures
14. Load checking program
15. Traffic pattern (on site)1
16. Facility for employees
17. Fueling procedures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 346/403
18. Litter control
19. Vector control procedures
20. Indoor air quality
21. Outdoor air quality
22. Odor control procedures
23. Noise control procedures
24. Training personnel
25. Fire control protection
26. Lockout/tagout procedures
27. Insurance coverage
28. Record keeping procedures
a. Daily tonnage receipts by waste type
b. In county daily tonnage receipts
c. All regulatory correspondence
d. All environmental and regulatory inspections
e. Wastewater generation and disposal records
f. Load inspection and load discrepancy records
g. Accident records
29. Wastewater generation and handling
a. Wastewater generation calculations
b. Wastewater storage procedures
c. Wastewater disposal/treatment procedures
30. Operational contingency plans
a. Equipment failure
b. Interruption of utility service
c. Inclement weather
d. Labor strikes
31. Proposed life of facility
32. Final closure
a. Waste removal
b. Equipment removal
c. Equipment cleaning
d. Cost estimate
e. Schedule
G. Operator information and experience
1. Articles of incorporation
2. Audited financial statements
3. Pollution control facility experience, including transfer station experience within the state of Illinois and other states
4. Summary of all pollution control facility violations and transfer station violations in the state of Illinois, and other states
5. Transfer station experience outside Illinois
6. Resume of facility manager
H. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 347/403
III. The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of the
surrounding property.
A. Introduction
B. Land use/zoning/planning study
1. Site zoning
2. Adjacent and surrounding zoning1
3. Adjacent and surrounding land uses1
4. Landscape plan1
5. Setbacks1
6. Conformity with the Kendall County 2020 land resource management plan
C. Real estate impact study
1. Proposed improvements
2. Chicago metropolitan area data and Kendall County area data
3. Transfer site area study
4. Property value impact study
D. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
IV. The facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the site is floodproofed.
A. Introduction
B. Location of 100-year floodplain1
C. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
V. The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or other operational accidents.
A. Introduction
B. Fire prevention measures
C. Spill prevention measures
D. Accident prevention/risk management
E. Operational contingency plan
F. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VI. The traffic patterns to, or from, the facility are so designed as to minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
A. Introduction
B. Methodology used
1. Traffic characteristics of the facility
2. Traffic assignment and analysis
3. Roadway and site access requirements
C. Site accessibility
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 348/403
1. Site location1
2. Area roadways1
3. Proposed roadway improvements1
4. Existing traffic volumes
D. Develop traffic characteristics
1. Directional distribution
2. Estimated site traffic generation
3. Future growth
E. Accident history of key intersections to, and from, facility
F. Traffic impact analysis
1. Site access
G. Identification of routing to disposal facility
H. Gap study
I. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VII. If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an accidental release.
A. Introduction
B. Emergency response plan
C. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
VIII. If the facility is to be located in a county where the county board has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning
requirements of the local solid waste disposal act or the solid waste planning and recycling act, the facility is consistent with that plan.
A. Introduction
B. Benefits of facility
C. Consistency with the solid waste plan
D. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
IX. If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any applicable requirements specified by the board for such areas have been met.
A. Introduction
B. Location of regulated recharge
C. Conclusion, signed by professional expert
Note: 1. A graphic presentation or figure is required with the text.
(Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-2005)
8-7-5: FILING PROCEDURES:
A. The applicant for site location approval shall file not less than twenty five (25) copies of the application, together with such additional copies as shall be
requested by the city clerk, including ten (10) full sized copies of exhibits and fifteen (15) reduced copies of all exhibits, with the city clerk, together with
the appropriate site review application fee. The applicant is to provide up to ten (10) additional copies of the application to the city upon request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 349/403
B. The clerk, upon receiving said application, shall do the following:
1. Accept for filing, and date stamp as filed, any application that is filed. The date on the date stamp of the clerk shall be considered the official filing
date for all time limit purposes. Receipt and acceptance of an application by the clerk is pro forma, and does not constitute an acknowledgment that
the applicant has complied with the act or this chapter.
2. Upon the filing of an application, the clerk shall immediately distribute copies of the application to each member of the city council then holding office,
a copy to the mayor of the city, a copy to the city engineer, a copy to the director of building,planning and zoning, and a copy to the city attorney for
the city.
3. The clerk shall make available a copy of the application and public record concerning the application for public inspection during the normal business
hours of the clerk's office. Additionally, the clerk shall provide to any person so requesting, copies of the application or the public record, upon such
person's payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
C. Form of applications:
1. All applications shall be in writing on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11"), eight and one-half inch by fourteen inch (81/2" x 14"), or
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") paper.
2. The pages of the application shall be consecutively numbered, and all exhibits shall be clearly marked and identified.
3. The text portion of the application (not including exhibits or graphic presentations) shall also be furnished in electronic format.
D. Proof of service evidencing that copies of said application were served upon each municipality whose official boundaries are within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the property line of the proposed facility.
E. Proof of notice, pursuant to section 39.2(b) of the act. (Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-2005)
8-7-6: HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. For each application filed, the mayor shall appoint a pollution control facility committee (hereinafter "PCF committee") to conduct the public hearing for
that application to be made up of five (5) city council members. These appointments shall be confirmed by the full city council of the city within thirty five
(35) days of the receipt of each application. During the course of the public hearing, at least one member of the PCF committee shall be present at
each session. If no hearing officer is appointed for the public hearing, as provided hereinbelow, one member of the PCF committee shall be chosen by
the committee members to preside over the public hearing, and must attend any and all hearings conducted on the application.
B. The mayor shall appoint a hearing officer for the public hearing on the application. If appointed, the hearing officer shall preside over the public hearing,
and shall make decisions concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted. The hearing officer shall have
expertise in the field of pollution control facilities. The hearing officer shall make all rulings in accordance with fundamental fairness and statutory and
constitutional requirements. The hearingofficer may be requested by the PCF committee to prepare a statement of findings at the conclusion of the
public hearing and following the submittal of additional comments for the thirty (30) day period following the public hearing.
C. Within forty five (45) days of the receipt of the application, the PCF committee shall meet and schedule the date(s), location and time for the public
hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled by the PCF committee to be conducted at a location which is reasonably expected to be large enough
to accommodate the number of persons anticipated to attend.
D. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the application, the city clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, of scheduled public hearing date(s), location and
time.
E. Within sixty five (65) days of the receipt of the application, the applicant shall publish notice of public hearing, date(s), location and time, in a local
newspaper(s) and notify, by certified mail, all members of the district general assembly in which the proposed facility is located.
F. No sooner than ninety (90) days, but no longer than one hundred twenty (120) days, from the date of receipt of the application, the PCF committee shall
commence public hearings which are adequate to establish the facts in the case, provided that said hearing shall be conducted within the required time
periods. All public hearings shall be conducted as follows:
1. A pretrial conference hearing shall be held not less than three (3) days prior to the date established for commencement of the hearing. At that time,
the applicant, the city and any other participants of record shall participate in such preconference hearing. The PCF committee shall establish the
date, time and manner in which such prehearing conference shall be conducted. The prehearing conference may (at the discretion of the committee)
be conducted either in person or by teleconference. The purpose of the preconference hearing shall include (but not necessarily be limited to) the
following: a) determination of the criterion which will be placed in issue by any of the parties to the hearing, b) to the extent necessary and
practicable, address any prehearing issues which may have arisen, and c) address any prehearing motion which has been filed or any motions which
will be presented on the first day of the hearing prior to the commencement of evidentiary testimony.
2. All persons desiring to be formal participants in the hearing, including members of the public, shall file their written appearance with the city clerk not
less than seven (7) business days prior to the date scheduled for commencement of the hearing on the application, with copies of such appearance
being provided by the participant to the applicant, the city, and any other participants of record. Any person so appearing at such public hearing shall
have the right to present testimony and witnesses. Any such person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at said public hearing.
Opportunity for any personsappearing at said public hearing to cross examine any witness may be reasonably limited in time and duration by the
hearing officer, to assure completion of the hearings in accordance with the deadlines of the act. The hearing officer may propound questions to any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 350/403
witness or to the applicant to clarify the record established by the participants at the hearing or to bring out relevant information. If the city is not the
applicant, the city shall be deemed a participant and a party to all proceedings, and shall proceed last with its case and cross examination.
3. The applicant and the city's counsel shall be allowed to cross examine witnesses by right, subject to such reasonable limitation as may be set by the
hearing officer. Cross examination by the city shall not be limited to matters contained in the application. Parties represented by attorneys may be
allowed to cross examine in the discretion of the hearing officer. Other persons shall be allowed to submit questions to the hearing officer, who shall
exercise discretion in the manner in which such questions are to be posed to witnesses. Sufficient examination of witnesses is to be allowed so as to
provide for fundamental fairness.
4. All witnesses shall testify under oath. Testimony may include the use of prepared statements and exhibits. If testimony is by prepared statement,
copies of such prepared statements shall be made available at the hearings (or, prior to the first hearing date, at the office of the city clerk) at least
one day in advance of such testimony being given. All witnesses shall be subject to reasonable examination as follows: direct, cross examination,
redirect and recross.
5. The hearing officer may exercise discretion to allow public comment at each hearing or may set one time for public comment.
6. Verbal recording shall be made of the public hearing and a written verbatim transcript prepared by a certified court reporter or a certified shorthand
reporter shall be made available, at cost, upon request. Written transcripts will be provided to all city council members, the city attorney, and outside
counsel retained by the city to represent its interests during the siting process.
7. Applicant shall submit proof of notification of the public hearing as required in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/39.2, and the procedures included in
subsection E of this section.
G. At any time prior to completion by the applicant of the presentation of the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross examination by the
city, PCF committee and any participants, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may file not more than one amended
application. In such a case, the time limitation for final action set forth in the environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/39.2(e), as
amended, shall be extended for an additional period of ninety (90) days. The hearing officer shall,in the hearing officer's discretion and to the extent
reasonably practicable, permit the city, the applicant and any other formal participant (party) to file proposed findings of fact and conclusion of law.
H. Submission of demonstrative evidence and exhibits: Any exhibits that a participant, other than the applicant, anticipates using during the public hearing
shall be submitted to the city at least two (2) days prior to its anticipated use. All participants shall submit at least three (3) copies of all exhibits. The
city shall furnish one copy to the applicant. Members of the public who participate in the public comment time held during the public hearing shall
submit any exhibits they expect to use to the city prior to the time designated for the public to speak. At least three (3) copies of all such exhibits shall
be submitted. The applicant shall be provided one of the three (3) copies. Any additional exhibits to be used by the applicant during the public hearing
and not a part of the application shall be submitted at least forty eight (48) hours prior to their anticipated introduction at the public hearing. Any
additional exhibit used by the applicant that in any way materially changes the proposed design, location and/or operation of the facility shall be
considered an amendment to the application, and all sections of this chapter pertaining to amendments shall take effect. The time limits for submission
of evidence may be waived by the member of the PCF committee presiding over the hearing or the hearing officer if he/she determines that the
participant could not reasonably have anticipated the use of said exhibit at the time that submission was due.
I. Between one hundred twenty (120) and one hundred sixty (160) days of receipt of the application, transcripts from public hearings shall be forwarded to
city council members and the city attorney for review. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing(s), the PCF committee shall publish in a local
newspaper notice informing the public of the deadline for written comments. Written comments submitted to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the
final public hearing shall be made a part of the record of proceedings and considered. Copies of all comments received by the city clerk shall be
forwarded to all city council members, the applicant and the city attorney. Copies of comments shall be distributed to the city engineer, the director of
building, planning and zoning, the hearing officer for the city and other persons upon request. Additional work sessions and meetings may be held by
the PCF committee, if necessary, prior to referral of its findings and recommendation to the city council. All work sessions and meetings shall be open
to the public, but may not allow public participation in the work sessions and meetings.
J. Upon completion of the public hearing, interested city staff shall have thirty (30) days thereafter in which to file their final reports and recommendations
with the PCF committee. Copies of the final reports shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk for three (3) working days prior
tothe PCF committee decision. Members of the public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of said documents upon payment of the cost of reproduction.
K. Decisions:
1. If the hearing officer has been requested by the PCF committee to make findings and recommendation, the hearing officer shall reduce same to
writing and submit it to the PCF committee.
2. The PCF committee may, if it has received findings and recommendation from the hearing officer, adopt same as the findings and recommendation
of the PCF committee. If the PCF committee has not received findings and recommendation from the hearing officer, or if it chooses not to adopt the
findings and recommendation of the hearing officer, then the PCF committee shall prepare its own findings and recommendation and submit same to
the city council for its decision as to the ultimate approval or disapproval of the proposed application.
3. The city council shall make a decision based upon the record from the public hearing and review of the findings and recommendation of the PCF
committee. The decision of the city council shall be by duly adopted resolution, in writing, specifying the reasons for the decision, such reasons to be
in conformity with section 39.2(a) of the act. In granting site location approval, the city council may impose such conditions as may be reasonable
and necessary to accomplish the purposes of the act, to the extent that said conditions are not inconsistent with the act and the regulations
promulgated by the Illinois pollution control board. Such decision shall be available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk, and may be
copied upon payment of the cost of reproduction. If there is no final action by the city council within one hundred eighty 180 days (or 270 days if an
amended application has been filed) after the filing of the application for site location approval, the applicant may deem the application approved.
4. Within seven (7) days after the city council approves or denies the application, the decision, and basis for the decision, shall be provided to the
applicant in writing, and shall be further forwarded to the Illinois environmental protection agency by the city clerk.
5. Under the requirement of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/40.1, within thirty five (35) days after the city council approves or denies the application,
any appeal of the city council decision (by applicant, objector, public or anyone affected by the proposal) must be filed with the Illinois pollution
control board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 351/403
6. An applicant may not file an application for site location approval which is substantially the same as a request which was disapproved, pursuant to a
finding against the applicant under any criteria of section 39.2(a) of the act, within two (2) years of the time of the disapproval. (Ord. 2005-49, 10-24-
2005)
Chapter 8
WATER CONSERVATION
8-8-1: GENERAL WATERING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Residential Watering: The following watering and sprinkling restrictions shall apply throughout the year:
Residential watering of lawns, with other than handheld watering devices, shall be restricted to the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. (prevailing time). Such watering shall also be restricted to odd numbered calendar days for residences with odd numbered street addresses
and even numbered calendar days for residences with even numbered street addresses. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the continuous
watering of lawns, except during the authorized hours, using automatic watering devices or stationary water sprinklers.
B. Office/Business/Industrial Watering: The following watering and sprinkling restrictions shall apply throughout the year:
Office, business, and industrial watering of lawns shall be restricted to the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (prevailing
time). Such watering shall also be restricted to odd numbered calendar days for businesses with odd numbered street addresses and even numbered
calendar days for businesses with even numbered street addresses. These restrictions shall not apply to any person or entity normally engaged in the
business of growing or selling plant materials to the extent necessary to maintain such business inventory. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit
the continuous watering of lawns, except during the authorized hours, using automatic watering devices or stationary water sprinklers. (Ord. 2006-29,
4-24-2006)
8-8-2: SOD LAYING AND LAWN SEEDING:
Except for erosion control as approved by the city engineer, sod laying, lawn seeding, and planting of landscaping is prohibited from July 1 through August
31 of each year. In the absence of anyadditional watering restrictions imposed by the city, the following watering restrictions, for new sod, seeding or
landscaping shall apply:
A. On the day new sod or seed is planted, watering is allowed for up to eight (8) hours.
B. For the next nine (9) days, watering is allowed every day from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. until
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
C. After the first ten (10) days, the even/odd watering restrictions imposed by section 8-8-1 of this chapter shall apply.
Sod laying, lawn seeding, and the planting of landscaping may be prohibited or restricted by resolution of the city council, based upon the
recommendation of the mayor and/or the director of public works, as set forth in section 8-8-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
8-8-3: EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. The city council may impose mandatory water conservation measures by passage of a resolution stating that a water emergency exists in the city. In the
event of an emergency, immediately upon passage of such a resolution, the restrictions imposed by this chapter shall apply.
B. In the absence of a council resolution and whenever the water supply of the city is diminished, from any cause whatsoever, to an amount which in the
opinion of the mayor, in consultation with the director of public works and/or the city engineer and/or the chairman of the streets and utilities committee,
is or is likely to become dangerous to the health and safety of the public, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a proclamation in the
form of a public notice containing regulations on the use of water from the city water distribution system. Such regulations may provide for the limited
usage of water, limitations on days and hours of use from some or all purposes, and the prohibition of specified uses. Upon issuing said proclamation,
the mayor shall make the contents thereof known to the public by news release to the local newspapers and radio media and may also notify the
citizens in any other practical manner that shall be devised. Further, the mayor shall immediately notify all members of the city council of the nature of
the emergency and the regulations that have been imposed.
C. The emergency proclamation of the mayor shall remain in full force and effect until either of the following shall occur:
1. The mayor determines that the emergency no longer exists and that the emergency proclamation, and the regulations imposed thereby, shall no
longer continue in effect.
2. The city council modifies, repeals or makes permanent the emergency proclamation, and the regulations imposed thereby, by means of a resolution
passed at any regular or special meeting of the city council.
D. City employees, at the direction of the director of public works, shall notify and warn any person of the effect of said proclamation and direct said person
to comply with said watering or sprinkling restrictions. If any said person after having first been warned about said restrictions and said proclamation,
shall continue to violate said restrictions of the proclamation, they shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 352/403
E. The following restrictions (in addition to any additional restrictions which may be imposed) shall apply during any period in which emergency water
conservation restrictions are imposed:
1. Residential watering of trees, flowers, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetation by the use of handheld watering devices shall be restricted to the hours
of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (prevailing time). Such watering shall also be restricted to odd numbered calendar days for
residences with odd numbered street addresses and even numbered calendar days for residences with even numbered street addresses.
2. Office, business, and industrial watering of trees, flowers, shrubs, gardens, or other vegetation shall be restricted to the hours of five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (prevailing time). Such watering shall also be restricted to odd numbered calendar days for businesses with odd
numbered street addresses and even numbered calendar days for businesses with even numbered street addresses. These restrictions shall not
apply to any person or entity normally engaged in the business of growing or selling plant materials to the extent necessary to maintain such
business inventory.
3. No water shall be used to wash automobiles, except at places of business where autos are normally washed, either with attendants, automatic
equipment or by self-service. No swimming pools shall be filled, except for children's wading pools of fifty (50) gallon capacity or less. (Ord. 2006-29,
4-24-2006)
8-8-4: ACTIVITIES GENERALLY PERMITTED:
Unless additional restrictions are imposed by resolution of the city council or order of the director of public works:
A. There shall be no restrictions as to hours or days when water from the city water distribution system may be used for:
1. Watering or sprinkling of gardens, trees, shrubs or other outdoor plants where such watering or sprinkling is done by a person using a handheld
watering device;
2. Filling swimming pools with a volume of fifty (50) gallons orless; or
3. The automatic watering of trees and shrubs by means of root feeders within the drip line of the tree or shrub. The "drip line" of a tree or shrub is
defined as the ground area immediately beneath the branches of the tree or shrub.
4. The restrictions set forth above shall not apply as to any other lawful use of water from the city water distribution system such as bathing, washing,
etc. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
8-8-5: HARDSHIPS:
Upon written application, the director of public works may issue temporary permits, which allow watering that would otherwise be in violation of the above
restrictions, or other restrictions imposed by this chapter, if in the director's opinion strict compliance would impose undue hardship on the applicant. Said
permits shall be limited to ten (10) days' duration and shall only allow such watering as required to relieve undue hardship. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
8-8-6: NOTICE TO PURCHASERS:
Prior to selling any newly constructed property, the builder or owner must inform prospective purchaser of the watering and sod laying and lawn seeding
restrictions imposed by this chapter and attach a copy of this chapter to the contract. Prospective purchasers must sign a statement that they have been
informed of the lawn installation restrictions and have received a copy of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
8-8-7: EMERGENCY CANCELED:
Emergency restrictions imposed by this chapter shall cease to be in effect immediately after the city council passes a resolution stating that the water
emergency no longer exists. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
8-8-8: PENALTIES:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, the fine schedule for violating this chapter shall be as follows:
First offense $ 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third offense 250.00
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
The city shall use its best efforts to inform residents and businesses of the imposition of emergency water conservation measures, however failure to
receive notification shall not constitute a defense or excuse for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-29, 4-24-2006)
Chapter 9
TREE MAINTENANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 353/403
8-9-1: PURPOSE:
In order to promote the health, safety and enhance the beauty and general welfare of city of Plano, Illinois, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city
to plant, maintain, protect, preserve and to regulate the planting, maintaining, protecting and preserving of public trees and landscaping; to eliminate
dangerous conditions caused by trees and shrubs that may result in injuries to persons or property; and to protect all trees within the city against the
spread of disease or pests. This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as and referred to as the TREE MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2008-
43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and terms have the following meanings:
PUBLIC TREE: A tree or shrub planted or maintained, or both, by the city on an easement, planting easement, street, city park or public premises.
STREET: Includes the right of way width of any city maintained street, avenue, boulevard, line, walk, road, parkway, alley, or other right of way for highway
purposes.
STREET OR PARKWAY TREE: Any tree whose trunk is wholly or partially located within a city street right of way or planting easement. A "street tree" or a
"parkway tree" is always a public tree; "tree" includes shrub. (Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-3: TREES AND SHRUBS; DUTIES OF OWNERS:
A. No property owner shall permit any bushes, shrubs or plants located within the following vision triangle formed by intersecting streets to grow to a height
of more than three feet (3') from the surface of the roadway, or in the case of a tree, shall be pruned from the base of the tree to a minimum height of
seven feet (7'), in order that the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching the street intersection shall not be obstructed.
B. At any intersection the sides of the vision triangle formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be sixty feet (60') in length as measured
outward from the point of intersection of said centerlines along such centerlines.
C. Bushes, shrubs or plants planted along a city sidewalk shall be regularly pruned perpendicular to the edge of said sidewalk such that the full width of
the sidewalk is not diminished.
D. Every property owner shall remove all dead or dangerous trees on his or her property. If the director of building, planning and zoning determines that
any tree growing on private property within the city is afflicted with a dangerous insect, infestation, disease, or condition, which threatens other trees or
the public health, safety, or welfare, said tree is hereby declared a public nuisance, and the director shall immediately notify the owner, describing the
tree or trees, their location, the nature of the problem, and the corrective measures required to be taken. These measures may include pruning,
treatment, or destruction of the affected tree or trees as necessary.
E. No property owner shall undertake the pruning or removal of any branch or tree exceeding eight inches (8") in diameter without contracting for the work
with a licensed arborist or firm normally engaged in the occupation of pruning, treating, or removing trees. Said firm shall be licensed with the city of
Plano, and shall present a current certificate of liability insurance in the minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily
injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, when applying for and renewing their business license.
F. If any property owner does not comply with this section, the director may issue corrective orders as provided by subsection D of this section. Should the
property owner fail to comply with this order, the city may perform the necessary work. The cost of the work may be collected by suit or any other
manner provided by law. (Ord. 2010-22, 10-25-2010)
8-9-4: TREES AND SHRUBS; PUBLIC AREAS:
Due to the potential interference with public utilities, no person shall plant trees, bushes, shrubs or other plants in the public right of way without written
permission of the director of public works. Ownership of such trees, bushes, shrubs, or other plants located in the public right of way shall remain with the
city. All plantings shall conform to the approved tree list. (Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Unless written permission is given by the director of building, planning, and zoning no person shall do any of the following in any public area, including,
but not limited to, parkways, medians, and parks:
1. Tear down, destroy, or damage any public tree, shrub or plant.
2. Remove any guard, stake or other device or materials intended for the protection of a public tree or close or obstruct any open space about the base
of a public tree designed to permit access of air, water and fertilizer.
3. Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire, rope or other material to, around, or through any tree or its guard, except in emergencies such as storms or
accidents, and except for any nursery tag identifying its species or care.
4. Permit any fire to burn where such fire will injure any portion of any tree or shrub.
5. Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain or to be emptied on or about any tree or shrub.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 354/403
6. Deposit, store, place or maintain on any street, highway, or other public place, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other material which may impede
free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree or shrub.
7. Fail to report, repair or stop any leak existing or occurring in any gas or water pipe or main within a radius of forty feet (40') of any public tree.
8. Allow excavations or driveways to be placed within five feet (5') of any public tree. Any person making such excavations or construction shall guard
any tree within six feet (6') of the excavation or construction with a substantial frame box approved by the director of public works or director of
building, planning and zoning. All building materials or debris shall be kept at least four feet (4') from any tree.
B. It is prohibited for property owners to undertake, or allow, pruning or removal of a tree on private property in violation of subsection 8-9-3E of this
chapter.
C. It is prohibited to contract for, or offer the service of, the pruning or removal of a tree on private property in violation of subsection 8-9-3E of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-6: COMPENSATION FOR TREES DESTROYED OR DAMAGED:
Any person destroying or causing damage to any tree in any public area shall be responsible for the cost of repair or replacement of the destroyed or
damaged tree, which cost may be imposed as a condition of restitution in a civil infraction proceeding, or which may be collected by suit or any other legal
means. (Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The department of building, planning, and zoning, as a part of its duties to enforce the property maintenance code, is charged with the responsibility of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. No oversight or dereliction on the part of city employees or official of the city vested with the duty or authority to
issue permits, conduct investigations and enforce the provisions herein shall legalize, authorize, waive, or excuse any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
The director of building, planning, and zoning or his authorized representatives may upon the presentation of his credentials go upon any premises at any
reasonable time for the investigation and inspection of any tree which is suspected to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
8-9-8: LIEN FOR UNPAID CHARGES; COLLECTION:
A. Charges incurred by the city for the abatement of any violations under this chapter shall be a lien upon the real estate upon or for which such charges
were incurred by the city, whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for more than thirty (30) days after it has been rendered.
B. A lien is created under the preceding sentence only if the city sends to the owner or owners of record of the real estate, as referenced by the taxpayer's
identification number (permanent index number): 1) a copy of each delinquency notice sent to the person or persons who is or are delinquent in paying
the charges, or other notice sufficient to inform the owner or owners of record, as referenced by the taxpayer's identification number (permanent index
number), that the charges have become delinquent and 2) a notice that unpaid charges may create a lien on the real estate under this section.
C. However, the city has no preference over the rights of any purchaser, mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other lienholder arising prior to the filing of the
notice of such lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Kendall County, Illinois.
D. The notice required by this section shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of such real estate sufficient for the identification
thereof, 2) the amount of money due for such service/charges, and 3) the date when such amount became delinquent.
The city shall also send a copy of the notice of the lien to the owner or owners of record of the real estate, as referenced by the taxpayer's identification
number (permanent index number). The city shall have the power to foreclose this lien in the same manner and with the same effect as in the
foreclosure of mortgages on real estate.
E. The city shall also have the power, from time to time, to sue the owner or owners of the real estate in a civil action to recover the money due for the
services and charges rendered, plus court costs. Whenever a judgment is entered in such a civil action, the foregoing provisions in this section with
respect to filing sworn statements of such delinquencies in the office of the recorder and creating a lien against the real estate shall not be effective
thereafter as to charges sued upon and no lien shall exist thereafter against the real estate for the delinquency. Judgment in such a civil action
operates as a release and waiver of the lien for the amount of the judgment. (Ord. 2008-43, 9-8-2008)
Chapter 10
REGULATIONS ON THE USE OF PHOSPHORUS-CONTAINING FERTILIZER
8-10-1: PURPOSE:
The city is desirous of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public by protecting the water quality in the lakes, rivers, and streams in the city's
environs. The city has found that there is a biological link between the concentration of phosphorous in surface water runoff and the biological health of
lakes, rivers, and streams. An increase in the phosphorus concentration in surface water runoff results in an increase in the rate of growth and volume of
undesirable biological growth in lakes, rivers, and streams. A significant source of phosphorus content in surface water runoff is fertilizer used in residential
and commercial applications. Accordingly, the city desires to regulate the use of phosphorus-containing fertilizer so as to limit the concentration of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 355/403
phosphorous in the city's lakes, rivers, and streams and by so doing, to increase the beneficial effects of said lakes, rivers, and streams on the public's
health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who is engaged in the business of applying fertilizer for hire.
FERTILIZER: A substance containing nitrogen, phosphorus, potash, or any other recognized plant nutrient element or compound which is used primarily
for its plant nutrient content. Fertilizer shall not include the following natural products: agricultural limestone, marl, sea solids and unprocessed animal
manure, which have not been manipulated so as to alter or change them chemically, burnt or hydrated lime, and sewage sludge produced by any sanitary
district, and shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who applies fertilizer but who is not a commercial applicator. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-3: PROHIBITION:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator, including homeowners and renters, shall apply to any area within the city of Plano any fertilizer, liquid or
granular, which contains any amount of phosphorous or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, except:
A. The naturally occurring phosphorus in unadulterated natural or organic fertilizing products such as yard waste compost, or
B. As otherwise provided in section 8-10-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-4: IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, DRAINAGEWAYS AND BUFFER ZONES:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator shall apply any fertilizer to:
A. Impervious surfaces;
B. Areas within drainage ditches;
C. Waterways or within ten feet (10') thereof; and
D. Any delineated wetland and any area established as a natural buffer zone. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exemptions to the prohibitions described in this chapter:
A. The prohibition against the use of fertilizer containing phosphorus shall not apply to turf and lawn areas for which soil tests confirm the ambient
phosphorus content is below median phosphorus levels for typical area soils. The scope of this exemption shall only be for such volume or
concentration of phosphorus necessary to permit such turf or lawn area to contain phosphorus levels equal to the median phosphorus levels for typical
area soils. Phosphorus applied as fertilizer pursuant to this exemption shall be integrated into the soil where it is immobilized and generally protected
from loss by stormwater runoff.
B. The prohibition contained in section 8-10-3 of this chapter shall not apply to any farming or agricultural business, provided the use of fertilizers is related
to growth of a product or maintenance of growing fields. Appropriate steps shall be taken to integrate the fertilizer into the soil where it is immobilized
and generally protected from loss by stormwater runoff. This exemption shall not apply to the standard lawn area of said farm or agricultural business.
(Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-6: SIGNS:
Any person, corporation, or partnership which sells any fertilizer at retail shall be required to post a sign at the point of sale for fertilizer containing the
following legend:
The city of Plano prohibits the application of fertilizer containing phosphorus to any lawn or turf area and any impervious surface, drainageway, wetland,
or buffer zone.
Such sign shall have an area of not less than 93.5 square inches and shall be conspicuously posted no less than four feet (4') above the ground or floor
level. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
8-10-7: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 356/403
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the chief of police and the director of building, planning, and zoning, or other city officer charged with
the enforcement of city ordinances.
B. Any person, corporation, firm, franchise or other entity found to violate this chapter shall be liable for penalties equal to not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. (Ord. 2008-45, 9-22-2008)
Chapter 11
ALARM SYSTEMS
8-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110 volt AC line)
arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police department may be expected to respond. The term alarm
system shall include alarm systems that signal a robbery or burglary or attempted robbery or attempted burglary and smoke alarms and fire alarms and
similar detection devices, but excludes automobile alarms.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for proprietary systems. If such a system, however,
employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the
definition of "alarm system", and shall be subject to this chapter.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system or of his employees or agents, excluding force majeure, such as natural disasters or power outages.
SUBSCRIBER: A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business
to monitor and/or service the alarm device. (Ord. 2009-37, 12-14-2009)
8-11-2: FALSE ALARMS; RESPONSE CHARGES:
A. Charges: When the police department responds to false alarms received from the same premises more than three (3) times in a twelve (12) month
period of a calendar year (January through December), the alarm user or subscriber shall pay the city the following amount within thirty (30) days after
receiving notification of the fourth false alarm:
1. Four (4) to nine (9) responses occurring in a calendar year: Fifty dollars ($50.00) each.
2. Ten (10) to nineteen (19) responses occurring in a calendar year: One hundred dollars ($100.00) each.
3. Twenty (20) or more responses occurring in a calendar year: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each.
B. Late Payment: If payment is not received within the thirty (30) day period, as provided above, the charge for such response shall be increased to double
the amount of the initial response charge.
C. Exempt Properties: Properties occupied by governmental entities, including, but not limited to, school buildings, county buildings, and other taxing
bodies shall be exempt from this chapter. Furthermore, all churches, rectories, and parsonages shall be exempt from this chapter. (Ord. 2009-37, 12-
14-2009)
Chapter 12
CITY PARKS; RULES AND REGULATIONS
8-12-1: SCOPE:
The rules and regulations contained in this chapter are intended to ensure the use and enjoyment of all city park facilities. It is the intention of the city
council that not only will this chapter be enforced but that all appropriate provisions of state criminal law, especially those related to the use of drugs, liquor,
or weapons, be enforced by the city police. This chapter is in no way intended to take the place of provisions of state, municipal, or county law otherwise
intended to ensure the safety and good conduct of any person making use of city park facilities. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-2: PUBLIC'S RESPONSIBILITY TO BE INFORMED:
It is the public's responsibility to be aware of all park rules and regulations that may or may not be posted in the parks or at the nature trails. Specific
prohibited activities, park hours, and other rules and regulations which are referred to in this chapter are printed and are available for inspection at the city
offices or recreation offices. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-3: OTHER AGENCIES' AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE:
All law enforcement agencies which have concurrent jurisdiction or whose corporate limits fall within the boundaries of the city, and which have entered
into an intergovernmental agreement with the city shall consent to have the city exercise full power and authority to act in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 357/403
8-12-4: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A. Trees, Bushes: No person shall cut, pick, mutilate, or in any other way harm any tree, bush, shrub, wildflower or other natural formation on city park
property.
B. Benches, Signs, And Buildings: No person shall deface or destroy any bench, sign, building or any other property under the control of the city.
C. Vehicles, Animals Damaging Property: No person shall drive any motor vehicle or motorized vehicle as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, bicycle,
horse, or similar animal, on city property in such a manner to destroy or damage city park property.
D. Fires Restricted: No person shall build a fire of wood, charcoal or other material on the ground or any other place except as specifically designated by
the city for such purpose and any fire of legal nature shall not be unduly large or dangerous to surroundings.
E. Digging For Artifacts Prohibited: Digging for artifacts or other purposes will be prohibited in all city parks unless permission is given by the Plano city
council. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-5: CRIMINAL ACTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall commit any criminal act on city park property as prohibited in the criminal code of the state of Illinois as set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq. (Ord. 2010-3, 1-25-2010)
8-12-6: HOURS:
A. City Park Use: Parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours; with the exception of the city park (Klatt), which is
closed during the winter. Hours for park use shall be from dawn until dusk unless otherwise posted.
B. Temporary Closures: Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the city, at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular intervals and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and entirely or for merely certain uses as the city shall find necessary.
C. Leaving Park Property When Closed: No person shall remain on city park property at a time when it is not open to the public, except where otherwise
authorized. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-7: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED:
A. Transporting Alcohol In Vehicle: No person shall possess, consume, or transport in a vehicle any alcoholic beverage on city park property as set out in
the city ordinances.
B. Designated Areas Excepted: A special exception from this section is granted in designated areas of city park property on authorization of the city for
special events. All rules and regulations applicable to those designated areas must be abided by as set forth therein.
C. Intoxicated Persons: No person shall enter or remain on city park property in an intoxicated condition.
D. Persons Under The Influence Of Drugs: No person shall use, possess or be under the influence of any substance, as defined in the controlled
substance act or cannabis, as defined in the cannabis control act while on city park property. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-8: RESTRICTIONS TO VEHICLE PARKING:
A. Public Nuisance; Towing Away: Any vehicle parked or standing on city park property in violation of any law, ordinance, or rule is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. Such vehicle may be removed and the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle shall be liable for all towing, storage and
other charges arising out of any action taken hereunder.
B. Parking On Sod Or Dirt: No person shall park or drive any vehicle on city park property on any area covered by sod, dirt or other areas not designed for
such traffic or usage unless permitted to do so by the director of public works or city police department without a written permit from the city.
C. Posted Areas: No person shall drive or park any vehicle in any area which is posted to prohibit or restrict such.
D. Vehicles Obstructing Traffic Or Boat Landings: No vehicle may be left unattended on any roadway on city park property or obstruct a boat landing or
traffic.
E. Handicapped Parking Areas: No person shall park a vehicle on city park property in a handicapped reserved space unless such vehicle is clearly
marked by a handicap sign or license plate duly issued by the state or local government body.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 358/403
F. Prohibited Parking Areas: No person shall park any vehicle adjacent to a curb painted yellow which shall constitute a prohibited parking area.
G. Vehicles Or Animals On Sidewalks: No person shall drive a vehicle or ride an animal on any sidewalk on city park property.
H. Registered Owner Responsible For Fine: It shall be the responsibility of the registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this section to comply
with the payment of the prescribed fines, and it shall not be an affirmative defense that the vehicle was not under his/her control at the time of violation.
I. Current Use Of Facilities: No person shall allow a vehicle to be parked on city park property while the operator or occupants are not currently using the
facilities of the city or participating in its programs, or during the hours the facility is closed to the public.
J. Bicycle Parking: No bicycles shall park on sidewalks, gazebos, or play areas designated for park users. Wherever possible, bicycles shall be parked in
designated areas such as: parking lots, bicycle racks, or other posted areas. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-9: TRESPASS TO LAND:
A. Swimming; Walking On Frozen Waters: No person shall wade or swim within any waters, or walk on frozen waters under the control of the city where
such activity is prohibited.
B. Tents, Permit Required: No person shall set a tent on city park property without permission of the city in the form of a written permit from the city. (Ord.
2009-28, 9-28-2009)
C. Special Use Areas: No person shall enter or remain in an activity or special use area sponsored or provided by the city where a preregistration,
application, admission fee or membership in an organization is required, without first complying with the preregistration, application, admission fee or
membership requirements. (Ord. 2010-3, 1-25-2010)
D. Climbing Walls Or Fences: No person shall climb, walk or sit upon any sign, wall or fence under the control of the city, nor shall any person go upon any
grass plot or any portion of any city park property where, by any sign or notice, persons are prohibited from going.
E. Sleeping In Park: No person shall make use of any city park property as a place to sleep.
F. Loitering:
1. No person or persons shall loiter in a special use area facility and not participate in the program or use of the facility as offered by the city.
2. No person or persons shall loiter in the city park parking lots. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-10: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. False Alarms: No person shall transmit a call to a park official of a fire or police emergency knowing such call is in fact false. Filing a false fire or police
report is prohibited.
B. Lewd Conduct: No person or persons shall engage in the lewd fondling of self or others or engage in sexual intercourse or deviant sexual conduct on
city park property, or be in violation of indecent exposure.
C. Disorderly Conduct Or Behavior: No person on city park property shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language,
or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to disturb public peace.
D. Breach Of The Peace: No person shall act in such a manner as to cause alarm to another or provoke a breach of the peace on city park property.
E. Hindering Park Or City Officials: No person shall cause a disturbance, hinder, intimidate or obstruct a park official or city official engaged in his or her
official duties. No such person nor one engaged in illegal activities shall remain on city park property after being instructed to leave by a park or city
official.
F. Gang Activities: No person or persons, shall enter, gather, or loiter on city park property while wearing known gang colors, emblems or other gang
insignia or communicate gang related messages through the use of hand signals or other means of communication while on city park property.
G. Begging: No person shall use city park property as a place to panhandle or beg for money.
H. Obstructing Pedestrians Or Vehicles: No person or persons shall loiter in the parks in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicle movement.
I. Skating, Rollerblading, Bicycling:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 359/403
1. No rollerskating, rollerblading, skateboarding, or bicycling shall be allowed on park equipment, nor in any areas prohibited by the city of Plano,
including, but not limited to, basketball and tennis courts and gazebos.
2. Any person using roller skates, rollerblades, skateboards or bicycling shall relinquish right of way to all other pedestrians.
J. Bullying: Bullying is prohibited in all city parks.
K. Equipment: Some of the city park equipment is age restricted. The enforcement will be at the discretion of city official or police officers. (Ord. 2009-28,
9-28-2009)
8-12-11: LITTER:
A. Use Of Receptacles: No person shall discard any paper, bottles, cans or other form of rubbish on city park grounds except in receptacles provided for
such purpose.
B. Abandonment Of Vehicles, Used Property: No person shall abandon or unload any used property or vehicles on city park property.
C. Disposing Of Garbage, Yard Waste: No person shall bring any household garbage, yard waste, building materials, trash, rubbish or other matter onto
city park property or leased lands and leave such with the intent of disposing of it. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-12: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Definitions: Definitions as used in this chapter, shall be as follows. Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the meanings
ascribed to them.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian for, or given custody of, a minor by a court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR: A person who has not attained eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts
described below. Parent or guardian may be responsible for any damage done by minor.
1. An unemancipated minor residing with parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt or violation of any ordinance, law or statute, prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
2. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service returned, from the city of Plano police department or Kendall County sheriff, following adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and
3. If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation
of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from any admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 2009-28,
9-28-2009)
8-12-13: MAKING AND CREATION OF NOISE:
A. All amplified noise shall not be able to be heard beyond seventy five feet (75') from the source. (Ord. 2014-24, 7-14-2014)
B. Any sound amplified electronically or otherwise to a level that can be heard beyond seventy five feet (75') is prohibited unless expressly authorized by
the city of Plano. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-14: RESTROOMS AND WASHROOMS:
No person on city park property shall litter, damage or deface restrooms and washrooms. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-15: RULES TO BE OBEYED:
No person shall violate or disobey any rule of the city relating to the use and governance of park property. The city may issue such rules and regulations
as are necessary to ensure public health and safety in the use and enjoyment of any and all park facilities. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-16: EJECTION:
Any park official or city official shall have the authority to remove from city park property any person acting in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-
2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 360/403
8-12-17: OFFICIALS:
Park officials and city officials are defined inclusive of the following list:
A. City of Plano police officers.
B. Public works employees.
C. Elected city officials. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
8-12-18: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2009-28, 9-28-2009)
Chapter 13
TOBACCO DEALERS
8-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product" excludes cigarettes,
smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in this section and any product approved by the United States food and drug
administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for any other medical purposes, and
is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, or tobacco in any of its forms, including "alternative nicotine product" as herein defined.
VENDING MACHINES: Any mechanical or electrical, self-service devices which, upon insertion of money or tokens, dispenses tobacco products. (Ord.
2014-8, 2-24-2014)
8-13-2: LICENSE/REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License/Registration Required: It shall be unlawful to sell or to offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver, or to keep with the intention of selling at retail,
giving away or delivering, tobacco products within the city without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this chapter.
B. Additional License: Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code.
C. Application For License: Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall be processed according to normal
licensing procedures.
D. License/Registration Fee: The annual license/registration fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, payable
on July 1 of each year. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
8-13-3: PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Sale To Underage Persons: It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to
any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. Posting Of Signs: Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of
tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The letters of said sign shall be a minimum of one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
C. Employment Of Underage Persons: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under sixteen (16) years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises. (Ord. 2014-8, 2-
24-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 361/403
D. Purchase By Underage Persons; Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase
tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
E. Possession By Underage Persons: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco product; provided,
that the possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
F. Sale Near Church Or School: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products within one hundred feet
(100') of any school, childcare facility, or other building used for education or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
G. Gift Of Tobacco Products On City, School Or Park Property: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise
distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or
person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other
property owned by the city, any school district, any park district or any public library.
H. Vending Machines; Locking Device: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling,
giving away or delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic
locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years old.
I. Exemption: Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally
not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of business located at such premises shall be exempt from subsection
H of this section. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
8-13-4: AGENT AND EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
8-13-5: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Determination By Mayor; Hearing:
1. The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provision of this
chapter, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the
mayor may instead levy a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense, four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the second offense
in a twelve (12) month period, and six hundred dollars ($600.00) for the third or subsequent offense in any twelve (12) month period. Each day on
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2014-8, 2-24-2014)
2. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after public hearing in front of the mayor and city
council. The licensee shall be given not less than seven (7) days written notice of said opportunity to appear and defend against the charges
contained in the notice. The seven (7) day notice period shall begin to run the day after delivery of the notice.
3. The mayor shall, within ten (10) days after the hearing, state the reason for any suspension, revocation or fine, in a written order, together with the
amount of the fine, the time of the suspension or that the license has been revoked. A copy of the order shall be served upon the licensee within
seven (7) days of the decision.
B. Payment Of Fine: Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the city any fine levied by the
mayor within fourteen (14) days of the notice of the order of said mayor setting forth the amount of the fine.
C. Failure To Pay Fine: Failure of any licensee to pay said fine within fourteen (14) days of notice of said order shall be cause for license suspension or
revocation. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
8-13-6: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any reason, no license shall be granted to the licensee for a period of four (4) months thereafter for the
conduct of business of selling "tobacco products" as defined in this chapter in the premises described on such revoked license. (Ord. 2010-8, 4-26-2010)
Chapter 14
COLLECTION BINS FOR DONATED ITEMS
8-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Collection bins for donated items" are defined as any bin, box or container that is accessible to the public and is intended for the collection of items,
including, but not limited to, secondhand clothes and toys intended for donation. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 362/403
8-14-2: LOCATION:
Donation drop boxes are permitted if located on property in the business or commercial zoning districts or on properties primarily occupied by an
educational, religious, governmental or charitable use. The boxes shall only be placed with the property owner's permission and on properties that contain
an existing and operating use. No more than two (2) boxes (side by side) are allowed on a zoning lot less than two (2) acres in size. No more than three
(3) boxes (side by side) are allowed on a zoning lot equal to or greater than two (2) acres in size. Each box shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and
twenty five (25) square feet in ground area. The boxes shall be located on a parking lot or other paved surface, not adjacent to the front building facade.
The boxes shall not: be within fifteen feet (15') of the front property line, reduce the width of paved clear space for the passage of pedestrians to less than
five feet (5'), be located within twenty five feet (25') of a fire department connection, utilize any required parking spaces or disrupt the flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. The box shall include language prohibiting the placement of items outside of the box. The name, address, e-mail, and phone number of
the box owner/operator shall be posted on the box. Upon telephone notification from the city of Plano code enforcement department that materials are
being placed outside of a box, the box owner/operator shall have forty eight (48) hours to remove said materials. Failure to do so on three (3) or more
occasions in any calendar year shall result in penalties listed herein. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
8-14-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to place or allow to be placed on their property a collection bin without first making application and securing
an annual license from the city. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
8-14-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An applicant for a collection bin license shall file an application therefor with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city, which application shall be
forwarded to the director of building, planning and zoning for review. The application shall include, without limitation, the following information:
A. The name, mailing address, telephone number and electronic mail address of the applicant.
B. The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the collection bin will be installed or placed, if different.
C. The street address of the property on which the collection bin will be installed or placed.
D. A site plan or aerial depiction of the property on which the collection bin will be installed or placed, which site plan or aerial depiction shall indicate the
location of the proposed collection bin with distances to the nearest lot lines.
E. Written authorization from the property owner or authorized management company consenting to the placement of a collection bin on the subject
property.
F. Payment of an annual nonrefundable collection bin license application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The fee is per bin or up to twenty five (25)
square feet of ground area. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
8-14-5: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION; REVOCATION:
A. Approval: Upon receipt of a complete application for a collection bin license, and upon a determination that the application satisfies the standards and
conditions set forth in this chapter, the city clerk shall approve the application and issue a collection bin license to the applicant. The director of building,
planning and zoning may condition approval of the application upon additional provisions or restrictions that are consistent with the provisions set forth
in this chapter.
B. Denial Or Revocation: The city, upon the recommendation of the director of building, planning and zoning, may revoke a collection bin license or deny
an application for a collection bin license upon a determination that:
1. The application contains any false, fraudulent or misleading material statement.
2. Either the application or the proposed donation collection bin does not satisfy the standards and conditions set forth in this chapter.
3. The applicant has made false, fraudulent or misleading material statements in the course of operating a collection bin in the city.
4. The applicant has previously violated any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the operation of a collection bin in the city.
5. Installation, placement or operation of the proposed collection bin will be injurious to the public health, safety or welfare.
C. Notification Of Denial Or Revocation: Upon the revocation of an existing collection bin license or the denial of an application therefor, the city clerk shall
notify the applicant by first class mail.
D. License Term: Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate on December 31 following its issuance. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
8-14-6: STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 363/403
A license shall not be issued for a collection bin unless it demonstrates compliance with the following standards:
A. May only be placed on properties within the permitted zoning districts as stated in this chapter.
B. Shall not be located on vacant properties or where the collection bin is the principal structure on the lot.
C. Shall not be placed within a required parking space.
D. Shall not be placed within a required front yard or within ten feet (10') of a side or rear lot line.
E. Shall not be located in a drive aisle or located in such a manner as to cause a sight obstruction for motorist.
F. Shall not reduce any sidewalk or paved space designed for the passage of pedestrians to less than five feet (5') in width.
G. No more than two (2) collection bins shall be allowed on a zoning lot less than two (2) acres in size. No more than three (3) collection bins shall be
allowed on a zoning lot equal to or greater than two (2) acres in size.
H. No more than one collection bin operator is allowed on a zoning lot.
I. Shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and twenty five (25) square feet in ground area.
J. Shall be located on concrete or a paved surface.
K. Shall contain the following contact information clearly visible from the front of the bin: the name, address, e-mail, and phone number of the
owner/operator. The collection bin shall also include a legible notice prohibiting the placement of items outside the bin.
L. Shall not contain any advertising, beyond the owner/operator of the bin. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
8-14-7: MAINTENANCE:
Collection bins shall be maintained in good condition with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust. All bins shall be free of debris and shall be serviced
regularly so as to prevent overflow of donations or the accumulation of junk, debris or other material. Upon telephone notification from the director of
building, planning and zoning code enforcement division that materials are being placed outside the bin, the bin owner/operator shall have forty eight (48)
hours to remove said materials. Failure to do so on three (3) or more occasions in any calendar year will result in revocation of the license. (Ord. 2016-24,
7-11-2016)
8-14-8: PENALTY:
In addition to any other remedy available to the city under this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty and fine provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-11-2016)
Chapter 15
REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE KEEPING OF HONEYBEES
8-15-1: PURPOSE:
The city is desirous of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public by establishing certain requirements and regulations of sound beekeeping
practices, which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of honeybees in populated areas within the corporate
limits of the city. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
8-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING, PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT: The building, planning and zoning department of the city, and any officer thereof, including all code
enforcement officials.
HONEYBEES: Bees of any type customarily raised for honey; such bees are also known as Apis mellifera.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 364/403
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city, and any police officer. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
8-15-3: KEEPING OF HONEYBEES:
The keeping by any person of honeybee colonies in the city is prohibited, except in compliance with the following provisions of this chapter:
A. Hive Type: All honeybee colonies shall be kept in inspectable type hives with removable combs, which shall be kept in sound, usable condition.
B. Honeybee Colonies: Honeybee colonies may be kept only in the following zoning districts in the city: R-4, one-family residence district, R-3, one-family
residence district, R-2, one-family residence district, R-1, one-family residence district, and A-1, agricultural district, and then only on a lot containing a
minimum lot size of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
C. Fencing Of Flyways: For all colonies located less than twenty five feet (25') from the nearest property line, as measured from the nearest point on the
hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet (6') in height, consisting of a solid fence, wall,
dense vegetation, or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extending at least ten feet (10') beyond the colony in each direction, so
that all honeybees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet (6') above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. Any
such fence or wall shall comply with the fence regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 3 of this code.
D. Water: Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the honeybees on the property at which the hive is
located, so that the honeybees are discouraged from congregating at swimming pools, hose bibs, pet water bowls, birdbaths, or other water sources at
which they may come in contact with humans or domestic pets.
E. Removal: Any honeybee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping, or any swarm of honeybees or colony residing in a hive which,
by virtue of its condition, has been abandoned by the beekeeper, is unlawful, and shall be removed from the city limits by the property owner upon
receipt of written notice from the city.
F. Maximum Quantity: Not more than one honeybee colony may be kept on any lot or parcel in the city.
G. Public Nuisance: All other nest or colony of stinging insects, such as yellow jackets, hornets, other varieties of bees, and wasps, including Vespidae, in
trees, buildings, underground or in any other space, diseased colony of honeybees, or any colony of honeybees not maintained in compliance with this
code constitutes a public nuisance. The existence of a nest of wild bees of any type, not cultivated by any person and whose honey is not harvested by
any person, shall not constitute a violation of this code, unless such nest is in such location as to present a threat of stinging to any person on any
public street, sidewalk, mall, park or other public place, or to any person in any parking lot, sidewalk or other place open to the public in a shopping
center or other privately owned property open to the public, or to any person on adjacent private property. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
8-15-4: ENFORCEMENT AND RIGHT OF ENTRY:
A. The county health department, the city police department, and the building, planning and zoning department shall enforce this chapter, and are
empowered, during reasonable business hours, to enter premises to inspect hives or colonies for the purpose of ascertaining the variety of insects
occupying the hives, conditions of health, and management of crowding. Entry may be pursuant to warrant or pursuant to the consent of the owner or
occupier of the premises. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
8-15-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS:
A. The requirements of the Illinois bees and apiaries act, or any successor thereto, as in effect from time to time, shall apply to the keeping of honeybees
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
8-15-6: PENALTY:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum provided in
title 1, chapter 14, "Administrative Adjudication", of this code for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2014-21, 6-23-2014)
Chapter 16
SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT
8-16-1: ADOPTED:
A. The Smoke Free Illinois Act, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the Smoke Free Code of the City, which regulates and governs
smoking in public places, places of employment, and government vehicles; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and
terms of said Smoke Free Illinois Act are hereby adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter; and the City of Plano Police
Department is empowered to adopt procedures for the issuance of citations and the collection of penalties for violation of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 365/403
B. References to a State employee or official may be to a corresponding City employee or official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any
provision of the Smoke Free Illinois Act adopted herein may be cited by placing "8-16- " before the appropriate Smoke Free Illinois Act section number.
C. The use of any "alternative nicotine product" as defined under 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 675/1.5(a), as amended from time to time, specifically the
use of what is commonly known as electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes, including USB - shaped e-cigarettes, such as JUUL®, shall be included within
the definition of "smoking" or "smoke" under the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/10, as amended from time to time.
D. "Electronic cigarette" means any electronically actuated device which in operation causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor, or other substance
other than those produced by unenhanced human exhalation. "Electronic cigarette" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or under any other
product name or descriptor. The term "electronic cigarette" does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that has been specifically approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration. (Ord. 2018-27, 12-10-2018)
8-16-2: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND OUTDOOR VENUES:
It is unlawful to smoke in the following unenclosed public places:
A. In all parks or recreational areas owned or operated by the City including, but not limited to, athletic fields, bleachers, hard court play surfaces,
playgrounds, shelters and parking lots located on the same property as the park or recreational area, unless exempted by the City Council for special
requests and events. (Ord. 2018-27, 12-10-2018)
8-16-3: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT THROUGH ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
A. Violation; Enforcement: A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates section 15 or 20 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall
be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. Enforcement shall be through administrative adjudication.
B. Fines:
1. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a first violation/offense, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second violation/offense and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third and
each subsequent violation/offense.
2. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates section 15 or 20 of the Smoke Free Illinois
Act shall be fined: a) two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation/offense, b) five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second
violation/offense within one year after the first violation/offense, and c) seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each additional violation within one
year after the first violation/offense. (Ord. 2018-27, 12-10-2018)
8-16-4: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this title or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of this title that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid
application of this title is severable. (Ord. 2018-27, 12-10-2018)
Title 9
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE OFFICERS
9-1-1: POLICE PENSION FUND1:
A. Definition: "Policeman" as used in this Section means any person appointed and sworn or designated by law as a policeman of the City and who has
served or is serving or shall serve in the regularly constituted Police Department of the City as a policeman, police supervisor or police officer.
B. Fund Established: There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund under and in accordance with the provisions of an act of the Legislature of the
State of Illinois entitled, "Policemen's Pension Fund-Municipalities 500,00 and Under" Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 1081/2, paragraphs 3-101 et
seq.
C. Purpose: Said Police Pension Fund is hereby created in and for the City for the purpose of providing pensions for members of the Police Department of
the City under the terms and regulations hereinafter set forth, and not to be in conflict with the provisions set down in chapter 1081/2, paragraphs 3-101
through 3-149 inclusive of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 366/403
D. Tax Levied for Fund: The City Council shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all taxable property of the City at the rate on the dollar of all such taxable
property which will produce an amount which when added to the deductions from the salaries or wages of policemen and receipts available from all
other sources as hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual requirements of the Pension Fund. Such tax shall be levied and
collected in like manner with general taxes of the City and shall be in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all
property within the City.
In the event that the Pension Fund in any year, over and above the reserve fund, is sufficient to meet all demands of those requiring payment
therefrom in such year, the City Council may dispense with the levy of such tax.
All such monies derived from the taxes levied hereunder and the monies provided by Section 2-4-4 of this Code shall be set apart by the City
Treasurer to constitute the Police Pension Fund.
E. Applicability of Provisions, Eligibility for Benefits:
1. This Section is applicable to all policemen of the City who meet the qualifications set forth in article 3, chapter 1081/2 of the "Policemen's Pension
Fund-Municipalities 500,000 and Under", Illinois Revised Statutes.
2. All policemen and widows or dependents are eligible for pension benefits from the Fund who qualify under paragraphs 3-107, 3-108, 3-113, 3-118
and 3-119 of chapter 1081/2 of "Policemen's Pension Fund-Municipalities 500,000 and Under", Illinois Revised Statutes. (Ord. 1974-1, eff. 1-1-74)
9-1-2: AUXILIARY POLICE:
All officers, both full-time and part-time, must complete the twenty four (24) hour mandatory firearms training course required by Public Act 79-652. The
training must be completed before an officer can carry a weapon in the performance of his official duties. The firearms training requirement is incorporated
as an integral part of the basic law enforcement training course prescribed for full-time law enforcement officers. Officers that complete the basic law
enforcement training courses thus comply with the firearms training requirement. Regardless of where the firearms training is obtained, it must be
completed prior to the officer carrying a weapon in the performance of his duties. (1989 Code)
9-1-3: POLICE POSITIONS; CHAIN OF COMMAND:
A. Corporals:
1. Position Established; Appointment: There is hereby established the position or rank of Corporal of the Plano Police Department. The number of
Corporals in the Plano Police Department shall be determined, from time to time, by the City Council in accordance with the needs of the Police
Department of the City. The position or rank of Corporal shall be filled by appointment to the rank of Corporal by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners of the City2 (after appropriate testing) and shall be filled by a person who is then a patrol officer of the City. (Ord. 1990-17, 7-23-90)
2. Duties: The duties of the Corporal shall be such duties as are assigned to him or her, from time to time, by the Chief of Police of the City, giving due
regard to the chain of command within the Plano Police Department. (Ord. 1990-17, 7-23-90; amd. Ord. 1991-13, 4-22-91)
3. Salary: The salary or compensation for the Corporal shall be as established, from time to time, by the City.
B. Lieutenant:
1. Position Established; Appointment: There is hereby established the position or rank of Lieutenant of the Plano Police Department. The number of
Lieutenants in the Plano Police Department shall be determined, from time to time, by the City Council in accordance with the needs, from time to
time, of the Police Department of the City. Upon the effective date hereof, there is hereby established the position of Lieutenant. The position or rank
of Lieutenant shall be filled by appointment to the rank of Lieutenant by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City3 of Plano (after
appropriate testing) and shall be filled by a person who is then a police officer of the City.
2. Duties: The duties of the Lieutenant shall be such duties as are assigned to him or her, from time to time, by the Chief of Police of the City, giving
due regard to the chain of command with the Plano Police Department. Wherever, in the Rules and Regulations of the Plano Police Department, the
rank of Commander appears, said rank shall be construed to include and mean the rank of Lieutenant.
3. Salary: The salary or compensation for the Lieutenant shall be as established, from time to time, by the City. The chain of command in the Police
Department shall be: Chief of Police, Lieutenant of Police, Sergeant of Police, Corporal of Police, senior patrol officer or officers, patrol officer or
officers. (Ord. 1991-13, 4-22-91)
Chapter 2
DOGS AND CATS; PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS IN THE CITY
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ADMINISTRATOR: A veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois and appointed pursuant to the animal control act1.
ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN: Any person appointed by the administrator to perform the duties set forth in this code or in the animal control act2.
AT LARGE: Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is not under the control of a responsible person, nor under restraint.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 367/403
CAT: Felis catus as defined in 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2.04a.
DANGEROUS DOG3: A. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of
serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal or
B. A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
DANGEROUS DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any domestic animal when unmuzzled or unleashed, that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal:
A. The behavior of which constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person or animal in a place where such person is conducting himself or
herself peacefully or lawfully; or
B. Which chases or approaches a person or animal upon a street, sidewalk or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack.
DANGEROUS/EXOTIC ANIMAL: All animals defined as "dangerous animals" in the Illinois dangerous animals act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 585/0.1
et seq., as amended from time to time, the provisions thereof being incorporated herein by reference, or monkey, gorilla, chimpanzee, and any wild dog or
other nonhuman primate, any rodent weighing more than one pound with the exception of guinea pigs, and any noncanine animal not native to North
America and which can attain a weight of two hundred (200) pounds, or any feline animal which can attain a weight in excess of forty (40) pounds.
DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Dogs, cats, and any other types of animals or fowl normally maintained as a household pet or guardian.
IMPOUND: To take into the custody of the city police department or county animal control.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, of an antirabies vaccine as approved by the department of agriculture of
the state of Illinois.
OWNER: Any person who has a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his/her care, or who acts as
custodian of an animal, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him/her.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, any public or private institution, or any municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the city.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is familiar with the animal and has the size and experience to be able to keep the animal under complete control
at all times.
RESTRAINT: An animal is under restraint if it is confined by a fence of sufficient height and security (which may be an electronic invisible fence system) to
prevent it from leaving the encompassed area, or on a leash under the control of a responsible person, or on a leash securely fastened to an inanimate
object and of a length which prevents it from leaving the property of its owner or keeper.
SERIOUS INJURY: Any physical injury that results in broken bones, lacerations, wounds, or skin punctures that require medical treatment.
VICIOUS DOG4: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions.
VICIOUS DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any domestic animal that, without justification, attacks a person, or animal and causes serious physical injury or death, or
any individual animal that has been found to be a "dangerous domestic animal" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-2: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. Permitting Domestic Animals To Run At Large Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to permit any domestic animal to run at large on the property of any person
but the owner thereof without the permission of the owner of the aforementioned property. Domestic animals which are running at large may be subject
to citation and/or impoundment.
B. Permitting Domestic Animal To Attack Another Domestic Animal Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit or fail to prevent any domestic
animal to attack or bite another domestic animal, including, but not limited to, dogs and cats.
C. At Large Restrictions: No owner of a domestic animal shall permit or allow that domestic animal to be at large in any public area or on any private
property, including the property of the owner, unless effectively restrained as provided herein.
1. Public Area Restraint:
a. No domestic animal shall be on any public area within the city unless restrained by a leash and controlled and under the control of a responsible
person of sufficient strength to control and restrain that domestic animal by leash. The leash required by this subsection shall be of a size and
strength sufficient to control the size and strength of the domestic animal to which it is attached.
b. Upon the approach of another pedestrian, the owner of a domestic animal shall bring the domestic animal to heel such that half the available
public way is free for use by the other pedestrian.
2. Private Property Restraint:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 368/403
a. Unenclosed Area: No domestic animal shall be in or on an unenclosed area of any private property outside the principal building unless:
(1) A person who can and does effectively control that domestic animal is immediately and physically present in the same unenclosed area; or
(2) The domestic animal is tethered using visible means of restraint sufficient to protect pedestrians on public property and so as to effectively
prevent the domestic animal from leaving the unenclosed area. The tether shall be of sufficient length to allow the animal to sit, stand, lay down,
and have access to clean water.
b. Enclosed Area: An enclosed area on private property is that area outside the principal building which is entirely enclosed by fencing which
effectively prevents the domestic animal(s) within the enclosed area from leaving the enclosed area. The fencing may be traditional, electronic or
radio controlled.
(1) In the event that a domestic animal leaves the enclosed area to private property of another without being restrained by a leash, as provided in
subsection C1a of this section, the owner shall be in violation of this subsection.
3. Ineffective Restraint:
a. In the event that a domestic animal leaves an enclosed or unenclosed area of private property to a public area or private property of another
without being restrained by a leash, as provided in subsection C1a of this section, it shall be presumed that the provided fencing, human control or
tethering device was not effective, and that domestic animal shall not be permitted in the enclosed or unenclosed area, unless restrained by a
leash, as provided in subsection C1a of this section, until such enclosed area or tethering device is modified or repaired to make it effective and
evidence of such modification or repair is delivered to the chief of police at the police department and verified by inspection of the chief's designee.
b. In the event that a domestic animal leaves an unenclosed area to a public area or private property of another while under a person's immediate
personal supervision, then such immediate personal supervision shall be presumed to be insufficient and that domestic animal shall thereafter be
controlled by a leash or tethering device when on an unenclosed area.
c. In the event that a domestic animal leaves an enclosed or unenclosed area of private property to a public area or private property of another
without being restrained by a leash, as provided in subsection C1a of this section, on three (3) occasions within twelve (12) consecutive months,
that domestic animal shall only be permitted outside the principal building when restrained by a leash, as provided in subsection C1a of this
section.
D. K-9 Units And Service Animals:
1. The leash control requirements and the location prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any dog which is part of a K-9 unit or to any service
animal, provided that such dog or service animal is performing its intended duties. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-3: IDENTIFICATION AND LICENSE:
A. Dogs: Every person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog within the limits of the city shall provide such dog with a collar made of substantial material to
which a license tag shall be firmly fastened. No dog shall be permitted to be kept or remain within the city unless the person who owns, keeps or
harbors the same shall have caused the dog to be licensed with the county of Kendall, Illinois, and provided with a collar and tag as herein provided.
B. Cats: Every person who owns, keeps or harbors a cat within the limits of the city shall provide such cat with a collar made of substantial material to
which a leash may be attached.
C. Any Domestic Animal: Any domestic animal within the corporate limits of the city shall wear a collar or harness with a suitable tag bearing the inscription
of the name, and current address of the owner. The implantation of a microchip with this information is strongly suggested. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-4: INOCULATION REQUIRED:
Every owner or keeper of any dog within the limits of the city shall cause such dog to be examined by a registered veterinarian and kept current on all
required inoculations by such veterinarian in accordance with any state law, county or city ordinance. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-5: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or household to keep, harbor or maintain more than three (3) dogs and three (3) cats at any one time within the
corporate limits of the city; provided that in case of a female dog giving birth to pups, these pups may be kept within the limits of the city until they have
become four (4) months old, or in the case of a female cat giving birth to kittens, these kittens may be kept within the limits of the city until they become
four (4) months old. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-6: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOG OR DOMESTIC ANIMALS5:
A. Confinement Of Dangerous Or Vicious Dogs: No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dangerous or vicious dog within the city, unless such person shall
keep such dog safely and securely confined so as to protect from any injury any person, child, or domestic animal who shall lawfully come upon the
premises in the vicinity where such dog may be located. Adequate warning by signs shall be given to all persons lawfully coming upon the premises in
the vicinity of any such vicious or dangerous dog which may be confined as aforesaid.
B. Reports Of Dangerous Or Vicious Animals: The city police department or animal control officer is authorized to investigate any report of a dangerous or
vicious domestic animal and assist the administrator or Kendall County animal control officer in making a determination, as to whether such animal is
dangerous or vicious.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 369/403
C. Behavior Deemed Dangerous: Any dog or other domestic animal which exhibits any of the following behaviors may be deemed dangerous:
1. Causing an injury to a person or animal that is less severe than a serious injury;
2. Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person or animal in an aggressive manner;
3. Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced yard/enclosure and appears to a reasonable person able to jump over or escape; or
4. Attempts to attack any person or animal if it is restrained by a leash, fence, or other means and it is clear that only the presence of the leash, fence,
or other means of restraint is preventing the domestic animal from immediate attack.
D. Behaviors Deemed Vicious: Any domestic animal which exhibits any of the following behaviors may be deemed vicious:
1. Causing any serious injury or death to a person or animal;
2. Without provocation or justification attacks a person or animal;
3. Has been found to be a dangerous domestic animal upon at least three (3) separate occasions.
E. Exemptions To Being Declared Dangerous Or Vicious: No domestic animal shall be declared dangerous or vicious if:
1. The animal was used by a law enforcement official for legitimate law enforcement purposes or as a guard dog for the protection of commercial
property;
2. The threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
a. Who was committing, at the time, a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the animal;
b. Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or who can be shown or have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented,
abused, or assaulted the animal; or
c. Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
3. The animal was:
a. Responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its offspring; or
b. Protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an attack or assault. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-7: DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION6:
A. After a thorough investigation including: sending, within ten (10) business days of the administrator becoming aware of the alleged infraction,
notifications to the owner of the alleged infractions, the fact of the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an opportunity to meet with the
administrator prior to the making of a determination; gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing witnesses; and making a detailed
written report, an animal control warden, deputy administrator, or law enforcement agent may ask the administrator, or his or her designee to deem a
dog to be "dangerous". No dog shall be deemed a "dangerous dog" unless shown to be a dangerous dog by a preponderance of evidence. The owner
shall be sent immediate notification of the determination by registered or certified mail that includes a complete description of the appeal process.
B. A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the administrator, or his or her designee determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was committing
a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the owner of the animal;
2. The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
3. The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
4. The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
C. Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the determination
of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to the provisions of this section.
D. If deemed dangerous, the administrator, or his or her designee shall order: 1) the dog's owner to pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) public safety fine to be
deposited into the pet population control fund, 2) the dog to be spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days at the owner's expense and microchipped,
if not already, and 3) one or more of the following as deemed appropriate under the circumstances and necessary for the protection of the public:
1. Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert in the field and
completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated
with evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; or
2. Direct supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older whenever the animal is on public premises.
E. The administrator may order a dangerous dog to be muzzled whenever it is on public premises in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or
animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 370/403
F. Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with section 8 of the act and performing duties as expected. It shall be the
duty of the owner of the exempted dog to notify the administrator of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the
administrator advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The administrator shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized
list of the exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify the departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
G. An animal control agency has the right to impound a dangerous dog if the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the act.
H. Once an animal has been determined to be dangerous or vicious the designation remains with the animal for the life of the animal. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-
2012)
9-2-8: DANGEROUS DOG; LEASH7:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or
other recognized control methods. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-9: DANGEROUS DOG; APPEAL8:
A. The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to the act by an administrator may file a complaint against the administrator in the circuit
court within thirty five (35) days of receipt of notification of the determination, for a de novo hearing on the determination. The proceeding shall be
conducted as a civil hearing pursuant to the Illinois rules of evidence and the code of civil procedure, including the discovery provisions. After hearing
both parties' evidence, the court may make a determination of dangerous dog if the administrator meets his or her burden of proof of a preponderance
of the evidence. The final order of the circuit court may be appealed pursuant to the civil appeals provisions of the Illinois supreme court rules.
B. The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to the act by the administrator may, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notification of the
determination, request an administrative hearing to appeal the determination. The administrative hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
department of agriculture's rules applicable to formal administrative proceedings, 8 Illinois administrative code part 1, subparts A and B. An owner
desiring a hearing shall make his or her request for a hearing to the Illinois department of agriculture. The final administrative decision of the
department may be reviewed judicially by the circuit court of the county wherein the person resides or, in the case of a corporation, the county where its
registered office is located. If the plaintiff in a review proceeding is not a resident of Illinois, the venue shall be in Sangamon County. The administrative
review law and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted thereto, apply to and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of
final administrative decisions of the department hereunder.
C. Until the order has been reviewed and at all times during the appeal process, the owner shall comply with the requirements set forth by the
administrator or the court.
D. At any time after a final order has been entered, the owner may petition the circuit court to reverse the designation of dangerous dog. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-
9-2012)
9-2-10: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG9:
A dog found running at large and unsupervised with three (3) or more other dogs may be deemed a potentially dangerous dog by the animal control
warden or administrator. Potentially dangerous dogs shall be spayed or neutered and microchipped within fourteen (14) days of reclaim. The designation
of "potentially dangerous dog" shall expire twelve (12) months after the most recent violation of this section. Failure to comply with this section will result in
impoundment of the dog or a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-11: VICIOUS DOG DETERMINATION10:
A. In order to have a dog deemed "vicious", the administrator, deputy administrator, or law enforcement officer must give notice of the infraction that is the
basis of the investigation to the owner, conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather any existing medical
records, veterinary medical records or behavioral evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the dog is a vicious dog and give
the report to the state's attorney's office and the owner. The administrator, state's attorney, or any citizen of the county in which the dog exists may file a
complaint in the circuit court in the name of the people of the state of Illinois to deem a dog to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a certified applied
behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the court's determination of whether the dog's
behavior was justified. The petitioner must prove the dog is a vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. The administrator shall determine where
the animal shall be confined during the pendency of the case.
B. A dog may not be declared vicious if the court determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog, or
was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
2. The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the past abused,
assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring; or
3. The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 371/403
C. No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a
manner that is specific as to breed.
D. If the burden of proof has been met, the court shall deem the dog to be a vicious dog.
E. If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the owner shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) public safety fine to be deposited into the pet population
control fund, the dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of its owner and microchipped, if not already, and
the dog is subject to enclosure. If an owner fails to comply with these requirements, the animal control agency shall impound the dog and the owner
shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine plus impoundment fees to the animal control agency impounding the dog. The judge has the discretion to
order a vicious dog be euthanized. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to the owner until the administrator, or an animal control
warden approves the enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog without approval from the administrator or court.
Whenever an owner of a vicious dog relocates, he or she shall notify both the administrator of county animal control where he or she has relocated and
the administrator of county animal control where he or she formerly resided.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an enclosure. The
only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are: 1) if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the dog,
2) in the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life is threatened, or 3) to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not exceeding four feet (4') in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
G. Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the administrator, an animal control
warden, or the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such area.
H. If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within fifteen (15)
working days, the dog may be euthanized.
I. Upon filing a notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear the burden
of timely notification to animal control in writing.
J. Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, accelerant detection dogs, and sentry, guard, or police
owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for
exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with section 8 of the act. It shall be the duty of
the owner of such exempted dog to notify the administrator of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the
administrator advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The administrator shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized
list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him.
K. If the animal control agency has custody of the dog, the agency may file a petition with the court requesting that the owner be ordered to post security.
The security must be in an amount sufficient to secure payment of all reasonable expenses expected to be incurred by the animal control agency or
animal shelter in caring for and providing for the dog pending the determination. Reasonable expenses include, but are not limited to, estimated
medical care and boarding of the animal for thirty (30) days. If security has been posted in accordance with this section, the animal control agency may
draw from the security the actual costs incurred by the agency in caring for the dog.
L. Upon receipt of a petition, the court must set a hearing on the petition, to be conducted within five (5) business days after the petition is filed. The
petitioner must serve a true copy of the petition upon the defendant.
M. If the court orders the posting of security, the security must be posted with the clerk of the court within five (5) business days after the hearing. If the
person ordered to post security does not do so, the dog is forfeited by operation of law and the animal control agency must dispose of the animal
through adoption or humane euthanization.
N. Once an animal has been determined to be dangerous or vicious the designation remains with the animal for the life of the animal. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-
2012)
9-2-12: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS; DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS OR DOMESTIC ANIMALS; REMEDIES:
A. Additional Requirements: In addition to any and all other requirements of this code or the statutes of the state of Illinois, if a domestic animal is deemed
dangerous or vicious, the city police department or county animal control may require:
1. Special security or care requirements, including supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years or older;
2. Impoundment until satisfied that the owner will maintain the dangerous or vicious domestic animal on the owner's property except for medical
treatment or examination; post a clearly visible written warning that there is a dangerous or vicious domestic animal on the premises (visible from a
distance of 50 feet); or
3. Order humane dispatch of the dangerous or vicious domestic animal, pursuant to the humane euthanasia in animal shelters act11, upon a finding
that the owner has failed to abide by the established conditions of security.
B. Conditions To Release Animal: In the event of impoundment of a dangerous or vicious domestic animal, the animal shall not be released until
satisfaction of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 372/403
1. The owner of the dangerous or vicious domestic animal proves that the owner is a responsible person;
2. The dangerous or vicious domestic animal has a current rabies vaccination, where applicable;
3. The owner has a proper enclosure to prevent the entry of any person or animal and the escape of said dangerous or vicious domestic animal;
4. The dangerous or vicious domestic animal has been spayed or neutered;
5. The dangerous or vicious domestic animal has been implanted with a microchip containing owner identification information. The microchip
information must be registered with the animal control authority of the jurisdiction; and
6. The dangerous or vicious domestic animal owner shall enter the animal in a socialization and/or behavior program approved by the city; and
7. The owner of a dangerous or vicious animal must provide proof of liability insurance in a minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
C. Owner Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous or vicious domestic animal to:
1. Permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless under the control of a responsible person, muzzled, and restrained by a lead not
exceeding four feet (4') in length; the muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or
respiration but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal.
a. A "proper enclosure" is defined as: Fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, and no more than fifteen feet by eight feet (15' x 8') in area,
forming or creating an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog. Such enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from
the enclosure. If said fence or structure does not have a bottom which is secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded in the ground. Such
enclosure shall be within an area fenced by a stockade fence six feet (6') in height, and all gates within said fence shall remain locked at all times.
2. Fail to maintain a dangerous or vicious domestic animal exclusively on the owner's property, except as required for medical treatment or
examination. When removed from the owner's property for medical treatment or examination, the dangerous or vicious domestic animal shall be
caged or under the control of a responsible person, muzzled and restrained with a leash not exceeding four feet (4') in length. The leash required by
this subsection shall be of a size and strength sufficient to control the size and strength of the domestic animal to which it is attached. The muzzle
shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any human
being or animal.
3. Fail to notify the city police department and Kendall County animal control:
a. Immediately upon escape if a dangerous or vicious domestic animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another domestic animal, has
attacked a human being;
b. Within two (2) business days if the animal has died;
c. Within twenty four (24) hours if the animal has been sold or has been given away.
If the dangerous or vicious domestic animal has been sold or given away, the owner shall also provide the city police department and Kendall
County animal control with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dangerous or vicious domestic animal.
4. Fail to surrender a dangerous or vicious domestic animal for safe confinement pending a hearing when there is a reason to believe that the
dangerous or vicious domestic animal poses an imminent threat to public safety.
5. Fail to comply with any special security or care requirements for a dangerous or vicious domestic animal determined by the city police department or
animal control officer.
D. Impoundment: Any dangerous or vicious domestic animal running at large in the streets or public places of the city or upon private premises of any
other person not the owner, shall be impounded in the manner provided by this chapter; provided, however, that if a dangerous or vicious domestic
animal found at large cannot be safely impounded, that animal may be slain by any city police officer.
E. Impoundment And Disposition Of Dangerous Or Vicious Domestic Animal:
1. Any dangerous or vicious domestic animal running at large in the roads, streets or public places of the city, or upon private premises of any other
person other than the owner, keeper, or harborer, or which becomes a nuisance as herein defined, shall be taken up and impounded in the manner
provided by this chapter.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dangerous or vicious domestic animal, when notified that such dangerous or vicious domestic
animal has bitten any person, dog, cat or domestic animal or has so injured any person as to cause an abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such
dangerous or vicious domestic animal or to permit or allow such dangerous or vicious domestic animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city, but it
shall be the duty of such owner or keeper, upon receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to deliver such dangerous or vicious domestic animal to
any registered veterinarian of his choice, whereupon such dangerous or vicious domestic animal shall be confined for a period of at least ten (10)
days.
3. If any dangerous or vicious domestic animal cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dangerous or vicious domestic animal may be
destroyed by any police officer; provided, however, that in all cases where any dangerous or vicious domestic animal which has bitten a person or
caused an abrasion of the skin is destroyed by any police officer, and a period of less than fifteen (15) days has elapsed since the dangerous or
vicious domestic animal bit any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person, then it shall be the duty of the police officer or anyone
destroying such dangerous or vicious domestic animal to forthwith deliver the carcass and brain of such dangerous or vicious domestic animal to the
county health officer.
4. Dangerous or vicious domestic animals impounded under this chapter will be taken to the Kendall County animal control facility. The owner or a
person desiring to redeem such a dangerous or vicious domestic animal shall be required to pay any and all fees as set forth by the Kendall County
animal control officer. Animals not redeemed within the time limits established by the Kendall County animal control officer will be disposed of at his
discretion. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 373/403
9-2-13: DOMESTIC ANIMAL DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A. Any animal within the corporate limits of the city which is continuously barking, howling, or whining, or making other distressing or loud noises on a
consistent basis, or in any other manner disturbing the peace or quiet of any place, neighborhood, family, or person within the corporate limits of the
city, may hereby be declared a nuisance.
B. Upon complaint being made to the city police department, or upon a citizen of the city signing a written complaint with the city police department, the
city police department shall thereafter notify the owner or person having possession of such animal, or the owner or occupant of the premises on which
such animal may be kept, that a complaint has been made. The person so notified shall immediately upon receipt of such notice abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-14: KEEPING OF ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
A. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain cattle, horses, ponies, mules, sheep, goats, and fowl, including chickens, or swine (except miniature pigs,
rabbits, birds, mink, ferrets or other yard animals customarily used as a pet) within the city limits, except in districts within the city limits zoned A-1
agriculture or R-1 (with special use permit). Any person who shall violate this section shall be held as maintaining a nuisance.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the sale at retail or wholesale of domestic hens or other fowl from properties zoned business or industrial as part
of the business of the owner or occupant of such zoned property. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-15: NONDOMESTICATED ANIMALS:
A. No person shall confine in any cage, pen or other enclosure, either in or outside a dwelling or other building, any live animal or live reptile of any species
which is of the class Ferae naturae nondomesticated.
B. No person, business, association, or corporation may keep any animal defined as "dangerous animals" in the Illinois dangerous animals act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 585/0.1 et seq., as amended from to time to time, the provisions thereof being incorporated herein by reference, or monkey, gorilla,
chimpanzee, and any wild dog or other nonhuman primate, any rodent weighing more than one pound with the exception of guinea pigs, and any
noncanine animal not native to North America and which can attain a weight of two hundred (200) pounds, or any feline animal which can attain a
weight in excess of forty (40) pounds, or any poisonous reptile or other animal in any place other than a properly maintained zoological park, circus,
scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal refuge.
C. It is no defense to a violation of this section that the keeper of any animal or poisonous reptile which is prohibited by subsection B of this section has
attempted to domesticate such animal or poisonous reptile.
D. This section shall not apply to a properly maintained zoological park, federally licensed exhibit, circus, scientific institution, research laboratory,
veterinary hospital, kennels, pounds, or animal refuge in an escapeproof enclosure. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are Ferae naturae in the
eyes of the law may be conducted, kept or harbored within the city only after securing a permit from the chief of police.
E. The keeping of any such animal or reptile prohibited above shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be subject to summary abatement by any police
officer or animal control officer.
F. It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-16: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Beat, underfeed, overload, overwork, torment, abandon or otherwise inhumanely treat any domestic animal anywhere in the city;
B. Kill or wound, attempt to kill or wound, or take the eggs or young of any game or song bird;
C. Fail to provide any animal with proper food and water adequate to promote good physical health;
D. Knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic animal except that common rat poison mixed only with vegetable or grain substances may be
exposed for the protection of property;
E. Feed or place any liquid or food product so as to constitute a direct or obvious hazard to an animal;
F. Give away any domestic animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition; or as an inducement to enter a
place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement when the offer was for the purpose of attracting
trade;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 374/403
G. Keep or maintain an animal in a motor vehicle when the temperature is over seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) without providing proper ventilation for
the animal; or
H. Keep or maintain an animal out of doors without providing adequate and proper shelter from the weather;
I. Fail to provide proper shelter adequate to provide a protected dry place in cold weather and a dry shaded place with ventilation in warmer weather;
J. Fail to provide veterinarian care for a sick or injured dog, cat or other animal so as to prevent undue suffering;
K. Abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or may suffer injury, hunger, or exposure, or become the responsibility of the city. (Ord.
2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-17: ANIMAL FIGHTING:
A. No animal bred, trained or used for any type of animal fighting may be kept or raised within the city.
B. No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, advertise, attend, or carry on any animal fight or any other type of contest, or game of a similar
nature, nor any simulated version of same that involves baiting or inciting an animal to fight another animal.
C. In the administration and prosecution of violations of this section, the city may initiate a prosecution under section 5/26-5 of the criminal code of 196112.
(Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-18: ANIMAL WASTE:
A. It shall be unlawful to allow animals to defecate on private or public property, other than that property of owner of the animal, without taking immediate
action to clean up, remove and properly dispose of such waste in a trash container from said private or public property, by the individual who is in
control of the animal at the time.
B. No person shall leave or deposit fecal matter, whether or not it is in an enclosed container in any sewer or drain.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the accumulation of animal waste on private property such that by its sight or odor, said accumulation
becomes a health hazard or disturbs the peace of any place, neighborhood, family or person in the city. The disturbing of the peace of any such place,
neighborhood, family or person in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any such
nuisance to exist. (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
9-2-19: PENALTIES:
In addition to any other relief available to the city to remedy or abate any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions hereof, shall be fined as follows:
A. The penalty/fine for aggravated abuse of or cruelty to an animal (section 9-2-16 of this chapter) shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that
such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The penalty/fine for failure to properly restrain a dangerous animal shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second and each additional offense.
C. The penalty/fine for failure to properly restrain a vicious animal shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second and each additional offense.
D. The penalty/fine for violation of any provision of this chapter except as noted above shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, fifty dollars
($50.00) for the second offense, and seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the third and each additional offense, if paid within ten (10) days of the date of
notice of the violation. Any fine not paid within ten (10) days shall be increased by fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2012-21, 7-9-2012)
Chapter 3
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
9-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined to constitute disorderly conduct, and when committed, performed or permitted
to exist by any person within the territorial limits of the City, are herewith declared to be unlawful and prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 375/403
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in the making of a breach of the peace; or
B. Resists or obstructs the performance by one who may reasonably be believed to be a police officer or any authorized act within such officer's official
capacity; or
C. Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or firearms unlawfully to disturb the public peace; or
D. Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by any person who may reasonably be believed to be a police officer, where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm; or
E. Enters upon any school property, public or private, within the City at any time when other persons are present on such school property, for the
purpose or with the intention of making or doing any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display; or
F. Enters upon any school property, public or private, within the City at any time when other persons are present on such school property, and while
thereon makes or does any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which disrupts or interferes with or tends to disrupt or
interfere with administrative functions, educational classes or social and athletic activities then and there in progress; or
G. Resists any officer of the Police Department of the City in the discharge of his duties or in any way interferes with, hinders or prevents him from
discharging his duty as such officer, or offers or endeavors to assist any person in the custody of any member of the Police Department to escape
from such custody, or attempts to rescue any person in such custody; or
H. Creates a disturbance of public order by an act of violence or by an act likely to produce violence; or
I. Engages in fighting, threatening or tumultuous behavior; or
J. Hinders or molests persons passing along any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way; or
K. Annoys or causes injury to any person on any street or sidewalk or other public place by placing any obstruction upon or across the same or by
jeering at or deriding or in any other manner with intent to annoy and cause discomfort or inconvenience to any person in the lawful and orderly
pursuit of his business or pleasure in a street or public place; or
L. Crowds, jostles, scolds, insults, threatens, assaults, beats, strikes, kicks, injures or annoys or disturbs any person in any street or public place, or
injures, tears, destroys, spits on or soils the wearing apparel of any person in any such place; or
M. Loiters, sits or stands around the entrance of any church, theater, public building or other place of public assemblage, or in any manner so as to
unreasonably obstruct such entrance; or
N. Places or erects upon any public way an obstruction of any type except temporary barriers or warning signs placed thereon for the purpose of
safeguarding the public against any hazard; or
O. Disturbs, threatens or in any insolent manner, intentionally damages any occupied house or vehicle; or
P. Engages in fighting, loud shouting or other tumultuous behavior within the chambers of the city council during any regularly or specially convened
meeting of the city council or any subcommittee thereof; or
Q. Engages in the smoking of any cigarette, pipe, and/or cigar within the chambers of the city council during any regular or specially convened meeting
of the city council; or
R. Intentionally inhales vapor or fumes or any substance which induces euphoria, hallucinations or intoxication, except as otherwise provided by law; or
S. Visits or resorts to any place wherein the inhaling of vapors or fumes or any substance which induces euphoria, hallucinations or intoxication is
being conducted, practiced or carried on illegally therein; or
T. Makes continuous or causes to be made by the use of any horn, bell, radio, loudspeaker or by operation of any other instrument or device, any noise
or noises, which noise or noises are of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the city or any portion thereof or to
be detrimental to the life and health of any individual. (Ord. 1980-3, 3-24-1980)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided for in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1980-3, 3-24-
1980; amd. 1989 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 376/403
9-3-2: LOITERING AND CONGREGATING:
It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to congregate on any street, alley or sidewalk and engage in singing, preaching, praying, exhorting or
loud talking to the disturbance of any citizen or family and to the obstruction or blockading of any street, alley or sidewalk within the corporate limits of the
city.
Any two (2) or more persons who shall be found loitering, standing or congregated upon any street, alley or sidewalk to the obstruction of such street, alley
or sidewalk, and who refuse to disperse when requested so to do by any member of the police force shall, upon conviction, be severally guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Any person or persons who, after being warned by any police officer, shall congregate with another or others on any street, sidewalk or public way in the
city in such a manner so as to impede, obstruct or halt the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This prohibition
shall not apply to a person or persons lawfully engaged in any authorized parade, march, funeral procession or assembly. (Ord. 1976-8)
Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be liable to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1976-8; amd. 1989 Code)
9-3-3: DEFACING FIRE HYDRANTS:
Any person or persons who shall, without authority, mark, deface, injure, meddle with or destroy any of the fire hydrants of the city, or the valves, pipes, or
other connections or appurtenances thereto, or shall work or operate them, or attempt to do so, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (Ord. 4-13-20; amd. 1989 Code)
9-3-4: CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR IN PUBLIC:
No person shall drink any alcoholic liquor on any public street or alley within the city. (Ord. 1962-15; amd. Ord. 1968-5, 9-9-1968)
It shall be the duty of the city police to patrol the public highways and to make arrests for violation of the provisions of this section and any person violating
any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1962-15; amd. 1989 Code)
9-3-5: CHILD CURFEW:
All of the provisions of the Illinois child curfew act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 555/1, as amended from time to time, are adopted and incorporated into
this code as though fully set forth herein verbatim. All prosecutions for any violations of the child curfew act shall be in accordance with the provisions of
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 555/1. (Ord. 2009-10, 3-23-2009)
9-3-6: DUMPING OF SNOW IN PUBLIC STREETS:
A. The dumping, piling, pushing, or otherwise placing of measurable and significant amounts of snow in public streets and roadways within the corporate
limits of the city is a safety hazard and shall be prohibited.
B. No person or entity shall dump, pile, push or otherwise place snow onto the public streets and roadways within the city corporate limits, or authorize,
direct or cause snow to be dumped, piled, pushed or otherwise placed onto the public streets and roadways within the city, or allow snow to be
removed from one's premises and dumped, piled, pushed or otherwise placed onto public streets and roadways within the city except on a temporary
basis while in the process of shoveling, plowing or otherwise removing snow.
C. It is a violation of this section for any person or entity who owns, rents, or otherwise occupies or has control over any property fronting on any public
street or roadway from which abutting property snow has been dumped, piled or pushed or otherwise placed, other than by municipal governmental
employees in the course of their employment while plowing the public streets and roadways, to fail, or refuse to remove the snow from in front of the
property within twenty four (24) hours after receiving notice and direction to remove the snow by a city code enforcement officer, a police officer or
other authorized city agent or employee.
D. Snow which has been dumped, piled, pushed or otherwise placed onto the municipal streets and roadways of the city is significant in amount when it
impedes, tends to impede, or is likely to impede the free flow of traffic over, on, onto, or entering or exiting from the paved portion of the public streets
and roadways of the city.
E. Snow shall be considered to have been dumped, piled, pushed or otherwise placed onto a public street or roadway when the snow is dumped, piled,
pushed or otherwise placed in between the curbing, on streets and roadways which are curbed, or onto the paved surface of streets or roadways which
are not curbed and left to remain for any period of time other than in the actual process of shoveling, plowing or removing snow.
F. For purposes of this section, the word "snow" shall include snow, ice, slush and water in any solid or semisolid form.
G. It shall not be a violation of this section to fail to remove snow that is left on the public streets and roadways as a result of plowing by any governmental
agency; nor shall this section be read to require anyone to remove snow which has accumulated naturally in the public streets and roadways.
H. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Each day a violation
occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-2, 1-25-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 377/403
9-3-7: FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
consumer products safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United
States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
"Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (25/100) grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths
(20/100) grain of explosive mixture.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act.
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United
States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
B. Fireworks Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep, expose for sale, loan or give away any 1.3G fireworks, consumer fireworks, or
display fireworks, anywhere in the city. (Ord. 2015-8, 3-23-2015)
C. Possession Of Fireworks:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or to discharge anywhere in the city any 1.3G fireworks, consumer fireworks, or display fireworks. It
shall be noted that some 1.4G fireworks are acceptable if the appropriate criteria is met by those in possession of the fireworks.
2. For purposes of enforcing this chapter, evidence of fireworks paraphernalia or other fireworks related debris which is found on the property shall be
conclusive evidence that the activities set forth in this chapter have occurred and the property owner and/or lessee of such property shall be deemed
responsible for such activities and may be subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2016-37, 12-12-2016)
D. Permitted Fireworks: The sale and use of snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (25/100) grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths
(20/100) grain of explosive mixture, shall be permitted at all times.
E. Approved Consumer Fireworks: As defined by the act, all consumer fireworks must comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling
regulations of the U.S. consumer products safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified as fireworks UN0336 or
UN0337 by the United States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. In addition to complying with this definition, the office of the Illinois
state fire marshal and the city of Plano requires consumer fireworks meet the following requirements to be approved by this office:
1. The consumer fireworks must be labeled 1.4G consumer or must be 1.4S fireworks intended for outdoor consumer use.
2. The American Fireworks Standards Laboratory must have inspected the consumer fireworks. It is the consumer distributor's and consumer retailer's
responsibility to ensure that the consumer fireworks he or she distributes, sells, offers for sale, exchanges for consideration, transfers, or provides
have been AFSL tested. The consumer distributor and the consumer retailer shall maintain records verifying that such testing has occurred on the
consumer fireworks he or she distributes, sells, offers for sale, exchanges for consideration, transfers, or provides.
3. The consumer fireworks must be ground mounted. No handheld consumer fireworks shall be approved.
F. Other Approved Consumer Fireworks: Cones including showers of sparks, fountains, and repeaters are acceptable. Single tube fountains must not
contain more than seventy five grams (75 g) total of pyrotechnic composition. Cone fountains must not contain more than fifty grams (50 g) total of
pyrotechnic composition. Multiple tube fountains must not contain more than two hundred grams (200 g) total of pyrotechnic composition. Mines,
comets, tubes, shells, fancy florals, and parachutes are also acceptable. These items are firework devices designed to produce low level aerial effects,
which are propelled into the air by a lift charge. These items contain a maximum of forty grams (40 g) of chemical composition and no more than twenty
(20) grains of lift charge.
G. Registration: Consumer fireworks retailers/distributors registered with OSFM may sell approved consumer fireworks to consumers who have and
display a valid fireworks permit, issued by the city of Plano.
H. Prohibited Consumer Fireworks:
1. OSFM prohibits all consumer fireworks unless they meet the above listed approval requirements. Prohibited consumer fireworks include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a. Handheld fireworks.
b. Bottle rockets.
c. Firecrackers of any size or type.
d. Skyrockets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 378/403
e. Roman candles.
f. Chasers.
g. Buzz bombs.
h. Ground items other than those identified as approved.
i. Helicopters.
j. Missiles.
k. Pinwheels or any other twirling device.
l. Planes.
m. Sky lanterns, the type of balloon which requires fire to propel.
I. City Sanctioned Fireworks Display: City sanctioned professional and consumer grade fireworks displays must be approved by the city council, the police
chief, and the Little Rock-Fox fire protection district. Any person, business, or unit of local government that puts on a pyrotechnic display using display
fireworks must hire an Illinois state fire marshal licensed pyrotechnic distributor. The person who is the actual person responsible for setting off the
pyrotechnic display must have a pyrotechnic operator's license.
1. The following minimum requirements must be met to obtain a local permit:
a. The applicant must submit a written application at least thirty (30) days prior to the pyrotechnic display date.
b. The pyrotechnic display service is provided by a licensed pyrotechnic distributor and the display is conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic
operator.
c. The applicant must show proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company
authorized to do business in Illinois.
d. The applicant must enter into a hold harmless agreement with the city of Plano.
e. The fire chief of the local jurisdiction or his/her designee must inspect the display site and ensure the display can be performed in full compliance
with the NFPA standards adopted and amended by the OSFM rules part 235, for the type of pyrotechnic display to be performed.
f. The fire chief providing fire protection must sign the display permit.
g. The display must be performed in compliance with the rules adopted by the OSFM and the rules and regulations adopted by the city of Plano.
J. Violations And Penalties: Local enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 14, "Administrative Adjudication",
of this code. It is intended that the schedule of fines and costs and collection fees for administrative adjudication, in force, from time to time, shall,
except as otherwise provided herein, apply to all violations of this section. (Ord. 2015-8, 3-23-2015)
9-3-8: TRUANCY:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any student under the age of eighteen (18) years who is enrolled in a public, private, or parochial school to absent
himself or herself from attendance at school during such period when public, private or parochial schools are in session without parental permission or
valid cause.
B. Valid Cause: A valid cause for absence from school shall include illness, observance of a religious holiday, death of immediate family member, family
emergency or any other situation beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of education in each district, or such other
circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student.
C. Parental Permission: Parental permission, as required by this section, shall refer to and include permission obtained from a parent, legal guardian or
other adult person standing in loco parentis and having custody and control over such person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
D. Violators: Violators of this section over the age of thirteen (13) years may be subject to a fine or community service, or both. If the violator is under
thirteen (13) years of age, the parent or custodian of the violator is subject to the fine or community service, or both.
E. Violations And Penalties: Local enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 14, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code. It is intended that the schedule of fines and costs and collection fees for administrative adjudication, in force, from time to
time, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, apply to all violations of this section. (Ord. 2014-43, 11-10-2014)
9-3-9: RETAIL THEFT (SHOPLIFTING):
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases defined in this subsection have the meanings ascribed to them unless a contrary
meaning is clear from the context.
CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 379/403
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any type of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchise, or independent
contractor of such owner or operator.
MINOR: A person, who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order to make arrests for
offenses whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishments, any common use
areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such retail
mercantile establishment.
SHOPPING CART: Those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores, or other retail establishments for
the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets, and, incidentally, from stores to a place outside the store.
UNDER RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording devices to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
B. Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
6. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
7. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
8. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of such
property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring such, within ten (10) days after written demand from the owner for its
return. A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and
shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
C. Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his person or among his belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
D. Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
1. To request identification.
2. To verify such identification.
3. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise, and to make reasonable investigation of
the ownership of such merchandise.
4. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer.
5. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian, or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention
and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such a detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 380/403
E. Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/10-3, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the persons so detained.
F. Value Of Goods: This section shall apply to goods having a value or full retail of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or under.
G. Violations And Penalties: Local enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 14, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code. It is intended that the schedule of fines and costs and collection fees for administrative adjudication, in force, from time to
time, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, apply to all violations of this section. (Ord. 2014-45, 11-10-2014)
9-3-10: ILLINOIS CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: There is hereby adopted that certain code identified as the Illinois criminal code, more particularly 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and as the
same may hereafter be revised by the state legislature or amended by the governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an
ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein.
B. Copies: Three (3) copies of the said state law, together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in the
office of the city clerk for use and examination of and by the public.
C. Citation: Citation to the ordinance violation of the section of the Illinois criminal code adopted in subsection A of this section, shall be by citation to
chapter "9-3-10-___" with the section number being the same as the section number for that offense in the Illinois criminal code.
D. Violations And Penalties: Local enforcement of this section shall be in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 14, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this Code. It is intended that the schedule of fines and costs and collection fees for administrative adjudication, in force, from time to
time, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, apply to all violations of this section. (Ord. 2014-44, 11-10-2014)
9-3-11: CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
9-3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANNABIS: For the purposes of this chapter, cannabis shall include marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts
of the plant Cannabis sativa whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and any compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seed or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including
its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, but shall not include the mature stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
Nothing in this section shall apply to cannabis lawfully consumed or dispensed pursuant to 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130 et seq.
(Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act).
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section
10 of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis in violation of the Cannabis Control Act. It includes, but is
not limited to:
A. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis;
B. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis;
C. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis;
D. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis by a private person;
E. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis; where applicable, the following items:
1. Water pipes;
2. Carburetion tubes and devices;
3. Smoking and carburetion masks;
4. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
5. Carburetor pipes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 381/403
6. Electric pipes;
7. Air driven pipes;
8. Chillums;
9. Bongs;
10. Ice pipes or chillers;
F. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-2, 1-8-2018)
9-3-11-2: POSSESSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED (LESS THAN 10 GRAMS):
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, grow, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange, distribute and administer cannabis in an amount
of less than ten grams (10 g) within the City of Plano. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or
continues. Violations involving amounts of ten grams (10 g) or more shall be charged and prosecuted under State law and prosecuted in the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2018-2, 1-8-2018)
9-3-11-3: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of "drug paraphernalia" as described above, with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body, or in preparing cannabis for that use shall be subject to a Class IV fine. (Ord. 2018-2, 1-8-2018)
9-3-11-4: SEIZED PROPERTY:
All substances containing "cannabis" and any associated "drug paraphernalia", as defined above, which have been seized as a result of violations
hereunder, whether or not there is a conviction, shall be subject to forfeiture and the Chief of Police or their designee is directed to take custody of said
forfeited property and remove it for disposition in accordance with the law. (Ord. 2018-2, 1-8-2018)
9-3-11-5: PENALTY:
A. Any person who admits liability/guilt or is found liable/guilty by a preponderance of the evidence in an administrative hearing for violating any paragraph
of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative adjudication Class IV fine (mandatory court and $250.00 fine if found liable), plus applicable hearing
costs. (Ord. 2018-2, 1-8-2018)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED VEHICLES
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any
motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of age or older.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the city.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle, the engine, wheels, or other parts of which have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that
the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. It shall be presumed that any motor vehicle without a current vehicle registration plate
is an inoperable motor vehicle. However, this presumption shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any relevant and competent evidence
bearing upon the question of whether or not the vehicle can be driven under its own power. The phrase shall not include a motor vehicle which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair service. (1989 Code; amd. Ord. 2015-5,
2-23-2015)
9-4-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in this municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set
forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the
general public, anywhere in this municipality is unlawful. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the chief of the police department of the municipality after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more has
expired. (Ord. 1971-2; amd. 1989 Code)
9-4-3: POLICE TO BE NOTIFIED OF VEHICLE POSSESSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 382/403
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this state, not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the municipal police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
municipality. Upon receipt of such notification, the chief of the municipal police department shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession
of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain
a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided
in this chapter. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-4: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLE:
A. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in this municipality ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the chief of the police department of this municipality.
B. When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its
position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a towing
service may be authorized by order of the chief of the police department.
C. When vehicle removal from either public or private property is authorized by order of the police chief, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all
towing costs.
D. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license
plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason
for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-5: NOTIFICATION OF OWNER OF TOWED VEHICLE:
A. When the municipal police department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor vehicle
registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required
ownership information.
B. The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois state police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state
police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois state police files are searched with negative results, the information contained
in the national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois state police. The information determined from these record searches
will be used by the police department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.
C. When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the Illinois state police for the
purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois state
police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-6: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE BY OWNER:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to its
possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle
shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until all towing and storage charges have been paid. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-7: SALE, DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE:
A. Owner Notified, Public Sale: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer,
remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given
as provided herein, the police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the
time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been
impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified
mail to the registered owner or other person known by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the
vehicle. In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to
the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified
notice will not be required.
B. Owner Unknown, Vehicle Sold Or Junked:
1. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7)
years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by this chapter without notice to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
2. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum
of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 383/403
determination of disposition; and, an examination of the Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
C. Record Of Sale Or Disposal: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner or
other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction
will be maintained by the police department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
D. Proceeds Of Sale: When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this municipality is authorized to be towed away by the chief of police and
disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges
shall be deposited in the municipal treasury. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-8: DECLARED NUISANCE:
The parking or storing of any inoperable motor vehicle in the open on any property within the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. This section shall
not apply to: a) motor vehicles on the premises of a place of business engaged in wrecking or junking motor vehicles; or b) motor vehicles that are kept
within a building. (1989 Code)
9-4-9: NONLIABILITY OF CITY AND TOWING SERVICE:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when
the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1971-2)
9-4-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1971-2; amd. 1989 Code; Ord. 2011-25, 9-26-2011)
Chapter 5
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A civil emergency is hereby defined to be:
A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
B. Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the
City, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measurers must be taken to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or
vacant premises within the corporate limits of the City, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference
to said civil emergency.
9-5-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency as defined in Section 9-5-1 of this Chapter exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration setting
forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each
forty eight(48) hour period during the time the said civil emergency exists.
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall notify the news media situated within the City, and shall cause three (3) copies
of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the City:
The City Hall
The Police Station
The Post Office
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 384/403
9-5-3: CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a
whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
9-5-4: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS DURING EMERGENCY:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the City may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
A. Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and
beer is permitted.
B. Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer.
C. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than
gasoline tanks properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
D. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
E. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
9-5-5: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to impair the powers contained in this Municipal Code giving powers to the Police and Fire
Departments, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. (Ord. 1968-2)
9-5-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter or executive order issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against the City and shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1968-2; 1989 Code)
Chapter 6
GRAFFITI
9-6-1: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to inscribe; draw or otherwise place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned, any sign,
symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter without the permission of the owner of the property. The above list is not to
be limitative, but is merely illustrative of items known as graffiti. It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing provision if such
activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content and method of
the inscription to be placed on the structure or wall; however no owner of property shall place or give permission to place on any property, real or personal
which is in public view any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter which incites violence by reference to
gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to sexual activity of contains defamatory material about a public or private person.
(Ord. 1994-32, 10-24-94)
9-6-2: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI:
The City hereby declares "graffiti" as defined in Section 9-6-1, to be a nuisance, and as a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided herein:
A. Notice to Remove: Upon written notification by the City, the owner of property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within
five (5) working days from the date of the notice.
B. City Removal: The City, upon notification of graffiti placed upon any City property, shall remove the graffiti within three (3) working days from the date of
the notification. The City also shall remove graffiti from the exterior of private property if owners inform the City of the presence of such graffiti and of
their inability to remove it. Owners must sign a statement authorizing removal by the City and must sign a release holding the City harmless from any
claims or suits brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of such chemicals or from the actions takenby the City or its
employees to remove the graffiti. If property owners do not request such removal or do not remove the graffiti within the time specified they shall be
subject to the penalties listed in Section 9-6-3 below.
C. Extension of Time: An extension of the time in which graffiti must be removed may be granted by the City upon application of the property owner to the
Police Department and a showing of cause. Cause shall include but not be limited to: weather, temperature, availability of chemicals, or physical
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 385/403
limitations. (Ord. 1994-32, 10-24-94)
9-6-3: PENALTIES:
Upon a finding of guilty for violation of Section 9-6-1 above, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus all court costs and assessments. Upon a finding of guilty for a violation of Section 9-6-2 above, there shall be imposed a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus all court costs and assessments. In addition, the court
may require that the party guilty of violating the provisions of Section 9-6-1 of this Chapter make full and complete restitution to the City and/or the owner
of the property for expenses incurred by the City or by the owner of the property in the removal of the graffiti and/or the restoration of the structure or wall
to its previous condition. In addition, the court may order as further penalty, community service in the form of time to be spent in cleaning property that has
been defaced by graffiti in any location in the City. (Ord. 1994-32, 10-24-94)
Chapter 7
NOISE
9-7-1: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which disturbs, annoys,
injures, or endangers the repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city.
A. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise and in violation of this chapter:
1. The sounding of any horn or signaling device from any motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger, also the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary or unreasonable length of time. The use of any signaling device operated by engine exhaust is strictly prohibited.
2. The operation of any electronic device or musical instrument between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound emanates shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this subsection.
3. The operation of any electronic device or musical instrument for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound which is broadcast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any business, structure, or motor vehicle.
4. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
5. The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, or so loaded or operated in such a manner so as to create loud or unnecessary noise.
6. Engine braking, oftentimes referred to as "jake" braking, except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
COMMUNITY EVENTS: Shall include, but not be limited to: parades, festivals, sporting events, drum corps shows, and Fourth Of July celebrations when
sanctioned or sponsored in whole or in part by local governments, schools, charitable or service organizations.
MUSIC FESTIVAL: Any show or act, or aggregation of shows or acts, to be conducted outdoors in any way, whose purpose is to provide entertainment or
attract attention to itself or a business, whether an admission is charged or not, and an audience of fifty (50) or more persons are in attendance.
WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: Sound pressure level decibels as measured on a sound level meter. The sound level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
(Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-3: HOURS AND LEVELS:
A. Day Hours: No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during daytime hours (7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.) from any noise source to any
receiving residential land which exceeds seventy five (75) decibels (dB) when measured at any point within such receiving residential land, provided,
however, that point of measurement shall be on the property line of the complainant. (Ord. 2014-25, 7-14-2014)
B. Night Hours: No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound during nighttime hours (10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.) from any noise source to any
receiving residential land which exceeds fifty five (55) dBA when measured at any point within such receiving residential land provided; however, that
point of measurement shall be on the property line of the complainant. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-4: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Public Welfare And Emergency Operations: Those operations which are necessary to protect the health and welfare of the citizens, including, but not
limited to, snowplowing, utility and street repair, fallen tree removal, and fire, police, and ambulance response shall be exempt, provided that proper
steps are taken to minimize noise as a result of said operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 386/403
B. Powered Equipment: Powered equipment, including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, power tools, tractors, and snow removal equipment which is
necessary for the normal maintenance of property is exempt from the sound level requirements between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
C. Community Events: Community events are exempt from the sound level requirements between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. Further, community events are exempt from the music festival permit requirements as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-5: MUSIC FESTIVAL PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person as owner, lessee, operator, manager, officer or agent to give, conduct, produce, present, or offer
any music festival, entertainments or performances within the city without the permit duly issued in accordance with this chapter.
B. Application; Fee: Permit applications shall be submitted on a printed form provided by the city clerk. Applications shall be accompanied by an
application fee and shall be submitted no less than forty five (45) calendar days before the date of the event.
C. Application Review: Upon submission of the permit application and fee the city clerk will place the application on the agenda of the next city council
meeting for its review. The city council shall have the discretion to grant or deny any application or any part thereof on the basis that the festival is
obscene, unsafe, illegal, or because of its location would create traffic hazards, or create a nuisance to adjoining property owners, or in some way is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
D. Operation: A music festival, having been granted a permit, is exempt from the sound level requirements between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. However, no festival shall operate for a period exceeding ten (10) hours in any twenty four (24) hour period, nor shall
exceed three (3) consecutive days of operation. No one particular site shall operate more than three (3) music festivals in any calendar year.
E. Exemption For Private Parties: Private parties shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this section, but all other requirements of this chapter
shall apply. A "private party" is herein defined as a social event or gathering, for which no more than one entertainer or band has been arranged for,
and in which no guest in attendance is required to pay any admission fee or concession cost.
F. Insurance Requirements: Prior to the approval of any application under this chapter, the applicants shall submit to the city a certificate of insurance
showing the owner, lessee, proprietor, operator or manager of the premises and the music festival, as well as those persons acting in a similar capacity
with respect to each entertainment or performance which collectively make up the music festival as named insureds and, further, naming the city as an
additional insured in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering public liability, and five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) covering property damage, such policy insuring liability that may arise from the operation or maintenance of the music festival or any
part thereof.
G. City Held Harmless From Liability: The owner, lessee, proprietor, operator, or manager of the subject premises and the music festival shall in addition
deliver to the city a written agreement holding the city harmless from all liability resulting from any injury to patrons, bystanders, passersby, or any
individual as a result of the operation or maintenance of the music festival. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. The chief of police, or his designees, will have the primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations herein. Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the chief of police or his designees from obtaining voluntary compliance by the way of warning, notice or education.
B. If a person's conduct would otherwise violate this chapter and consists of any of the following:
1. Speech or communication protected by the constitution of the United States or the state of Illinois;
2. Of a gathering with others to hear or observe speech or communication protected by the constitution of the United States or the state of Illinois;
3. Or a gathering of others to lawfully picket or otherwise express, in a nonviolent manner, a position on a social, economic, political or religious
question;
then the person must be ordered to, or have the opportunity to, move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation prior to arrest or citation being
issued. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
9-7-7: PENALTIES:
A. A violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a ticket or citation carrying a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
However, this subsection shall not be construed as requiring the city of Plano police department to cite a person for violation of this chapter if, in its
discretion, the department determines that it is in the best interest of the community to utilize other lawful means to gain compliance.
B. A subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person or entity, which occurs within thirty (30) days of receiving a citation for violation of this
chapter, is punishable by a ticket or citation carrying a fine of no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 387/403
C. Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter or, in the case of continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate
offense and may be punished separately. (Ord. 2005-14, 3-28-2005)
Title 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
VEHICLE LICENSES
(Rep. by Ord. 1991-25, 7-22-1991)
Chapter 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Title shall, for the purpose of this Title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
Section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department and ambulances and emergency vehicles of Municipal
departments or public service corporations.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty
inches (20") in diameter.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The closely built up business portion of the City.
COMBINATION OF VEHICLES: Every combination of vehicles includes any combination of two (2) vehicles, any combination of a truck tractor with a
semi-trailer drawing one trailer, and any combination of a truck in-transit drawing two (2) trucks in-transit coupled together by the dual saddlemount
method.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections or any
portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other
implements of husbandry, and every implement of husbandry, which is self-propelled.
IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every vehicle designed and adapted foragricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations, including farm tractors,
farm wagons, wagon trailers or other vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: Shall be construed to include roadways of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundaries of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any other angle
may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided
highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction
thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other
vehicle.
METAL TIRE: Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails.
For the purpose of this Title, motor vehicles as a class shall be divided into the following two (2) divisions: (Ord. 1962-15)
First Division: Those vehicles which are designed and used for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
Second Division: Those vehicles which are designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and also those vehicles or motor cars which are
designed and used for the carrying of more than ten (10) persons. (Ord. 1962-15; 1989 Code)
MOTORCYCLES: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground but excluding a tractor.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or erected by authority of the City Council for the purpose of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 388/403
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof
with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purpose of this Title.
PARK: When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGNS or SIGNAL: Any sign, signal or device erected in accordance with the laws governing same and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The closely built up residence portion of the City.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such
roadwayscollectively.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious
organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with any school activity.
SEMI-TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SOLID TIRES: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STATE HIGHWAYS: Shall be construed to include the State highways as defined in the "Illinois Highway Code" as the same may from time to time by
amended.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation from movement.
STOP, STOPPING or STANDING: When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of the City other than the closely built up business or residence districts.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop
before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this Title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that
some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, but when the roadway is clear may proceed into the intersection. (Ord.
1962-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 389/403
10-2-2: ENFORCEMENT, OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
It shall be the duty of the City police to patrol the public highways and to make arrests for violation of the provisions of this Title. No person shall wilfully fail
or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
10-2-3: DRIVER'S LICENSE:
No person shall operate or attempt to operate a motor vehicle within this City without conforming to the requirements of the State traffic law pertaining to
driver's license.1 (Ord. 1962-15; amd. Ord. 1979-6)
10-2-4: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
The corporate authorities, and particularly the City Superintendent of Streets and Alleys are authorized and required to place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained such traffic control devices on such streets and alleys under its jurisdiction as it shall deem necessary to indicate and carry out the
provisions of this Title, or to regulate, warn or guide traffic. (1989 Code)
10-2-5: PEDESTRIANS CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS:
Between intersections, whenever the City Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation upon any street under its
jurisdiction, that crossing between intersections should be prohibited in the interest of public safety, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
marked crosswalk or an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, and that such prohibition shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof
are erected. (Ord. 1962-15)
10-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
It is unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this Title with respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this Title. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this Title shall be fined as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 1962-15; 1989 Code)
Chapter 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
10-3-1: VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
The City herewith adopts the Illinois Vehicle Code1 by reference and incorporates the same herein by reference.
10-3-2: IMPROPER OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
For the purpose of protecting the life, limb, and property of all persons using any public street or highway in the City, the operation of a motor vehicle in the
following manner is hereby constituted "improper operation of a motor vehicle": upon any public street or highway in the City:
In such a manner as to cause or produce unnecessary loud, raucous, excessive or unusual noise by the racing of the motor, or by lack of a muffler or use
of a muffler cutout or other illegal muffler as defined under the act of the Legislature of the State of Illinois entitled "Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways" or by tire friction upon rapid turning or weaving, by spinning of the wheels from standing or slow-moving position produced by sudden
unnecessary motor acceleration, or by continuous unnecessary sounding of a horn or other signal device. (Ord. 1969-6; 1989 Code)
10-3-3: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle2 or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this Title
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this Title which by their nature can have no application.
10-3-4: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (Ord.
1962-15)
Footnote 1: S.H.A. ch. 951/2.
Footnote 2: See Chapter 5 of this Title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 390/403
Chapter 4
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10-4-1: AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the authority granted to it under the Illinois vehicle code1, the city council has authority to prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
or to prescribe time limits for parking on any street or highway under its control and jurisdiction, in such manner as it shall deem necessary to promote
public convenience and safety and so as to facilitate traffic. Any such regulations adopted by the city council regarding the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles upon any specific street, streets or highways shall become effective on and after the date of the erection of appropriate signs indicating such
regulations. (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
10-4-2: PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED PARKING:
A. No Parking Places: Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or official
traffic control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
b. On a sidewalk;
c. Within an intersection;
d. On a crosswalk;
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
h. On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this subsection A1h, shall result in a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fifty (50)
hours of community service; (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
i. At any place where official signs, as authorized by the corporate authorities, the mayor or the police department, prohibiting stopping, standing, or
parking are in place; (Ord. 2014-26, 7-14-2014)
j. On any controlled access highway;
k. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;
l. In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending registration; (Ord.
2007-25, 5-29-2007)
m. At any place where the standing or parking of a vehicle reduces the usable width of a roadway for moving traffic to less than twenty two feet (22');
(Ord. 2015-18, 7-13-2015)
n. In any public alley during any hour of the day or night, except to load or unload freight for a period of time not exceeding forty five (45) minutes.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway;
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant; (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
c. In any residential zoned district, within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection; (Ord. 2015-18, 7-13-2015)
d. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
e. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted);
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
a. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. Parking During And After Snowfall: From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, or if parked, to
allow a motor vehicle to remain parked or standing in any public street or alley in the city during or after snowfall in which there is an accumulation of
two inches (2") or more of snow. This prohibition shall remain in effect until twenty four (24) hours after the end of the snowfall or until such time as the
public street or alley shall have been plowed, whichever event shall first occur.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 391/403
C. Parking Alongside Roadways: Except as otherwise provided herein, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be stopped or
parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right
hand shoulder.
Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of
authorized traffic movement with its right hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the
right hand shoulder, or with its left hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left hand
shoulder.
D. Parking On Top Of Curbs And/Or Rights Of Way:
1. The parking of motor vehicles shall be and is hereby prohibited on the tops of curbs and/or on the rights of way (parkways) adjacent to curbs on
curbed streets within the corporate limits of the city.
2. The superintendent of streets of the city of Plano is herewith authorized and directed to place along said streets or at the entrances to subdivisions
or areas of the city where curbs have been installed restricted parking signs bearing the following or a similar legend: "NO PARKING ON CURBS OR
PARKWAY", in conformity with the restrictions imposed by this subsection D. (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
10-4-3: HANDICAPPED/DISABLED PARKING:
A. Adopted: The city herewith and hereby adopts, in its entirety, all provisions of the Illinois motor vehicle code regulating and restricting the parking of
motor vehicles, whether on public or private property such as parking lots, bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped person or a disabled
veteran or a special decal or device issued pursuant to state statute or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction upon which is displayed a
registration plate, special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction designating the vehicle as operated by or for a handicapped person.
B. Handicapped Parking Spaces: The city council shall, from time to time, designate certain parking spaces within the city as "handicapped parking"
spaces. Upon the adoption of this chapter, the following parking spaces in the city are hereby declared to be "handicapped parking" spaces:
1. The first parking space at the northeast corner of Center Street and Main Street on Main Street.
2. The first parking space at the northwest corner of Center Street and Main Street on Main Street.
3. The first parking space at the northeast corner of Hugh Street and Main Street on Main Street.
4. The first parking space at the northwest corner of Hugh Street and Main Street on Main Street.
5. The first parking space west of James Street on the north side of Main Street.
The parking of motor vehicles in said parking spaces shall be restricted to motor vehicles operated by or for the benefit of handicapped persons as
defined in the vehicle code of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
10-4-4: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such officer is hereby
authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or
improved or main traveled part of such highway.
B. The police department of the city, in enforcement of this section, shall, in the issuance of citations or parking tickets for violation of the following
provisions of this chapter, indicate the date and time of the violation. In the event that the motor vehicle, which is parked in violation of said provisions
and is ticketed for violation, has not been moved by the owner or operator thereof within one hour from such ticketing, then the police department is
hereby directed and empowered to authorize the towing of said illegally parked motor vehicle to a place of safe storage. The owner or operator of any
such towed vehicle shall pay all costs incurred in the towing of said motor vehicle including a storage fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day for each day
that said motor vehicle remains unclaimed. The city police department shall, after any motor vehicle is towed, make reasonable efforts to contact the
owner and/or operator of said motor vehicle to notify said owner or operator of the towing of said vehicle and of the location of said towed motor
vehicle. (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
10-4-5: SIGNS:
A. Signs: The corporate authorities, and particularly the superintendent of streets and alleys of the city, are hereby authorized and required to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, restricted parking signs at said parking spaces limiting and restricting the parking of motor vehicles,
where applicable, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-25, 5-29-2007)
10-4-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations And Penalties: The police department of the city of Plano is hereby directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, unless another fine or penalty is set forth herein, shall be fined a minimum fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
B. Application: It is intended that the fine set forth herein and the schedule of fines and costs and collection fees for administrative adjudication, in force,
from time to time, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, apply to all violations of the parking ordinances of the city of Plano. The minimum fine and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 392/403
penalty imposed by this section shall not, however, apply to violations of the handicapped/disabled parking provisions of this chapter and the minimum
fines or penalties, as provided by the Illinois vehicle code, shall apply to all violations of the handicapped/disabled parking restrictions violations. (Ord.
2014-6, 2-10-2014)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES AND ROLLER WHEEL DEVICES
10-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BICYCLE: Means and includes a vehicle with two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is at least twenty inches (20") in diameter, with solid or pneumatic
tires, having a steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat and propelled by human power.
DEALER IN BICYCLES: Any person or entity engaged in the sale of bicycles (including 3-wheel bicycles) at retail or wholesale.
LICENSE STICKER: A sticker issued by the city of Plano for affixing to the bicycle or three-wheel bicycle bearing the license number assigned by the
police department.
LICENSEE: Any person who procures from the city a license sticker for a bicycle or three-wheel bicycle.
OPERATE: The word "operate" or any form or tense thereof shall mean and refer to the use, putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle or threewheel
bicycle by a person mounted thereon.
RENTAL AGENCY: Any person engaged in the business of offering for rental and renting bicycles (including 3-wheel bicycles) for hire by the public.
THREE-WHEEL BICYCLE: Means and includes a vehicle with three (3) wheels, any one of which is at least twenty inches (20") in diameter, with solid or
pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel and propelled by human power. This term shall be included in each instance in this chapter where the term
"bicycle" is used.
In addition to the above definitions any applicable definitions of the traffic ordinance shall be deemed to be included herein.(Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-2: REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Registration; License Sticker: The city of Plano, acting through its police department will register bicycles at no cost to the person registering the bicycle.
This is done at the station of Plano police department, Plano, Illinois.
B. Application: Application for registration for a bicycle shall be made by the owner in person, in writing, in triplicate, upon blank forms furnished by the
police department.
1. Such application shall be signed by the owner, and if the owner is a person under eighteen (18) years of age, the signature shall be witnessed by a
parent of the owner, or by the legal guardian of the owner. The application shall state the full name and address of the owner of the bicycle, the name
of the manufacturer, the serial number of the frame, the approximate date when the owner obtained title thereto, and if not new when obtained, the
name and address of the person from whom it was obtained.
2. Such application shall be presented to the police department or any of its authorized representatives.
3. The bicycle to be registered and licensed shall be brought to the station at the time of presenting the application for the purpose of examination.
4. The chief of police or any of his authorized representatives shall examine the bicycle, and if he finds the mechanical condition thereof such that it can
be safely operated, and that it is equipped with attachments as herein provided, and further finds that the statements made in the application are
true, he shall mark the application "approved" and attach his signature. If he finds the equipment to be faulty or deficient, he shall require the
necessary corrections to be made before issuing a license.
5. When the bicycle has been found to be in proper condition and the application to be correct, the chief of police or any of his authorized
representatives shall deliver to the owner a copy of the bicycle registration card which shall contain the name and address of the owner and the
description of the bicycle contained in the application. The applicant shall affix his signature to the registration card when issued in the presence of
the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives, who shall, with said certificate, also issue to the owner a license sticker with the word
"Plano" and the number of the license. The registration card and the license sticker shall have the same number. The license sticker shall be
attached to the bicycle at the location prescribed by the chief of police or his representative.
6. After the issuance of the registration card and licensesticker the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives shall endorse upon all copies
of the application the date of issuance and the number thereof. The original and one duplicate application shall be kept on file in the office of the
police department.
C. Term Of License: Each license shall be issued to a bicycle for its life or until ownership is transferred.
D. Loss, Sale, Or Destruction Of Bicycle; Surrender Of License: When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed, as herein provided, is sold or is
otherwise disposed of or destroyed, the licensee shall immediately surrender to the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives, the
registration card and the license sticker issued therefor, with the name and address of the new owner, if any, written on the face of the registration card;
and the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives shall immediately make proper endorsements thereof on his records and retain the card
and license sticker. A new card and license sticker shall be issued to the new owner upon proper application being made by the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 393/403
E. Loss Of License Sticker: The licensee shall report immediately to the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives, the loss or destruction of
the license sticker of the licensee, and the circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. With the approval of the chief of police or any of
his authorized representatives, a duplicate license sticker shall be issued. In the event that repeated requests are made for duplicate licenses for the
same bicycle, the chief of police may require payment of one dollar ($1.00) for such duplicate license to defray the cost of furnishing duplicate licenses.
(Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-3: RULES FOR RIDING AND OPERATING:
A. Riding Abreast Prohibited: When more than two (2) persons in a group are operating bicycles on a roadway, they shall ride single file.
B. Clinging To Vehicles: No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
C. Extra Passengers: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
D. Emerging From Alley, Driveways, And Garages: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage, or private sidewalk shall stop the
bicycle immediately prior to driving into or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in making such
movements.
E. Intoxication, Drugs, Or Physical Inability: No person shalloperate a bicycle while under the influence of liquor or drugs or while physically or mentally
unfit to safely operate the same.
F. Lights: No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the front of the
bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500'), nor without having a
red light or a reflector attached to the rear of the bicycle which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for a distance of not less than
two hundred feet (200') to the rear of the bicycle.
G. Mechanical Condition: No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.
H. Operating On Sidewalk: Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residential districts but in single file only. Under all
circumstances, the rider shall yield the right of way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper care shall at all times be exercised by the
rider for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is not greater than
necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting and shall not be increased until the pedestrian has been passed.
I. Parking Bicycle: It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they
may interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the owner or operator shall move or in any manner
interfere with any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a bicycle, except
that members of the police department and fire department may move, or, in proper cases, prevent the parking of the bicycle when, in the judgment of
the policeman or fireman, his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property. Bicycles can be parked at permitted bicycle racks.
J. Keep To Right: All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to the right and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right hand edge of
the roadway.
K. Speed: No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable or proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
L. Traffic Regulations: Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations
applicable thereto, and shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the city authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
M. Trick Riding: No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
N. Turns; Starting; Stopping: The operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a right turn, shall follow the right hand edge of the roadway, and the
operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No
operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, or stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-
2006)
10-5-4: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER WHEEL AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
A. The use of skateboards, roller skates, ice and ski roller skates, or any other such roller wheel device is prohibited on the streets, roads, sidewalks and
parking lots in any business, commercial or manufacturing district in the city of Plano.
B. Municipal authorities of the city of Plano are hereby authorized and required to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs
prohibiting the use of the above referenced roller wheel devices in any business, commercial or manufacturing district in the city of Plano, such signs to
be located in such position and to be provided with letters of a size that can be clearly legible. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 394/403
10-5-5: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A. Registration And Licensing: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to rent or offer to rent any bicycle without first complying with the
provisions of section 10-5-2 of this chapter relating to registration and licensing of bicycles. All such bicycles rented by the agency shall be licensed as
therein provided.
B. Equipment: Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with the lights and other equipment required by this chapter and shall be kept
in good and safe working condition.
Rental agencies shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent.
C. Inspection: The chief of police or any of his authorized representatives shall make periodic inspections of the rental agencies to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-6: OTHER PROVISIONS:
A. Inspection: Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle at any reasonable time for purposes ofmaking a checkup of the
license number and serial number and for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle.
B. Removal Of Serial Number Or License Plate: It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully or maliciously, to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the serial
number of any bicycle licensed hereunder, or to remove, destroy, mutilate any license sticker or registration card during the time in which the license
sticker or registration card is in force. The chief of police or any of his authorized representatives are hereby authorized to stamp numbers on the frame
of a bicycle in a legible manner for identification purposes upon which no serial number can be found or upon which the serial number can be found or
upon which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
C. Use Of Bicycle Without Consent Of Owner: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the city without the consent of the
owner.
D. Bicycle Without Serial Number: It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city, or any dealer in bicycles operating in the city, to purchase, receive
in trade or otherwise acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered without first
reporting the same to the chief of police or any of his authorized representatives.
E. Applicability: The provisions of this chapter, except those pertaining to registration and license requirements, shall be applicable to all bicycles operated
in the city. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Police Department To Enforce: The police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Suspension Of License: The police department may suspend any bicycle license for a period of thirty (30) days for a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or any applicable provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes relating to traffic.
C. Fines: In addition to the above enumerated penalties, a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) may be ordered by
any court having jurisdiction for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each
day that a violation is permitted to exist or continue. Fine should progress with multiple offenses in accordance to the following scale:
First offense $ 5.00
Second offense 10.00
Third offense 15.00
Fourth offense 50.00 and bicycle is confiscated for 6 months
(Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-8: AMENDMENTS:
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city council of the city of Plano. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
10-5-9: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-27-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 395/403
10-5-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect and be in full force ten (10) days from and after its legal passage, approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2006-12,
2-27-2006)
Chapter 6
SNOWMOBILES
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
It is the policy of this City to promote safety for persons and property in and connected with the use, operation and equipment of snowmobiles in the City.
10-6-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Except as herein provided for the sole purpose of gaining access to and from the unincorporated areas surrounding the City, it shall be unlawful to
operate a snowmobile within the corporate limits of the City.
B. No portion of this Chapter shall preclude the State of Illinois or its officers or agents from enforcing the Illinois Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act
under chapter 951/2, paragraphs 601-1 through 612-1 inclusive and nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve the owner or operator of any
snowmobile within the City limits from compliance with the said statute provisions.
10-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
DANGEROUS DRUG Any drug defined as a depressant or stimulating substance in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act1 and cannabis as defined in the
Cannabis Control Act of the State of Illinois.2
DEALER: A person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of manufacturing, selling or leasing snowmobiles at wholesale or retail.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between boundary lines of any highway, road, street, avenue, alley or public driveway.
INTOXICATING BEVERAGE: Any beverage enumerated in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Illinois.3
LOCAL AUTHORITY: The Municipal board or body having authority to adopt local police regulations under the constitution and laws of this State.
NARCOTIC DRUG: Any substance defined as a narcotic drug in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act.4
OPERATE: To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is
underway.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
OWNER: A person other than lienholder, registered as owner of a snowmobile.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person authorized under the statutes of the State of Illinois to make arrests for a violation of any statute or ordinance, whether it be
a total arrest power of all statutes or a portion of any statute.
REGISTER: The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile by State statute and by local ordinance.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway, improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used in this Chapter refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roads
collectively.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain, steered by skis or runners and supported in part by skis, belt
or cleats.
10-6-4: REGISTRATION AND DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Registration of Snowmobiles: Except as otherwise provided in the Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 951/2, no person shall, after the effective date
hereof, operate any snowmobile within the corporate limits unless such snowmobile has been registered and numbered in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
B. Driver's License: No person shall operate a snowmobile within the Municipality on any roadway unless they are in possession of a valid operator's
license issued by the State of Illinois or are a resident of another state and possess a valid operator's license from that state.
10-6-5: OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 396/403
10-6-5-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Generally: No snowmobile may be driven upon any roadway within the corporate limits of this community at a speed which is greater than is reasonable
and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the safety of any person or property. The fact that the speed of the
snowmobile does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver of the snowmobile from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around the curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and a duty of all persons to use due care.
B. Maximum Speed Limits: Unless some other speed restriction is established by the posting of speed limit signs under the authority of the City Council,
the maximum speed limits for snowmobiles within the corporate limits is as follows:
1. Thirty (30) miles per hour in any residential or business district.
2. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any alley.
3. Twenty (20) miles per hour while passing through any school zone, properly posted.
C. Minimum Speed Regulation: No person shall drive a snowmobile at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of his snowmobile or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer.
10-6-5-2: OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES:
A. Passing Vehicles: Snowmobiles shall be operated on all roadways as close to the right-hand side of the roadway as possible. Snowmobiles proceeding
in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one lane of traffic in each direction, each
driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
B. Limitations on Overtaking on the Left:
1. No snowmobiles shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to
be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
2. No snowmobile shall be driven on the left side of the roadway when approaching or upon the crest of a grade or curve in the highway where the
driver's view is obstructed, when approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, or when the
view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet (100') of a bridge, viaduct or tunnel, and no driver may pass to the left where signs or
markings are in place to define a no passing zone as indicated by pavement striping or appropriate signing.
10-6-5-3: TURNING MOVEMENTS, SIGNAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the
snowmobile before turning within a business or residence district.
B. Any stop or turn signal when required shall be given either by means of a hand and arm or by electric turn signal device conforming to the requirements
of chapter 951/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
C. All signals required by this Chapter shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner:
1. Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn, hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed, hand and arm extended downward.
10-6-5-4: RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Approaching or Entering Intersection: Any snowmobile approaching or entering an intersection from a different roadway shall yield the right of way to a
vehicle on the opposite roadway which is entering from the right at approximately the same time. The driver of the vehicle or snowmobile on the left
must yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
B. Turning Left: The operator of a snowmobile intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway, shall yield the
right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said snowmobile
operator having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
C. Entering Stop Intersection: Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic control signal, every operator of a snowmobile approaching a
stop intersection indicated by a stop sign must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the operator has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the operator of the snowmobile shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 397/403
entered the intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
when the operator is moving across or within the intersection, but said operator having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
D. Entering a Yield Intersection: The operator of a snowmobile approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience of such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable
for the existing conditions and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the operator has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the operator shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such operator is moving across or within the intersection. If a snowmobile is
involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past the yield right of way sign, such collision or
interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right of way.
E. Pedestrians: The operator of all snowmobiles shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing a
roadway within a crosswalk, but in any case every driver of a snowmobile shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated
or intoxicated person.
10-6-5-5: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES:
A. The operator of any snowmobile shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any snowmobile operator to leave the roadway and travel across private property to avoid an
official traffic control device.
B. Snowmobile traffic facing a steady red signal at any automobile traffic control device must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is indicated by a green traffic control signal.
10-6-5-6: STARTING PARKED SNOWMOBILES:
No operator shall start a snowmobile which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
10-6-5-7: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The operator of a snowmobile shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the highway.
10-6-5-8: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any snowmobile with a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
10-6-5-9: RACING:
No person shall engage in any race on any roadway within the corporate limits. Race means the act of two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on
any street or highway, in a situation in which one of the snowmobiles is beside or to the rear of a snowmobile operated by a competing driver and the one
driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him, either by acceleration or maneuver or one or more individuals competing in
a race against time on any street or roadway in this Municipality.
10-6-5-10: LIQUOR AND DRUGS:
A. Driving Under Influence of Liquor and Drugs: No person who isunder the influence of intoxicating liquor may drive or be in actual physical control of any
snowmobile within this Municipality; and further, no person who is an habitual user of or under the influence of any narcotic drug or who is under the
influence of any other drug to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a snowmobile may drive or be in actual physical control of any
snowmobile within this corporate limits.
B. Consuming and Transporting Liquor: No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while operating a snowmobile within this Municipality and any
alcoholic liquor transported in a snowmobile shall be in its original package and with the seal unbroken.
10-6-6: SNOWMOBILE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION:
A. Clear Vision: No person shall operate a snowmobile when it is so loaded with passengers as to obstruct the operator's view or his operation of the
driving mechanism.
B. Lights:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 398/403
1. Headlamp: All snowmobiles in operation shall display at least one lighted headlamp, white in color, having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') ahead during hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions.
2. Taillights: All snowmobiles while in operation shall display at least one red taillight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a
red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
C. Brakes: All snowmobiles shall have an operating brake system in good mechanical condition.
D. Mufflers: No snowmobile shall be sold or offered for sale or operated unless it is equipped with a sound-muffling device installed by the manufacturer
and under no circumstances shall this muffler device be modified or removed by the owner or operator. (Ord. 1983-2)
E. Such other equipment as may from time to time be required by the State of Illinois. (1989 Code)
10-6-7: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Obstructing Roadways: No operator shall wilfully or unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay or attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person
lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any roadway within the corporate limits.
B. Carrying Firearms: No person, except persons permitted by law, shall operate or ride any snowmobile with any firearms in his possession unless it is
unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case, or any bow unless it is in a carrying case, or rendered inoperable.
C. Crossing State Highways: No person may operate a snowmobile on any State highway within the limits of Municipality, except to cross said State
highway at a ninety degree (90o) angle yielding to all traffic and crossing only when it is safe to do so.
D. Driving on Sidewalks and in Parks: No snowmobiles shall be operated within the City limits on any parkway or sidewalk, nor within any public park,
unless such public park be posted for use by snowmobiles.
E. Resisting Police Officers: It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any peace officer in a discharge of his duties under this Chapter.
10-6-8: INSPECTIONS:
Duly authorized police officers may stop and inspect any snowmobile at any time for the purpose of determining if the provisions of this Chapter are being
complied with. If the inspecting officer discovers any violation of the provisions hereof, he may issue a summons to the operator of such snowmobile
requiring that the operator appear before the circuit court for the county in which the offense was committed. Every snowmobile subject to this Chapter if
underway and upon being hailed by a designated law enforcement officer, must stop immediately.
10-6-9: ACCIDENTS:
Operators of snowmobiles involved in any accident with another snowmobile or any other motor vehicle or pedestrian shall make accident reports in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois State Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, chapter 951/2, article VI, paragraph 606-1.
10-6-10: SNOWMOBILE ROUTES:
A. Routes Designated: The following streets or portions thereof within the corporate limits of the City are declared to be egress and ingress routes for the
use of snowmobiles:
Center Street, from Church Street north to the City limits.
Lee Street/Rock Creek Road, from Church Street north to the City limits.
Church Street, east and west to the City limits.
Hale Street, from Church Street south to the City limits.
Main Street, from Hale Street east to the City limits.
Rock Street, from Hale Street west to Ben Street.
Ben Street, from Abe Street south to the City limits.
South Street, from Ben Street west to the City limits.
West Street, from Church Street to Abe Street.
Abe Street, from West Street west to the City limits.
B. Use of Routes Restricted: The foregoing routes shall be used solely for access to and from the unincorporated areas surrounding the City. Nothing
herein contained shall be deemed to permit the operation of snowmobiles within the corporate limits other than for access to and from the
unincorporated areas.
C. Use of Arterial Streets: It shall be lawful to operate a snowmobile on street arterial to the above-specified egress and ingress routes for the sole purpose
of gaining access to such designated egress and ingress routes; provided, however, that the operator of such snowmobile on arterial streets shall, in
every event, use the shortest and most direct route on arterial streets to gain access to the above-designated egress and ingress routes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 399/403
D. Signs Posted: The corporate authorities of the City shall post or cause to be posted the above-designated ingress and egress routes as snowmobile
routes.
10-6-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
It is the duty of all sheriffs, deputy sheriffs and other police officers to arrest any person detected in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter and
any owner or operator of a snowmobile within the corporate limits of the City who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a petty offense.
Any person, firm, corporation, owner or operator violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense plus all applicable court costs. (Ord. 1983-2)
Chapter 7
TOWING OF VEHICLES/IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES
10-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term not defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, act 5, as amended from time to time.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A vehicle parked or otherwise located on a public way in such state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven, has no
license plates and appears to have been abandoned; or a vehicle that has been unmoved for a period of at least twenty four (24) hours, has no license
plates or valid registration, and appears to have been abandoned by its owner based on the period during which it has not been moved; or
B. Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private property without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor, or agency of the property, which person
has requested that the vehicle be towed.
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: Officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three (3) years.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day in which the offices of the city hall are open to the public for a minimum of seven (7) hours.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of
the vehicle; or
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of the members of the public; or
C. A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street or public way, that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
D. A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow removal from a public street, way or alley.
LEVEL 1 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE: Means and shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
LEVEL 2 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE: Means and shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder(s) of the motor vehicle as registered with the secretary of state, state of Illinois; or if not registered in Illinois
the particular state where the motor vehicle is registered.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the police department; or
B. A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or ordinances of the city which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the period of time for
which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed, and the signs posted at the
general location note that fact.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway, or any public way, except
devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-2: AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING:
A. Generally: The towing of vehicles by the city, or by its approved towing service operators on behalf of the city, shall be authorized only by the police
department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the police department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, act 5, as amended from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 400/403
B. Towing Without Notice; Immediate Tows: Hazardous or unlawful vehicles may be towed without prior notice; except that, when an unlawful vehicle is
one that has been reported as stolen and is not towable for some other specific reason, the owner should be, when practicable, notified by telephone or
other means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he/she so wishes, to avoid incurring the expenses of a police ordered tow.
However, the vehicle may be towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was reported stolen or at any time thereafter. Within
twenty four (24) hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, a notice shall be sent to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle
affording the opportunity for a hearing, as provided in section 10-7-4 of this chapter.
C. Towing With Prior Notice; Abandoned Vehicles: Abandoned vehicles may be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in subsection 10-7-4C of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-3: PRETOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the owner by personal service or shall be forwarded by mail, to the address of the owner
of the vehicles as indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state. The notice shall be in the form provided in section 10-7-5 of this
chapter. In the event that an out of state vehicle is proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone, or letter shall be made of the secretary of
state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be
made as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case will the city be required to delay towing more than seven (7) days after the date of
the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has been received within that seven (7) day period.
B. A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police department
shall be placed on the vehicle. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-4: PRETOW HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Opportunity For Hearing: The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven (7) days after
the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing, a pretow hearing. Subsequent to this seven (7) day period, the vehicle may
be towed, if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven (7) day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this section
will be deemed waived.
B. Request For A Hearing: Requests for a hearing are to be made in person to the chief of police or may be made by mail. Forms for such requests shall
be made available at the police department. At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date and time by mail or in person,
as the circumstances require.
C. Preliminary Hearing: If the owner or person entitled to a hearing requests a hearing within seven (7) days after the mailing or personal delivery of the
notice, preliminary hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the
request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard and the formal
rules of evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in
the conduct of their affairs.
D. Written Decision: The hearing officer shall make a written decision upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is
authorized by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, with a specific statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be
provided a copy of the pretow hearing decision.
E. Decision To Tow And Rates To Be Charged: If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner. The fees to be charged
for towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates set by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The
owner of the vehicle having had such a hearing may avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a proper,
lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle.
F. Establishment Of Maximum Towing And Storage Rates: The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator for towing and storage on police
ordered tows at rates that do not exceed maximum amounts to be administratively established by the chief of police and which may be revised from
time to time. However, nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent a competitive towing service operator from charging less than the established
maximum rates for police ordered or any other tows. In arriving at the maximum rates for various services, the chief of police shall consider such
matters as the prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of vehicles, the types of storage and area requirements for categories such as
large trucks and commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and amount of work required to perform various types of towing operations. For
particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious accidents, the chief of police is authorized to allow towing operators to charge rates
above those established for normal situations. All special charges must be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account such matters
as the man hours and equipment time required for the job. A towing service operator must fully itemize in writing the details of such a billing at special
rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow, and supply a copy of the itemized bill to the owner and to the police department. Any special rates
charged must be customary in the towing industry in the area for the nature and extent of the services provided. Every towing service operator and the
police department shall have available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any special rate policy established by the chief of police, for
vehicle owners to view upon request. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-5: FORM FOR PRETOW NOTICE:
The following form shall be utilized for the mailing or delivery of pretow notices to owners:
To:
(Name)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 401/403
(Address)
Date of Mailing:
Date and Time of and Name of Person making personal delivery:
PRE-TOW NOTICE
You are listed as the registered Owner or person entitled to possession of the following described vehicle: (make) (model/year) (other identifying
features (license plate number and State)) which is located on (location) in an apparently abandoned or unusable condition, to wit: (facts forming basis of
proposed tow) as defined in (Ordinance or statutory section).
The City of Plano will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed after seven (7) days from the above date of mailing or personal delivery unless you move
the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set forth below. Any such hearing will only concern the proposed towing, and will not be
determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation concerning the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be required to pay all towing and
storage charges before the vehicle is released.
The towing is authorized by Section 10-7-2 of the City Code of the City of Plano.
If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file in
person or by mail a request for such hearing within 7 days of the above date of mailing or personal delivery. If you file your request for a hearing by mail, it
must be received by the office listed below within 7 days from the mailing or personal delivery of this Notice.
(Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-6: VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied permission of the owner of record, that is used in connection with the following violations, shall
be subject to seizure and impoundment by the city, and the owner of record of said motor vehicle shall be liable to the city for a level 1 administrative
fee, as provided for in this chapter, in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
State Statute Violations
625 ILCS 5/6-303 Driving while license revoked
625 ILCS 5/11-204 Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer
625 ILCS 5/11-501 Driving under the influence of alcohol/drugs
625 ILCS 5/11-503 Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving
625 ILCS 5/11-506 Street racing, aggravated street racing
625 ILCS 5/11-601.5 Driving at 26 mph more, but less than 35 mph over applicable speed limit, class B misdemeanor
Speeding in excess of 35 mph, class A misdemeanor
720 ILCS 5/11-6 Indecent solicitation of a child
720 ILCS 5/12-2 Aggravated assault
720 ILCS 5/12-3.05 Aggravated battery
720 ILCS 5/18-1 Robbery
720 ILCS 5/18-2 Armed robbery
720 ILCS 5/19-1 Burglary
720 ILCS 5/19-3 Residential burglary
720 ILCS 5/20-1 Arson
720 ILCS 5/20-1.1 Aggravated arson
720 ILCS 5/20-2 Possession of explosives or incendiary devices
720 ILCS 5/21-1 Criminal damage to property
720 ILCS 5/25-1 Mob action
720 ILCS 570/401 Manufacture or delivery of unauthorized controlled substance
720 ILCS 570/401.1 Controlled substance trafficking
720 ILCS 570/402 Unauthorized possession under the controlled substances act
720 ILCS 550/4 Possession of more than 10 grams of any substances containing cannabis
720 ILCS 550/5 Manufacture or delivery of cannabis
720 ILCS 550/5.1 Cannabis trafficking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 402/403
720 ILCS 550/5.2 Delivery of cannabis on school grounds
720 ILCS 550/8 Unauthorized production or possession of cannabis sativa plant
720 ILCS 5/24-1 Unlawful use of weapons
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1 Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3 Unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of a school
(Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-3, 1-29-2014)
B. For any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied permission of the owner of record, that is used in connection with any violation of federal,
state, or local law that is not listed in subsection A of this section, including arrest warrants, which results in seizure and impoundment of the vehicle by
the city, the owner of record of said motor vehicle shall be liable to the city for a level 2 administrative fee, as provided for in this chapter, in addition to
any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-7: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply:
A. If a vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time of the violation and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four
(24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
B. If the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
C. With respect to the violations enumerated in section 10-7-6 of this chapter, if the owner proves that the item found is not unlawful. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-
2013)
10-7-8: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility approved by the city. This chapter shall not apply if the motor vehicle used in the violation
was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or
reasonably should have been discovered.
B. The police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of the motor vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the motor
vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's right to an administrative
hearing to be conducted under this section. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-9: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT HEARINGS:
A. Preliminary Hearing: If the owner of record of the vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request
within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure for a vehicle impoundment hearing. Said request shall be made in person and in writing and filed with the
chief of police or his/her designated agent. If the appeal is timely filed, a preliminary hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the
chief of police with the consent of the mayor, within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the written request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules
of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject
to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner of the
vehicle posts a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with the city and pays the towing company any applicable towing and
storage fees. If the hearing officer determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle
without penalty or other fees. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-10: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the city shall notify by personal service or by first class mail
to the owner of record of the owner's right to a hearing, along with the date, time and location of the hearing, to challenge whether a violation of this
chapter has occurred. The hearing date must be scheduled and convened no later than forty five (45) days after the mailing of the notice, or issuance
of the notice of hearing. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall
not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
B. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in violation of this chapter, then
the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle liable to the city for the applicable administrative fee.
C. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a violation, the
hearing officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for the return of the motor vehicle, or the administrative fees if already paid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=340 403/403
D. If owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing. If the owner of record
pays such administrative fee and the motor vehicle is returned to the owner, no default order need be entered if the owner was informed of his or her
right to a hearing, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the city receives the written waiver.
E. If a bond in the amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the police department, the impounded motor vehicle shall be released
to the owner of record. The owner of the motor vehicle shall still be liable to the towing agent for any applicable towing fees.
F. If an administrative fee is imposed for a violation of this chapter, the bond will be forfeited to the city; however if a violation of this chapter is not proven
by preponderance of the evidence, the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this chapter shall be
held by the city until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until the court of jurisdiction issues its orders.
G. Administrative hearings shall be conducted in accordance with and governed by the rules set forth in title 1, chapter 14 of this code.
H. All decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-
11-2013)
10-7-11: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
A. An administrative fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a debt due and owing the city.
B. A motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded until:
1. The administrative fee is paid to the city and all applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case the owner of record shall be given
possession of the motor vehicle;
2. A bond in an amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the police department and all applicable towing fees are paid to the
towing agent, at which time the motor vehicle will be released to the owner of record; or
3. The motor vehicle is deemed abandoned in which case the motor vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
abandoned motor vehicles. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-12: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the civil penalty and applicable fees under this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person with a lien of
record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he/she agrees
in writing to refund the city the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay lienholders of record, not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the applicable fees.
B. Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty five (35) days after: 1) the expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the city's action under this chapter; or 2) the time at which a final judgment is rendered against an owner of record who is in default; may be
disposed of as an unclaimed motor vehicle as provided by law; provided, however, that where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal
drug asset forfeiture laws, the subject motor vehicle may not be disposed of by the city except as consistent with those proceedings. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-
11-2013)
10-7-13: TOWING AGENCY:
A. It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in possession of the motor vehicle to obtain documentation issued by the police department
confirming compliance with foregoing requirements, and retain photocopies of that documentation in their files for a period of not less than six (6)
months following release of the motor vehicle. The foregoing information shall be made available to the authorities of the city for inspection and
copying, upon their request, by the towing or storage company. The towing or storage company is prohibited from releasing any motor vehicle they may
tow within the city until and unless they obtain documentation as aforesaid.
B. The towing or storage company shall be entitled to receive a reasonable fee from the owner or person entitled to possession of any such motor vehicle
prior to the release of the motor vehicle. The fee shall be to cover the cost of removing said motor vehicle and, in addition thereto, the cost of storage of
said motor vehicle for each day or fraction thereof that said motor vehicle shall have remained stored.
C. The fees in this section shall be in addition to any fee levied or assessed against the owner or operator of said motor vehicle by reason of violation of
any ordinance or statute and any arrest which may have resulted from such violation. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)
10-7-14: REFUND OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
In the event a judgment of "not guilty" is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction on all underlying charges that could have resulted in the impoundment
of a motor vehicle, then within thirty (30) days of presentation of a certified copy of said judgment to the police department, any administrative fees or
posted bonds obtained by the city shall be refunded to the paying party. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-11-2013)