CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published in May 2016 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Park Ridge, Illinois. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the ordinance included herein. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the article, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 4-14-2 is Section 2, located in Chapter 14 of Article 4. 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross-references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Park Ridge, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross-references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Park Ridge, Illinois. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and Park Ridge, Illinois. 2017.  
ARTICLE 1 - ORGANIZATION AND DEFINITIONS 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - ORGANIZATION OF CODE 
SECTION 
 
1-1-1 - TITLE AND SCOPE OF ORDINANCE 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Municipal Code of Park Ridge and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall completely supersede the Municipal Code of Park Ridge, Illinois, of 1981, and all other general ordinances passed by the City Council prior to date of adoption hereof, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or are continued in force and effect for any purpose.  
1-1-2 - AMENDMENTS 
Any additions or amendments to this Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part hereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the "Municipal Code of Park Ridge" shall be understood as including them.  
1-1-3 - ADMINISTRATIVE COPIES 
The City Clerk shall maintain one copy of this Code. This copy shall be printed and preserved by the City Clerk in a book or binder in loose-leaf form so that all amendments thereto and all general ordinances hereafter passed may be inserted in their appropriate places in such volume, and all Sections of this Code or ordinances repealed from time to time may be extracted there from for the purpose of maintaining said copy in such condition that it will show all general ordinances passed up to date at any time in such manner that ready reference may be had thereto. 
In determining whether or not any ordinance hereafter passed or any part thereof shall be inserted in such volume, and in determining the form, chapter or section in which it shall be inserted, and in determining what shall be taken out, if any doubt arises, the City Clerk shall be guided by the advice of the City Attorney.  
1-1-4 - LOOSE-LEAF REVISIONS 
The City Clerk shall prepare and publish revised sheets of every loose-leaf page in need of revisions by reason of amendment or repeal at intervals not exceeding one year. Each revision of this Ordinance shall be accompanied by the date upon which the ordinance revising the section was adopted and each revised page shall state the date of revision. 
The City Clerk shall distribute said revised loose-leaf sheets as well as said Municipal Code of Park Ridge for such fee as the City Council shall direct.  
1-1-5 - LEGAL PUBLICATIONS 
No officer or employee of the City shall issue or distribute as a publication on the part of the City or on the part of any officer, department or branch of the City government, any book, pamphlet, leaflet or other printed matter purporting to contain excerpts or quotations from this Code or purporting to give the law on any subject to the public either as a reprint of a Statute, ordinance or other legislative enactment, or as a digest, interpretation, condensation or explanation of the same without submitting such book, pamphlet or leaflet, or other printed matter to the City Attorney for examination and approval as to form and as to whether or not the law is correctly stated therein.  
1-1-6 - DISTRIBUTION OF CODE 
All printed copies of this Code shall be deposited with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall deliver one copy thereof to the Mayor, one copy to each Alderman and one copy to each head of a department of the City, two (2) copies to the Park Ridge Public Library, and copies to such other persons in each department as the City Council may designate. The City Clerk shall sell printed copies of said Code at such price as the City Council shall fix. 
The Mayor shall have power to reciprocate courtesies of other cities by presenting to each a copy of this Code, bound at the expense of the City, in such manner as to the Mayor may seem suitable.  
1-1-7 - NUMBERING OF SECTIONS 
Every section number shall consist of three component parts separated by dashes. The first figure shall refer to the article number, the second figure shall refer to the chapter number and the third figure shall refer to the section within the chapter.  
1-1-8 - CHANGING SECTION NUMBERS 
No officer or employee of the City shall issue any book or pamphlet containing any section or sections of this Code numbered differently than as numbered herein; and no section number shall be changed by such officer or employee in drafting any ordinance amending any section.  
1-1-9 - NUMBERING OF ADDITIONS 
The decimal system may be used where additions are inserted in any articles or chapters.  
1-1-10 - REFERENCE TO SECTION NUMBER 
Reference to any section of this Code shall be understood to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto unless otherwise expressly provided.  
1-1-11 - AMENDMENT TO SECTION SUBJECT TO PENALTY 
In case of the amendment of any section of this Code containing provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.  
1-1-12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Whenever in any section of this Code the doing of any act or the omission to do any act or duty is declared to be a breach thereof, and there shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person who shall be found guilty of such breach shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each such breach. Each day that the breach continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 1-9-2006)  
1-1-13 - MAXIMUM FINE 
Whenever in this Code a minimum but no maximum fine or penalty is imposed, the court may in its discretion fine the offender any sum of money exceeding the minimum fine or penalty so fixed but not exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00).  
1-1-14 - OFFENSES HAVING TWO PENALTIES 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the City Attorney may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.  
1-1-15 - REPEALS 
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the date of adoption of this Code, except such as are herein expressly exempted from repeal and except such as are referred to as being still in force, are hereby repealed, subject to the saving clauses contained in this Section 1-1-15. 
The following ordinances shall continue in full force and effect: 
A.  The Zoning Ordinance of Park Ridge, Illinois, as passed and approved on September 2, 1975, as heretofore and hereafter amended. 
B.  All ordinances fixing and referring to City datum and bench monuments. 
C.  All ordinances creating or establishing streets, public ways or easements. 
D.  All ordinances vacating streets or alleys. 
E.  All ordinances establishing the names of streets. 
F.  All ordinances providing for the annexation of territory to the City or providing for the disconnection of territory from the City. 
G.  All ordinances providing for and authorizing the issuance of bonds and other evidences of indebtedness for the City. 
H.  All ordinances providing for the adoption by the City of Park Ridge of "an Act to provide for the appointment of a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in all cities, villages and incorporated towns of this State, having a population of not less than 5,000 nor more than 250,000 and prescribing the powers and duties of such Board" approved August 10, 1965 and as amended by the City Council of the City of Park Ridge. (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1) 
I.  All ordinances effectuating "an Act to Regulate the Civil Service of Cities", approved March 20, 1895 as thereafter amended. (65 ILCS 5/10-1-1) 
J.  All ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes. 
K.  Ordinances authorizing franchises with public utilities operating within the City limits. 
L.  All ordinances establishing arterial streets.  
1-1-16 - OFFENSES UNDER REPEALED PROVISIONS 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, no new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against the former ordinance as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or claims arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatever to effect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or claims arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinances in force at the time of such proceeding. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may; by the consent of the party affected, be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express word or by implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provision upon the same subject or any other ordinance. 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City therein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person; or as waiving any right of the City under any section or provision of the City Code of Park Ridge, Illinois, adopted in 1981, or any amendments thereto existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance.  
1-1-17 - REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCES 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision.  
1-1-18 - INTENT 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out.  
1-1-19 - INVALIDATION OF PART 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the validity of the remaining portions of this Code shall not be affected, since it is the express intention of the governing body of the City to enact each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase and word separately.  
1-1-20 - EFFECTIVE DATE 
The Municipal Code of Park Ridge shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and due publication.  
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 
 
1-2-1 - CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS 
Whenever any words in any section of this Code import the plural number, the singular shall be deemed to be included, and whenever the singular number shall be used, it shall be deemed to include the plural. 
Whenever the masculine gender is used in this Code, females as well as males shall be deemed to be included. 
Words in the present tense shall be deemed to include the future tense. 
The words "written" and "in writing" may include printing. 
The word "shall" as used in this Code is mandatory. 
Building code . That portion of this Municipal Code of Park Ridge contained in the following Articles: 
Article 15—Building Regulations 
Article 18—Mechanical Code Regulations 
Article 19—Signs 
Building official . The Building and Zoning Administrator and such assistants as may be acting under his direction and authority. 
City . City of Park Ridge. 
City council . City Council of the City of Park Ridge. 
Code. The Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge and all amendments thereto. 
Corporate authorities. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Park Ridge. 
County. County of Cook. 
Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation in his or its individual capacity, or as administrator, conservator, executor, trustee, receiver, or other representative appointed by the court. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of said section. 
Public way. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, public parking lot or other public thoroughfare. 
State. State of Illinois.  
ARTICLE 2 - CORPORATE SEAL, EMBLEMS AND POLICIES[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History —Ord. No. 92-20, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 2001-02, 1-15-2001; Ord. No. 2003-15 and 2003-16, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 2003-44, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003-57, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 2007-27, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 2010-38, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2011-20, 3-21-2011. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - ADOPTION OF SEAL AND OFFICIAL FLAG, FISCAL YEAR[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2012-01, 1-16-2012. 
 
2-1-1 - SEAL 
There is hereby adopted as the official seal for the City, and authorized as such, a seal described as follows: 
A.  The Corporate Seal of the City Shall be circular in form, two inches in diameter, with a border one-quarter inch wide. Inside the border, centered at the top shall read: "City of Park Ridge" and centered inside the border, at the bottom, the words: "State of Illinois." 
B.  The word "Seal" shall appear in large letters in the lower one-half of the inside circle which defines the inside of the border. 
C.  Rising from each side to an apex, equidistant from each side, a wide band matching the golden band on the official City flag, which symbolizes the Ridge, the geographical and topographical characteristic that is captured in the present name of the incorporated City. 
D.  Above the Ridge, a stippled segment bisected by a classic torch with a "flame"—a symbol of the highest standards of education of all levels and ages. 
E.  On the segment to the left of the torch, three minor stars—symbols of the three stages in our City's history: Brickton, Pennyville, and the Village of Park Ridge 
F.  On the segment to the right, one large star standing for the unity and strength of our present City. 
G.  Below and parallel to the wider band, two narrow bands, also matching the narrow bands of our City flag, which on this flag completes the National colors and symbolizes our devotion to the United States of America and the State of Illinois. 
H.  Centered below the three bands will appear the word: "Incorporated" and below this word the figures "1910".  
2-1-2 - CITY FLAG 
There is hereby adopted as the official City flag, a flag designed and described as follows: 
A.  Rising from each corner to an apex equidistant from each side, a golden band symbolizing the Ridge, a geographical and topographical characteristic that is captured in the present name of the incorporated City, the golden color to commemorate the Golden Anniversary of the incorporation of the City of Park Ridge in 1910. 
B.  Above the Ridge a deep blue field bisected by a classic golden torch with a red "flame"...a symbol of highest standards of education at all levels and ages. 
C.  On the blue field to the left of the torch, three minor star symbols of the three stages in our City's history: Brickton, Pennyville and the Village of Park Ridge. 
D.  In the blue field to the right, one large white star standing for unity and strength of our present City. 
E.  Below and parallel to the golden band, on a field of white, two red stripes and completing the National colors and symbolizing our underlying devotion to the United States of America and the State of Illinois. 
F.  At the bottom and parallel to it, the words "City of Park Ridge" in deep blue.  
2-1-3 - PRIVATE USE OF CITY EMBLEMS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or copy any insignia or emblem that has been trademarked by the City except on the written permission of the City and in strict accordance with established City policy. A list of those items which have been trademarked shall be maintained by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, 1-16-2012)  
2-1-3.1 - PROHIBITED USE OF CITY FLAG 
It shall be unlawful to use the City flag or any likeness of the City flag in any materials promoting a commercial or political enterprise without prominently stating on the same page or item on which the flag's likeness is used: "The City of Park Ridge Does Not Endorse This Enterprise." 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, 1-16-2012)  
2-1-4 - PRIVATE USE OF SEAL 
No person shall fraudulently forge, deface, corrupt or counterfeit the Seal of the City, nor shall any person, other than the duly authorized public official make use of the said Seal. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less that twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.  
2-1-5 - FISCAL YEAR 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on May 1 in each year, and end on April 30 of each year following.  
2-1-6 - PATRIOTIC EXHIBITIONS 
The corporate authorities of the City may enter into any contract with any person for the purpose of arranging for the holding of any general patriotic public exhibition or celebration in the City on any public land located within the territorial limits of the City and to provide for the payment of any expense necessarily incurred in contracting for the holding of any of the specified events out of the miscellaneous receipts of the City which have not been other wise appropriated.  
2-1-7 - OFFICIAL FLOWER 
The official flower for the City shall be the red geranium.  
CHAPTER 2 - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE 
SECTION 
 
2-2-1 - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE IMPOSED 
A surcharge is hereby imposed on all billed subscribers of network connections provided by telecommunications carriers engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge at a rate $1.00 per month for purposes of installing, maintaining, and operating a 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System in accordance with the Emergency Telephone System Act (50 ILCS 750/15.3) as approved by the electors of the City of Park Ridge at an election held on March 15, 1994 in accordance with Ordinance No. 94-3. Such surcharge shall be in addition to any tax levied according to law.  
CHAPTER 3 - FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-3-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed on the sale at retail of food and alcoholic beverages prepared for immediate consumption, sold in the City of Park Ridge by a business which provides, on its own premises or on premises of another pursuant to license, franchise or other contractual agreement facilities for on-premise consumption of such food or alcoholic beverage. Such tax is levied at the rate of 1% of the purchase price of each sale and is in addition to all other taxes. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to meals provided to patients or residents of health care facilities, nursing homes, or other such institutions incidental to other services where no separate consideration is charged for meals; nor shall the tax apply to food dispensed from vending machines; nor shall the tax apply to food sold under the authority of public or private school systems. The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be upon the retail purchaser of the food or alcoholic beverage. Nothing herein is intended to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling food or alcoholic beverages.  
2-3-2 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
Each vendor of food or alcoholic beverages prepared for immediate consumption in the City of Park Ridge shall have the duty to collect the food and beverage tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the City of Park Ridge, along with an accounting therefor on return forms provided by the City. The return and tax payments shall be filed with the Director of Finance on the same filing dates as are established for filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue of the Retailer's Occupational Tax Return Form RR-1-A.  
2-3-3 - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
Each vendor of food or alcoholic beverages prepared for immediate consumption in the City of Park Ridge shall register with the City of Park Ridge on forms provided by the Finance Director. Each such vendor shall have the duty to maintain, complete, and accurate books, records and accounts, showing the gross receipts for the sale of food and beverages as herein described and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which shall be available to the City of Park for examination and for audit by the City upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.  
2-3-4 - LATE PAYMENT PENALTY 
If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid over to the City when due, a late payment penalty equal to 1% of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month or any portion thereof that such tax remains unpaid, and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby. The City may bring action to collect any unpaid tax or penalty.  
2-3-5 - PENALTY 
In addition to any other penalty, any person violating any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00, for each offense. Each failure to collect the tax imposed hereby and each failure to pay such tax over to the City of Park Ridge shall constitute a separate violation hereof.  
CHAPTER 4 - MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-4-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this State's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such "Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and the "Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the "Illinois Municipal Code" (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5). 
(Ord. No. 2006-24, 3-20-2006)  
2-4-2 - FILING REPORTS 
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 01-1999)  
2-4-3 - PAYMENT 
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.  
CHAPTER 5 - ETHICS PROVISIONS[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-57, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 2009-58, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 2014-22, 04-21-2014; Ord. No. 2015-77, 12-21-2015. 
 
2-5-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter: 
Act on a matter or acting on a matter shall mean: (1) participating in the discussion or vote on a matter when it is before the City Council for the purpose of discussion or vote; and (2) participating in the discussion or vote on a matter when it is before a Committee of the City Council for the purpose of discussion or vote; and (3) participating in the discussion of a matter at a meeting sanctioned by the City Council when specifically designated by the City Council to do so. This shall not include the routine approval of warrants by the Finance Committee and City Council. 
Actively pursuing an opportunity to establish an economic relationship. To engage in activities related to securing an Economic Relationship beyond an initial solicitation or offer made by the City Official, the City Official's business or the City Official's spouse to enter into an Economic Relationship or an initial inquiry made by an individual to the City Official, the City Official's business or the City Official's spouse. For example, an advertisement in a newspaper, church bulletin, or direct-mail piece is not "actively pursing an opportunity to establish an Economic Relationship" under this policy. Providing an estimate of costs for services, price list or rate to an individual is "actively pursing an opportunity to establish an Economic Relationship." If the individual then engages the services or places an order, an Economic Relationship is created. If the individual expressly declines the offer, and the City Official takes no further action, the City Official is no longer "actively pursing an opportunity to establish an Economic Relationship" with the individual. If the individual expressly declines the offer, and the City Official submits a new offer, the City Official is "actively pursing an opportunity to establish an Economic Relationship" with the individual. 
Business entity shall mean any organization or enterprise (operated for profit), including, but not limited to, a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability partnership, corporation, limited liability company, firm, business, trust, joint venture, syndicate or association. 
Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3). 
City official shall include the Mayor, Aldermen and members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Appearance Commission, Liquor License Review Board, the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager and Department Heads. For purposes of Section 2-5-2(D), City Official shall include the City Official's business and the City Official's spouse. 
City official's business shall include any business entity in which the City Official has a 5% or more ownership interest or any business employing the City Official in a supervisory or management capacity. 
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this Ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
Consideration from the city shall include zoning variations, zoning text amendments, zoning map amendments, subdivision, development approval, appointment to a City office, employment by the City, use of or interest in City property, transfer of City property and contracting with or product or service vending to the City. 
Contract or doing business with the city shall include any agreement between the City and any person, firm, corporation or other business entity for the purchase of materials, goods, services or real estate. Contract shall also mean a deposit of monies, loans, or other financial service provided to the City by banks and thrift institutions. Contract shall include employment by the City. 
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
Corporate authorities The Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Park Ridge. 
Direct business competition. Direct business competition occurs when one or more business entities provide a similar product or service and as a matter of practice compete for the same market or customers. 
Disclosure shall mean the filing, with the City Attorney, of a written statement that describes the economic relationship. 
Economic relationship shall mean any financial dealing, business relationship or client representation. This shall include any transaction or dealing of any kind or nature with a Petitioner, where the value of the goods, service or other benefit exchanged exceeds $150.00. However, in no event shall the term Economic Relationship be deemed to include a transaction in which the City Official is the consumer of a good (for example, clothing purchased from a merchant) or service (for example, dinner at a restaurant or the procurement of medical services), where the consumption of the good or service occurs in the ordinary course of the Petitioner's business and the price of the good or service is fixed by the merchant or service provider and is no different from that which is offered to the general public. Economic Relationship shall also specifically include campaign contributions totaling more than $150.00 (whether in cash or in kind) by the Petitioner made to or for the benefit of the City Official or the City Official's campaign committee or campaign fund in the past four-year time period. 
Employee shall mean any person employed by the City of Park Ridge whether part-time or fulltime or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
Employer means the City of Park Ridge. 
Entity shall include the definition of a person and business entity and shall include not-for-profit corporations. 
Financial interest. Any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership, trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment, employment, gift, fee or otherwise. This shall include any such interest whether present, promised or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect; whether or not legally enforceable; whether in the person or in a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in another subsidiary of the same parent corporation. A financial interest shall include, but is expressly not limited to, any economic interest, as set forth above, of a spouse or dependent child, as well as any economic interest held by an agent on behalf of an official or employee, a spouse or dependent child. It shall also include any economic interest held by an agent on behalf of an official or employee by a business entity managed or controlled by or by a trust in which an official or employee has a substantial interest. A business entity is controlled by an official or employee when that person or that person's spouse or dependent child, singly or in the aggregate, possess a majority ownership interest in the entity. An official or employee has a substantial interest in a trust when that person, the spouse or dependent child, singly or in the aggregate has a present or future interest worth more than $1,000.00. "Financial interest" shall not include ownership through purchase at fair market value of less than 1% of the shares of a corporation whose shares are registered and traded on a nationally recognized securities market. "Financial Interest" shall also not include authorized compensation or salary paid to an official or employee for services rendered to the City of Park Ridge, or any economic benefit generally available to the residents of the City of Park Ridge. 
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
Immediate family An individual's spouse, dependent children or others claimed by the individual as dependents for income tax purposes. All reference to a "person" or "person filing the statement" shall include spouse and dependent children. 
Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
Official or Officer means any person appointed or elected to any board, commission or other office of the City created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity, and the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, each department head, the City Attorney and City Prosecutor. 
Ownership interest A person has an ownership interest if the person is the sole proprietor, partner, stockholder, other equity interest owner, joint-venturer, beneficial owner or holds any other legally recognized interest normally indicating ownership. 
Past year. The preceding calendar year plus any time elapsed during the current year prior to the filing of the Disclosure Statement. 
Person shall include any individual or business entity such as a partnership, corporation or joint venture. 
Petitioner shall include any person seeking consideration from the City. 
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk. 
Prohibited acts are set forth in Section 2-5-3 of this Article. A prohibited act is an act that is forbidden under penalty of law. A prohibited act differs from a conflict of interest under this Chapter as a conflict of interest may be cured pursuant to Section 2-5-4. 
Political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event; or 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event; or 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution; or 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question; or 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question; or 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; or 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls; or 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; or 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office; or 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires; or 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; or 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question; or 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question; or 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention; or 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(2)  does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(3)  conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
Public body means any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-26, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 2009-58, 8-17-2009)  
2-5-2 - DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
A.  Time for Filing. Officials shall file the Disclosure Statement immediately upon taking office and it shall apply to the 12 months immediately preceding the taking of office. Reference to "doing business with the City" shall apply to the same period as references to the person's interest in business. Persons already holding office at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall file the Disclosure Statement within 30 days of such adoption. The official is required to file only upon taking office. However, if the information furnished in the Disclosure Statement changes during the official's tenure or term of employment, the official shall so notify the City Clerk in writing within 30 days of the change. This Disclosure Statement shall be in addition to any such statement required by the State or the County. 
B.  Persons Required to File. The following persons shall be required to file a Disclosure Statement: 
1.  All persons holding elective Office 
2.  Zoning Board of Appeals Members 
3.  Planning and Zoning Commission Members 
4.  Appearance Review Commission Members 
5.  Employees as defined in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-1011, et seq. (Disclosure of Economic Interest) 
6.  City Attorney 
7.  City Engineer 
8.  City Prosecutor 
9.  Library Board of Trustee Members 
10.  Historic Preservation Commission Members 
C.  Contents of Disclosure Statement. The Disclosure Statement shall report the following: 
1.  Real Property. Any financial interest in real property located inside or in an unincorporated area within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge. The statement shall include the common address and permanent index number ("PIN") of each parcel of real estate owned and shall indicate the nature of the interest held in the real estate. The property in which the official resides shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
2.  Gifts, Loans and Services. Any gifts or services rendered or series of gifts or services rendered that have a total or cumulative value in excess of $150.00 which have been received from any person or entity which has done business with the City during any calendar year. 
If the official filing the statement has been released from any indebtedness or series of indebtedness whose total exceeds the amount of $150.00 by any person or business entity doing business with the City without either paying the total balance due or giving adequate consideration, a statement shall be included listing the name of the creditor, the nature and amount of the indebtedness released and a description of the circumstances concerning the release. 
The foregoing shall not apply to consumer discounts or premiums received by an official, from a business, where the same discounts or premiums are offered to all consumers. 
3.  Interest in Business Entity Doing Business with or Seeking Consideration from the City. Any financial or ownership interest of 1% or more in any business entity which has done business with or sought consideration from the City during any calendar year. The disclosure shall include the extent and nature of the ownership interest and the type of business conducted with or consideration sought from the City. 
4.  Position of Influence in Business Entity Doing Business with or Seeking Consideration from the City Any position of influence such as officer, director, partner, attorney for, or consultant for any business entity doing business with or seeking consideration from the City of Park Ridge. The disclosure shall include the position and the type of business conducted with or consideration sought from the City. 
5.  Employment by Business Entity Doing Business with or Seeking Consideration from the City. Any employment by any entity doing business with or seeking consideration from the City. The statement shall include the name of the employing entity and the type of business conducted with or consideration sought from the City. 
6.  Personal Business Done with or Consideration Sought from the City. Any business which has been done with or any consideration which has been sought from the City. This statement shall include the type of business with or consideration sought from the City. 
7.  Financial Interests at O'Hare Airport. Any financial interest in any contract with O'Hare Airport, any entity doing business at O'Hare Airport or with the City of Chicago for a concession or service for or at O'Hare Airport. 
8.  Gambling or gambling interests within or Outside of the State of Illinois. Any financial interest in any casino or casino licensee or any business providing service or goods to a casino or casino licensee in the State of Illinois. 
9.  Liquor Industry Interests. Any financial interest in any entity holding a liquor license in the City of Park Ridge. 
D.  Policy Disclosure of Economic Relationship. 
1.  Policy Statement. One of the primary duties of a City Official is to Act on Matters where a Petitioner is seeking Consideration from the City. From time to time, a City Official may be required to Act on a Matter in circumstances where the City Official is involved in an Economic Relationship with a Petitioner. 
It is the intent of this section that it be construed broadly for the purpose of granting to the citizens of Park Ridge full knowledge of the dealings of City Officials as those dealings may relate to City business. 
2.  Transparency Statement Required. When a City Official is called upon to Act on a Matter in the course of his or her official duties, the City Official shall publicly disclose any Economic Relationship the City Official has with a Petitioner prior to Acting on the Matter, where either: (1) the City Official has a current Economic Relationship with a Petitioner; or (2) the City Official has had a previous Economic Relationship with a Petitioner while the City Official knew that the Petitioner was seeking Consideration from the City; or, (3) the City Official is actively pursuing an opportunity to establish an Economic Relationship with the Petitioner. If disclosure pursuant to this policy would violate a confidential relationship between the City Official and the Petitioner, (such as an Attorney/Client privilege or HIPAA), then the City Official shall abstain from Acting on the Matter and when abstaining, need state only that the abstention is done pursuant to this policy. In the case of Disclosure of campaign contributions, the actual amount of the contributions shall be disclosed. 
The Transparency Statement shall be filed prior to the time of Acting on the Matter. The City Attorney shall read the Transparency Statement into the record at the regular meeting of the City Council occurring immediately after the Transparency Statement is filed. However, should the matter require discussion prior to such meeting, then the City Attorney shall give notice of the Transparency Statement to the City Manager; the City Clerk and each member of the City Council within twenty-four hours of its filing. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City Official be required or expected to disclose any matter of which the City Official does not have actual knowledge. 
E.  Requests for Release. All disclosure statements filed under this Chapter shall be available for examination and copying by the public at all reasonable times. Each person examining a statement must first fill out a form identifying the examiner by name and address with the date of examination.  
2-5-3 - PROHIBITED ACTS 
The following acts are not mere conflicts of interest, but are absolutely prohibited: 
A.  Use of Position to Obtain Employment for Others. No official shall, directly or indirectly obtain or seek to obtain preferential treatment for any person seeking employment or other consideration from the City for any purpose other than the betterment, advantage or best interests of the City. Nothing shall preclude the Corporate Authorities from exercising the full authority vested in them in the hiring of the City Manager or other official, which they have a duty to hire. 
B.  Discrimination. No official shall appoint or remove or in any other way favor or discriminate against any other person with respect to any appointive office because of his or her race, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, color, religious affiliation, political preference, national origin, physical or mental disability, ancestry, marital status, parental status, unfavorable discharge from the military (except dishonorable), source of income, housing status, or any other protected status under applicable law. 
C.  Rewards for Political Activity. No official shall promise an appointment to any municipal position as a reward for any political activity or cause or require any City employee to contribute to or perform services for any political party as a condition of continued employment or under threat of detriment to employment. 
D.  Use of City Equipment. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of the City owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for convenience, profit or political purposes, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as City policy for the use of such public official. 
E.  Representation of Persons in Matters Involving the City of Park Ridge. 
1.  No person serving in the following capacities within the City shall, while serving or within two years after his or her office or employment has ceased, act as agent, consultant or attorney for any party in that other party's request for consideration from the City or in that other party's claim against the City. 
a.  Mayor 
b.  Alderman 
c.  City Manager or Assistant City Manager 
d.  Department head 
e.  City Attorney 
f.  City Engineer 
g.  City Prosecutor 
2.  No person serving in the following capacities within the City shall, while serving, act as agent, consultant or attorney for any party in that other party's request for consideration from the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Appearance Commission. 
a.  Member of Planning and Zoning Commission 
b.  Member of Zoning Board of Appeals 
c.  Member of Appearance Commission 
F.  Pecuniary Gain from The City. No elected City official, the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, City Attorney or Department Head shall do any business of any kind or nature with the City except for the performance of those duties specified for the particular office holder by statute, ordinance or other regulation or order. This shall not prevent an entity in which one of those officials has an ownership interest from doing business with the City so long as the conflicting ownership interest is less than 1% or the affected official complies with the conflict of interest requirements of Section 2-5-4. 
G.  Attempts to Influence Members of Boards or Commissions. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this subparagraph is to encourage public rather than private expression of opinions on matters pending before the City's Boards and Commissions by elected officials, petitioners, and representatives of petitioners. 
2.  Undisclosed Discussions Prohibited; Elected Officials. An elected official of the City may not have any undisclosed communication with any member of a City Board or Commission concerning any issue that is pending before that Board or Commission. For purposes of this subparagraph (2), "pending" shall include that period of time when the elected official discovers that the matter may come before that Board or Commission and the time that the Board or Commission renders its final decision on that issue. 
3.  Undisclosed Discussions Prohibited; Petitioners. A petitioner or a representative of a petitioner may not have any undisclosed communication with a member of a City Board or Commission with respect to the matter that the petitioner has pending before that Board or Commission. For purposes of this subparagraph 3, "pending" shall include that period of time when the petitioner or petitioner's representative reasonably believes the matter may be brought before a Board or Commission and the time that the Board or Commission renders its final decision on that issue. 
4.  Board or Commission Defined. For purposes of this subparagraph G, "Board or Commission" means the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Appearance Commission, Civil Service Commission, Fire and Police Commissioners, Police Pension Board, Firemen's Pension Board, Liquor License Review Board, and Fair Housing Commission. For purposes of this subparagraph (G), a liaison to a Board or Commission is considered a member of the Board or Commission. 
5.  Communication Defined. Communication shall include, but not be limited to, face-to-face discussion, communication through an intermediary, telephone communication, written communication and electronic messaging. 
6.  Undisclosed Communication Defined. Undisclosed communication shall include any such communication with any member of a Board or Commission, petitioner or petitioner's representative that is not disclosed by the elected official on the record at a public meeting and any such communication that a petitioner or petitioner's representative has with a member of a Board or Commission that is not disclosed by the petitioner or petitioner's representative on the record at a public meeting. 
7.  Petitioner Defined. Petitioner shall include but not be limited to, an individual or entity that seeks relief or files an application for relief with a Board or Commission. Representative shall include but not be limited to, attorneys, architects, analysts, and any other expert consultant or agent who presents information on behalf of a petitioner to a Board or Commission. 
This subparagraph (G) shall not prohibit an elected official, petitioner, or representative of a petitioner from expressing an opinion at a public hearing or other public meeting held for the purpose of publicly discussing or deciding the matter. 
This subparagraph (G) shall also not prohibit a member of a Board or Commission from requesting information from an elected official in writing. A copy of the request shall be provided to all members of the Board or Commission. Further, this subparagraph (G) shall also not prohibit an elected official from providing a written opinion to a Board or Commission. A copy of any such opinion shall be provided to each member of the Board or Commission, as well as to all other elected officials. Any written communications noted herein shall be entered as part of the record of the matter pending before the Board or Commission. 
H.  Prohibited Political Activities. 
1.  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any political activities during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the City in connection with any political activity. 
2.  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
3.  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any political activity. 
4.  Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this Chapter 5. 
5.  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party or of a political organization or club. 
(Ord. No. 2003-121, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 2007-26, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 2008-88, 12-1-2003; Ord. No. 2009-58, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 2015-77, 12-21-2015)  
2-5-4 - POLICY REGARDING CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
A.  Persons Who are to Avoid Conflict of Interest. All officials, employees or professional consultants for the City shall attempt to avoid conflicts of interest with the City. However, if any person develops a conflict of interest due to business commitments or other matters of personal advantage that were not designed to exploit the official's or employee's position with the City, the person shall comply with subsection C below. 
B.  Standard for Determining Conflict of Interest. For purposes of this Section 2-5-4, a conflict of interest is created when a non-City interest would cause an impairment of the official's ability to exercise independent judgment on behalf of the City. The standard for determining impairment of independent judgment is objective rather than subjective and shall be whether a person of ordinary and reasonable judgment would be affected. 
Any of the foregoing notwithstanding, a person shall be deemed to have a conflict of interest in the following circumstances. 
1.  The person is seeking to acquire a 1% or more ownership interest in or is about to become an officer, director, management official, employee, attorney or other professional consultant in any entity seeking consideration from or attempting to establish a business relationship with the City. 
2.  The person is representing another person or entity as an advocate or consultant in a matter not concerning the City of Park Ridge in which the other entity or person being represented has another interest which is adverse to the interests of the City, or when that other entity or person is actively seeking other consideration from the City. 
C.  Resolving Conflicts of Interest 
1.  If a member of the Corporate Authorities develops a conflict of interest that is prohibited by statute, that person will abide by the statute in question. 
2.  If a member of the Corporate Authorities develops a conflict of interest that is prohibited by B(1) or (2) above, that person shall abstain from any discussion, statement or vote on the matter. 
3.  If a member of the Corporate Authorities develops a conflict of interest that is not prohibited by statute or is not defined by B(1) and (2) above, that member shall be permitted to issue written statements with respect to or participate in public meeting discussions of the issue involved in the conflict, however the member shall also abide by the following: 
a.  Make full written disclosure to the City Clerk or make public disclosure of the conflict at an open meeting. 
b.  Refrain from voting on the issue involved in the conflict. 
c.  Refrain from private discussions with other members of the Corporate Authorities, City staff members or City consultants with respect to the issue involved in the conflict. 
4.  a.  If the City Manager, Assistant City Manager or Finance Director develops any conflict of interest of any kind or nature, that person shall: 
i.  make full written disclosure to the City Clerk or make public disclosure of the conflict at an open meeting; and 
b.  abide by any prohibitions or restrictions issued by either the Corporate Authorities or the City Manager, with respect to participation in the resolution of the issue that is the subject of the conflict. 
c.  If any consultant or any employee other than the City Manager, Assistant City Manager or Finance Director develops a conflict of interest and may reasonably be expected to advise or participate in the discussion of the issue that is the subject of the conflict, that person shall: 
i.  make full written disclosure to the City Clerk or make public disclosure of the conflict at an open meeting; and 
ii.  Abide by any prohibitions or restrictions issued by either the Corporate Authorities or the City Manager, with respect to participation in the resolution of the issue that is the subject of the conflict. 
5.  If the conflict involves numerous issues or is so pervasive that it would render the person unable to properly carry out his or her obligations to the City, the person shall resign the office or position.  
2-5-5 - COMPETING WITH ANY ENTITY SEEKING CONSIDERATION FROM THE CITY 
An official shall comply with subsection 2-5-4(C) 3 of this Chapter when the official: a) has actual knowledge that an entity is seeking consideration from or attempting to establish a business relationship with the City; and b) has actual knowledge that the same entity is in direct business competition with another entity in which the same official has or is about to acquire more than a 1% interest in or is about to become an official, director, management official, employee, attorney or other professional consultant.  
2-5-6 - ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS, FAVORS OR OTHER CONSIDERATION PROHIBITED; STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT 
A.  Gifts, Favors or Other Consideration. No public official or his/her immediate family living with him/her shall accept any gift, favor or consideration, from any Prohibited Source, nor shall such public official: 
1.  Accept any gift, favor or other consideration of value that may tend to influence the official in the discharge of his or her duties; or 
2.  Grant in the discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
B.  State Officials and Employees Ethics Act Adopted. The State Officials and Employees Ethics Act is hereby adopted as required by Section 70-5 of the Act. Section 2-5-6(A) is not applicable to the following: 
1.  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
2.  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value. 
3.  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
4.  Educational materials and missions. 
5.  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business. 
6.  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancée. 
7.  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members. 
8.  Food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this Section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means. 
9.  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances. 
10.  Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this Act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity. 
11.  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
12.  Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.00. 
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
C.  Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse, or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this Section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
D.  Ethics Advisor. The City Attorney is the designated Ethics Advisor for the City of Park Ridge. The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the City concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and State ethics laws. 
The Ethics Advisor shall perform other such duties as may be delegated by the Mayor and City Council. 
E.  Future Amendments to State Officials and Employees Ethics Act. Any amendment to the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act that becomes effective after the passage of this Section shall be incorporated into this Section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section by reference without formal action by the Corporate Authorities of the City. 
F.  Future Declaration of Unconstitutionality of State Officials and Employees Ethics Act. 
1.  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section (except subsection A of this Section) shall be repealed as of the date that the Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This Section (except subsection A of this Section) shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court. 
2.  If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this Section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-58, 8-17-2009)  
2-5-7 - PURCHASE OF PROPERTY 
Nothing in this Chapter 5 shall be construed as precluding an official or employee from buying property which may someday be the subject of zoning or similar action as long as such official or employee does not acquire such property on the basis of information which is unavailable to other members of the public and does not vote or attempt to influence the vote of others with respect to such property.  
2-5-8 - FILING OF COMPLAINT 
A.  Complaint Form. 
No Complaint may be accepted, reviewed or acted upon, unless it is filed on the Official City of Park Ridge Complaint Form as set forth in this Section 2-5-8A. If a Complaint is received in an alternative format, the City Clerk shall provide the following Complaint Form to the Complaining Party, along with a complete copy of this Chapter 5 of Article 2 (City Ethics Code). The City Attorney is not authorized to act on any Complaint that is made in any format other than a fully completed City of Park Ridge Ethics Complaint Form. 
OFFICIAL CITY OF PARK RIDGE ETHICS COMPLAINT FORM 
I.  (You must fill in each blank) 
Person making complaint _____ 
Address _____ 
Phone No. _____ 
Email address _____ 
II.  (You must fill in each blank) 
Person against whom complaint is being made ___________(this must be a City of Park Ridge elected or appointed official, employee or consultant) 
Your understanding of the title, office or position the person holds with the City ___________ 
III.  (You must fill in this blank; a copy of the City's Ethics Code is attached) 
Section or subsection number(s) of the City of Park Ridge Ethics Code or any state or federal law which you believe has been violated. _____ 
IV.  (You must select the single box that best describes the complaint) 
Is the violation 
?  An act or omission which is a violation of the Park Ridge Ethics Code? 
?  An act or omission which you believe is a violation of local, state or federal law? 
?  An act or omission which you believe indicates a conflict of interest between (a) the person's obligations to the City and (b) the person's outside non-City interests? 
?  Continuing conflict of interest because an outside obligation or interest detracts from the person's obligations to the City and/or its residents? 
V.  (In completing this section, it is not sufficient to allege merely "an appearance of impropriety." You must describe a specific act or omission.) 
Please give a detailed narrative description of the violation and/or conflict of interes: You must include (1) a time frame; (2) the specific act or omission of which you are complaining; (or) in the case of a conflict of interest; the outside (non-city) interest which you believe compromises or detracts from the person's ability to give full devotion to his or her City obligations and/or the best interests of the City and its residents. (3) You must describe, in your own words, why you believe the act, omission or course of conduct is a violation of Park Ridge Ethics Code or local, state or federal law or why the conduct indicates a compromise of the person's ability to give full devotion to the city. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
THIS FORM MUST BE FULLY COMPLETED 
The City of Park Ridge takes very seriously every complaint of an ethics violation. Therefore, it is mandatory that this form be completed in its entirety. The City Clerk is not permitted to accept an application that is not fully completed. 
B.  Receipt by City Clerk. The City Clerk is authorized to receive and maintain a log of all fully completed City of Park Ridge Ethics Complaint Forms filed against individuals subject to this Chapter 5. Within seven days of receipt, the complaint shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the City Attorney. 
C.  Review by City Attorney. Upon a review of the Complaint and such preliminary inquiry as may be advisable, but not later than 21 days after receipt from the City Clerk, the City Attorney shall issue a Response to the Complaint. 
1.  If the City Attorney believes that the Complaint fails to set forth a violation of the Ethics Code or any other violation of the law; then the City Attorney shall forward the Response to the City Manager and the Mayor for the signature of each confirming agreement with the Response. If either the Mayor or Manager disagrees with the finding of "no violation;" he or she shall so state and the City Attorney shall proceed as set forth in (2) below. If the Complaint is against the Manager or Mayor, then the signature of the Chairman of Procedures and Regulations shall be required in his or her stead. If the Mayor and Manager agree with the finding of "no violation," the Complaint, the Response and any other documentation shall be forwarded to the City Council for action at its next regular meeting following the Mayor and Manager's Response. The City Council shall then vote on the following proposition: "Shall the Ethics Complaint filed on ___________, 20___ be forwarded to an Independent Reviewer?" An affirmative vote of four aldermen shall be required to move the matter on to an Independent Reviewer as set forth in (2) below. 
2.  If the City Attorney, City Manager, Mayor or the majority of aldermen as set forth in (1) above believes a valid complaint has been stated, the City Manager shall then retain an Independent Reviewer for the purpose of determining whether there is probable cause to believe that a violation was committed. The Independent Reviewer shall be a member in good standing of the Illinois Bar and have at least one of the following additional qualifications: 
a.  Retired judge of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
b.  At least five years of experience as a prosecutor with either the office of the U.S. Attorney or the Cook County State's Attorney; 
c.  Currently acting as an Administrative Adjudicator with a municipality in Cook County, Illinois. 
As part of the review, the Independent Reviewer may interview the charging party in person. The Independent Reviewer shall render a written decision within 45 days of the filing of the Complaint. If there is a finding of probable cause that a violation has been committed, the Independent Reviewer shall initiate further action. 
Further action may include prosecution before the City's administrative law judge or, if the allegation is one of financial malfeasance or a violation of state or federal law; then before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  Complaints by Elected Officials. To the extent that it is practicable to do so, an elected City official should use his or her best efforts to notify, in writing, other elected City officials prior to filing a complaint or charges against any City official or employee. 
E.  Independent Counsel. If the complaint is against the City Attorney; or if for any other reason the City Manager or the Corporate Authorities deem it appropriate, independent counsel may be retained to evaluate and, if necessary, prosecute the complaint.  
2-5-9 - PENALTY 
A.  Any person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-5-3(H) may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. A violation of Section 2-5-3(H) of this Code shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the City by filing in the Circuit Court information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
B.  A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-5-6 is subject to a fine in an amount not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $5,000.00. 
C.  Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this Ethics Code to the local enforcement authorities, the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00.  
CHAPTER 6 - USE TAX ON CERTAIN TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY PURCHASED OUTSIDE THE STATE OF ILLINOIS 
SECTION 
 
2-6-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the City tangible personal property purchased at retail from a retailer outside the State of Illinois whenever such tangible personal property is titled or registered with an agency of the government of the State of Illinois at a rate of 1% of the selling price of such tangible personal property, as "selling price" as defined in the Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105. The State of Illinois Department of Revenue shall collect such taxes from persons and legal entices whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being within the City.  
CHAPTER 7 - UTILITY TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-7-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax at the rate hereinafter specified is hereby established and levied by the City of Park Ridge on the following occupations or privileges: 
A.  Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity at a rate of five percent 5% of the gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge. 
B.  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge and not for resale, at a rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. 
C.  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge, and not for resale, at a rate of 5% of the gross receipt therefrom. The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under Section 2-7-1 et seq. of this Code. If a taxpayer under this Section is unable to use a credit authorized by this Section solely because the tax imposed by this Section has been replaced by the tax imposed under Section 2-7-1 et seq., then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under 2-7-1 et seq. 
D.  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge and not for resale, at a rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.  
2-7-2 - LIMITATIONS 
None of the taxes authorized by this Chapter are imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the State or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity or engaged in transmitting messages by electricity be subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.  
2-7-3 - EFFECT OF OTHER COMPENSATION 
The taxes enumerated in this ordinance shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.  
2-7-4 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of the taxes enumerated in this Chapter: 
Gross reciepts. The consideration received for the transmission of messages by electricity, the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money including cash, credit services, and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such messages, without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
Transmitting messages by electricity. This term, in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person-to person communication, shall include the furnishing for consideration of service or facilities (whether owned or leased, or both) to persons in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages as are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. 
Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision, or receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.  
2-7-5 - RESERVED  
2-7-6 - PAYMENT 
On or before the last day of August of each year, each taxpayer shall make a return to the City Treasurer for the month of July of that year, stating: 
A.  His name; 
B.  His principal place of business; 
C.  His gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
D.  Amount of tax; 
E.  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
On or before the last day of each month thereafter each taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer for a corresponding one-month period. 
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the City Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. However, in the event that the amount of billing for a month is not ascertainable by the taxpayer, then the tax may be paid based upon an estimate of the month's collection for a period not to exceed two months. For the third month of each quarter, the payment shall be based on actual billings for the quarter, less the payments made for the previous two months.  
2-7-7 - PAYMENT BY MISTAKE 
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneously payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than one year prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.  
2-7-8 - RECOVERY OF TAX DUE 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Chapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount.  
2-7-9 - PENALTY 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provisions of this Chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.  
CHAPTER 7.1 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-37, 5-19-2003. 
 
2-7.1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
Gross charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this City and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this City, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within this City, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross charge" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this Chapter, (ii) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or (v) charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; 
(7)  Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or 
(9)  Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State. 
Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State. 
Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
Retailer means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this Section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State , or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State. 
Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this Chapter. 
Telecommunications , in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this Chapter, "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this Chapter. For purposes of this Section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupations Tax Act.  
2-7.1-2 - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges: 
A.  The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at the rate of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. 
B.  The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at the rates of 6% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State. 
C.  The tax imposed by this Chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality.  
2-7.1-3 - COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS 
A.  The tax authorized by this Chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department. 
B.  Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.  
2-7.1-4 - RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT 
On or before the last day of every month, the tax imposed under this Chapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, Section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the Act.  
2-7.1-5 - RESELLERS 
A.  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts that will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this Chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Department may reasonably require. 
B.  Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. 
C.  Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.  
2-7.1-6 - SEVERABILITY 
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application of any provision of this Chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Chapter, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter.  
2-7.1-7 - EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law.  
CHAPTER 7.2 - ELECTRICITY TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-7.2-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
City means City of Park Ridge. 
Director means the Director of Finance of the City of Park Ridge. 
Person means any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court; 
Person maintaining a place of business in this State means any person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State. 
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. 
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser.  
2-7.2-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A.  Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the City at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
1.  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.558 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
2.  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.359 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
3.  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.354 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
4.  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.303 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
5.  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.302 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
6.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.301 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
7.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.281 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
8.  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.200 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
9.  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.130 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
10.  For the next 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.080 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
B.  The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the City, State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the State. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Illinois.  
2-7.2-3 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
A.  Subject to the provisions of Section 2-7.2-5 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
B.  Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. 
C.  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the City upon request. For purposes of this Chapter, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.  
2-7.2-4 - TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN 
A.  Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the Director. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under Section 2-7.2-3. 
B.  If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under Section 2-7.2-3, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Director and pay the tax directly to the Director on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.  
2-7.2-5 - RESALES 
A.  Electricity that is delivered to a person in this City shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
B.  If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Director for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Director may reasonably require. 
C.  Upon approval of the application, the Director shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
D.  The Director may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this Chapter for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number: (1) was obtained through misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales. 
E.  (1)  If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Chapter directly to the Director pursuant to subsection B of Section 2-7.2-4 on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to Section 2-7.2-3 and remit the tax pursuant to subsection A of Section 2-7.2-4 on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
(2)  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this Section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Director the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the Director may reasonably require.  
2-7.2-6 - BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.  
2-7.2-7 - CREDITS AND REFUNDS 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the City, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this Chapter unless the persons files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted.  
CHAPTER 8 - POWER TO INCUR INDEBTEDNESS 
SECTION 
 
2-8-1 - POWER TO INCUR INDEBTEDNESS 
The corporate authorities are hereby authorized to execute contracts for the borrowing of funds from any authorized lending institution in such amounts as the corporate authorities shall deem necessary and for such purposes as are deemed appropriate to the furtherance of the conduct of the government of the City and with repayment schedules convenient to the City with maturity dates not to exceed 40 years from the date on which the obligation is incurred in accordance with the terms and provisions of Article 7, Section 6 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, effective July 1, 1971. The corporate authorities are also hereby authorized to issue general obligation bonds in accordance with Article 7, Section 6 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, effective July 1, 1971. 
(Ord. 2004-12, 2-16-2004)  
CHAPTER 9 - BUDGET POLICY[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-80, 11-15-2010; Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012. 
 
2-9-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF BUDGET POLICY 
There is hereby established in the City a budget policy which shall be implemented by the City Manager in the orderly preparation of an annual budget.  
2-9-2 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER IN IMPLEMENTING BUDGET POLICY 
The City Manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Permit, encourage, and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures in all Municipal departments, commissions and boards. 
B.  Compile an annual budget in accordance with the following: 
1.  The City Manager will schedule and hold budget workshops during January, February, and March each year. The workshops will be special Finance Committee of the Whole meetings and will be structured to cover topics such as revenue projections, department personnel (salaries, benefits, pensions), department contracting and material, shared services, transfers, debt service, capital plan replacement funds and other topics the City Manager, Finance Director or City Council deem appropriate. At the first scheduled budget workshop, the City Manager will submit a summary of projected revenues and expenditures for the annual budget. At the conclusion of the budget workshops, the City Manager will compile the results into a final proposed budget for adoption by the City Council at the first City Council meeting in April. The budget upon which the vote is taken shall be a budget in which each individual fund is balanced (except equipment replacement funds), that is, for each individual fund, the sum of all revenues and funding sources (funding sources include one time revenue and fund transfers) for each individual fund is greater than or equal to the sum of all expenditures and funding uses (funding uses include operating expenditures, fund transfers, capital expenditures, debt service payments and all other expenditures including budgeted contingencies). 
If the difference between the sum of the revenue and funding sources and the sum of the expenditures and funding uses for any individual fund is negative, then certain specified fund balances or accounts may be used to bring that fund into balance. [6] 
Supplement A 
Sample List of Fund Balance Classification that can be used to balance an individual fund budget: 
General Fund—Unassigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Library Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Dempster TIF Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Motor Fuel Tax Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Uptown TIF Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
IMRF Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Municipal Waste Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
911 Emergency Telephone Fund—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Debt Service 2004A GO—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Debt Service 2004B GO—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Debt Service 2005A GO—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Debt Service 2006A GO—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Debt Service 2006B GO—Assigned Fund Balance (Unreserved Fund Balance as of 4/30/11 CAFR) 
Parking Enterprise—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
Water Enterprise—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
Sewer Enterprise—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
Motor Equipment Replacement Fund—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
Tech Equipment Replacement Fund—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
Library Tech Equipment Replacement Fund—Unrestricted Net Assets (Unrestricted net assets as of 4/30/11) 
2.  If use of fund balance to balance the budget should cause the ending unassigned fund balance of the General Fund, or assigned fund balance of any Governmental Fund or the net unrestricted assets of any Enterprise Fund to fall below 90% of the Target Fund Balance, as described in Council Policy Statement 40, then a two-thirds vote of the Aldermen shall be required to approve the budget of such fund. The budget shall contain estimates of revenues available to the City for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the City and all of the City's departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. The budget shall contain at the budget category level, actual or estimated revenue and expenditures for one year immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared, long with two years' future projection. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure should be made. The budget categories will include but not be limited to: revenue, regular salaries, overtime, medical/dental insurance, pension contributions, workers compensation, all other personnel, contractual services, commodities, capital, debt service, and transfers. 
3.  Revenue source changes shall include any rate or fee schedule change, additions of new revenues, and deletions of revenue sources or other major financing policy issues. 
4.  Once the budget is approved, revenues and expenditures shall be monitored on a regular basis and adjustments made in spending if revenues are less than projected. The City Manager shall provide monthly reports to the City Council and the City Council shall review and act on all significant proposed spending adjustments that result in service changes. 
5.  Examine all books and records of all Municipal departments, commissions, and boards, which relate to monies received by the City, City departments, and commissions and boards, and paid out by the City, City departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the City, City departments, commissions and boards. 
D.  Obtain such additional information from the City, City departments, commissions and boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling a City budget, such information to be furnished by the City, City departments, commissions and boards in the form required by the City Manager. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the City Manager shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the City until such City department, commission or board shall comply in full with the request of the City Manager. 
E.  Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no expenditures are made by the City, City departments, commissions or boards except as authorized by the budget. 
(Ord. No. 2010-81, 11-15-2010; Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— Prior to the first budget workshop, the Finance Director shall publish a schedule that includes each City Fund and the Fund Balance classification that may be used to balance the budget of that City fund. See Supplement A. 
 
2-9-3 - RESERVED 
(Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012)  
2-9-4 - PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET, EFFECT 
Passage of the annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of an appropriation ordinance. The annual budget need not be published except in a manner provided in Section 2-9-8 herein. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. Subsequent to the passage of the budget, an ordinance shall establish the property tax assessment provided for in the approved budget.  
2-9-5 - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND 
Monies may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repair and/or replacements of specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property both real and personal, to be designated as the "Capitol Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund". Expenditures from the Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur. As of fiscal year ending 2012, the City maintains two capital repair or replacement funds: the Technology Replacement Fund; and the Motor Equipment Replacement Fund. 
(Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012)  
2-9-6 - REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET 
If new elected officials are elected and then are installed during the first 30 days of a fiscal year, the corporate authorities may, by majority vote, revise the annual budget by deleting departments or objects or by adding to or subtracting from departments or objects. An example of a Department is 1021—Administration. An example of an object is 910000—Regular Salaries. An expense line item within the budget is defined as dollar amount budgeted using a combination of a Fund (ex. 100), a Department (ex. 1021), and an Object Code (ex. 910000). An example of the complete line item is 100-1021-910000. 
During the fiscal year, the City Manager may revise the Expense/Expenditure budget for any individual Fund only as follows: by (1) deleting funding for departments or objects; (2) adding funding to departments or objects; or (3) changing departments or objects. Such revisions shall follow the procedure set forth below: 
If a purchase order encumbrance or a manual journal entry causes the respective total fund-department-object budget amount to be exceeded, the following procedure will be applied: [The MUNIS report, "YTD Budget Report" will be used to monitor compliance (see report example below) 
1.  Determine if this or another already existing purchase order encumbrance can be reduced. If such a purchase order reduction can be achieved, such that the total fund-department-object budget is no longer exceeded, the reduction should be processed and a budget transfer is not required. 
2.  If reduction cannot be accomplished pursuant to (1) above, then a budget transfer between or among line items is required. The budget transfer must cause the total fund-department-object budget to equal or exceed the total fund-department- object encumbered incurred expenses. (The column labeled "Remaining" in the YTD budget report must be greater than or equal to zero.) 
3.  If a budget transfer is required as in (2) above but a line item to move the funds "From" cannot be identified and/or is not available, then Council Policy Statement 21—Unbudgeted Expenditures, which governs the transfers from Contingency Funds, shall apply. If no Contingency Funds are budgeted or available, a revision of the budget must be presented to and approved by the Committee of the Whole at a Finance Committee meeting and approved by the City Council. 
MUNIS Report Example 
Accounts for 
100 General Fund 	Original 
Estim. 
Rev. 	Revised 
Estim. 
Rev. 	Actual 
YTD 
Rev. 	Actual 
MTD 
Rev. 	Remaining 
Rev. 	Pct. 
Coll. 
940100 TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
1025 Information Technology 	33,871 	33,871.00 	3,241.84 	3,241.84 	-386.04 	9.6% 
1031 Finance Administration 	5,250 	5,250.00 	599.29 	599.29 	150.00 	11.4% 
2011 Police Administration 	21,200 	21,200.00 	2,115.15 	2,115.15 	3,200.00 	10.0% 
2021 Fire Administration 	19,827 	19,827.00 	1,340.41 	1,340.41 	8,420.04 	6.8% 
3011 Public Works Admin 	7,260 	7,260.00 	787.30 	787.30 	560.04 	10.8% 
3024 Street Maintenance 	3,600 	3,600.00 	411.28 	411.28 	99.96 	11.4% 
4011 CPD Administration 	8,900 	8,900.00 	998.82 	998.82 	400.04 	11.2% 
Total telecommunications 	117,873 	117,873.00 	11,607.82 	11,607.82 	12,617.81 	9.8% 
 
Expanded Illustration of Overrun 
Fund/Dept 	Object 	Object Desc. 	PO # 	Vendor 	Budget 	PO Amt 	Incurred 	Remaining 
1001025 	940100 	Telecommunications 	130330 	Call One 		$9,257.04 	$1,087.78 	
1001025 	940100 	Telecommunications 	130201 	Verizon Wireless 		$25,000.00 	$2,154.06 	
					$33,871.00 	$34,257.04 	$3,241.84 	($386.04) 
 
All budget transfers are processed in Finance. The budget transfer form can be found in Word templates, "_BUDGTRANS". 
For budget transfers requiring Finance Committee approval, the transfer must be routed to the various Departments and City Manager's office. The last Department to receive the transfer is Finance. Finance will coordinate placing budget transfers on Committee of the Whole agendas. 
Intra-Departmental Budget Transfer same Object Code.Process this type of transfer if you want to leave the money in the same object code but need it transferred to a different department within the same fund. 
Example: 
From: Fund 100—Department 1024—Object 940100 Telecommunications 
To: Fund 100—Department 1025—Object 940100 Telecommunications 
Signature requirement for transfers of all dollar values —Department Head, City Manager, and Finance Director. 
Intra-Departmental Budget Transfer different Object Code . Process this type of transfer if you want to move the money to a different object code and a different department within the same fund. 
Example: 
From: Fund 100—Department 1024—Object 940100 Telecommunications 
To: Fund 100—Department 3071—Object 940200 Tree Trimming 
Signature requirement for transfers <=$1,000.00 —Department Head, City Manager, and Finance Director. 
Signature requirement for transfers >$1,000.00 —Department Head, City Manager, Finance Director, and Finance Committee. 
Inter-Departmental Budget Transfer different object . Process this type of transfer if you want to leave the money in the same department but need it transferred to a different object code within the same fund. 
Example: From: Fund 100—Department 1031—Object 941600 Audit 
To: Fund 100—Department 1031—Object 940100 Telecommunications 
Signature requirement for transfers <=$10,000 —Department Head, City Manager, and Finance Director. 
Signature requirement for transfers >$10,000 —Department Head, City Manager, Finance Director, and Finance Committee. 
(Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012; Ord. 2012-43, 9-04-2012)  
2-9-7 - RESERVED 
(Ord. 2012-04, 1-16-2012)  
2-9-8 - PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET 
The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to passage of the annual budget, by publication in such form as the corporate authorities may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget, and prior to final action on the budget the corporate authorities shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and passed without further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of this hearing shall be given at least one week prior to the time of the hearing by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Municipality.  
2-9-9 - CONTRACT AWARDS AND APPROVALS 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish the legal standards for the procurement of goods and services. 
B.  City Council Approval. Except as set forth in subsection C, all purchases of goods and services must be approved by the City Council and accomplished pursuant to the methods set forth in either paragraph 1 or paragraph 2 of subsection D. 
C.  Purchase Exceptions. As the sole exceptions to the requirement of subsection B above, the following are authorized to approve expenditures in the amounts set forth below: 
1.  Department Head—$2,500.00 or less. 
2.  Finance Director—$10,000.00 or less. 
3.  City Manager—$20,000.00 or less. 
4.  City Council—$20,000.01 or more. 
5.  Finance Committee—Sole Source Procurement. Not less than five business days before the Finance Committee considers a request for sole source procurement of a specified good or service, the City shall publish notice of intent to use sole source procurement for a specified good or service. The Finance Committee may grant approval for sole source procurement, by two-thirds majority approval of all Alderman, if any of the following criteria apply: 
a.  Only one known source exists for supplies or services as determined by documented research; 
b.  No other reasonable alternative source exists that meets the agency requirements; 
c.  Only one source meets the business needs of the agency/state (e.g., compatibility, unique feature to meet state's business need, etc.); and 
d.  Procurement of public utility services. 
Prior to presenting the request to the Finance Committee, the Department requesting the sole source procurement shall prepare a fact-based, written justification for the Finance Committee to review that addresses each applicable criteria set forth above. 
Purchasing as set forth in subsections 1—4 above, may be accomplished only in accordance with the following: 
a.  The annual budget provides for such purchase; 
b.  It is done pursuant to one of the selection methods set forth in subsection D; and 
c.  Procurement is not artificially divided in order to qualify for such purchasing. 
D.  Source Selection Methods. Selection of a source or sources for goods and services must be accomplished in one of the following methods: 
1.  Invitation to Bid. When the specifications are readily understood and the product and market are well known and readily obtainable, this is the preferred method of selecting a source of goods and services for the City. 
2.  Request for Proposal (RFP). Requests for proposals may be used as an alternative to an invitation to bid when factors other than price are a necessary consideration. Such factors may include service, rapidly changing technology, the experience of the staff and/or potential vendors or other matters of significance to management or the City Council. This method of selection requires sealed competitive proposals in the same manner as an Invitation to Bid. However, no contract will be formed or awarded pursuant to an RFP until the staff has submitted a written recommendation to the City Manager or the City Council, whichever is required by this Section 2-9-9. 
3.  Informal Solicitation. An informal competitive solicitation process may be used for purchases of goods and services where it is not anticipated that the expenditure will exceed twenty thousand dollars $20,000. The difference between this method and those set forth in (1) and (2), is that the solicitation may be made by direct contact rather than publication for bids. No contract may be awarded pursuant to this method unless at least three bids are received. In all instances, the normal procurement approval process must be followed. 
4.  Request for Qualifications (RFQ). Requests for qualifications may be used when a particular service; i.e. legal, architectural or engineering, requires a high degree of professional training and experience. 
5.  Fuel Purchase Agreements. It is recognized that the purchase of fuel for city vehicles must be purchased many times throughout the course of a fiscal year. The City does not have the storage capacity to make such purchases on an annual basis and the price for commodities may fluctuate significantly throughout the year. For this reason, the Director of Public Works may make such fuel purchases as are, from time to time, reasonably necessary and in the best economic interests of the City. Such purchases may exceed $20,000.00. The Director must solicit proposals from not less than three sources and must report such purchases, in writing, to the City Manager within 24 hours of the purchase. The City Council may by majority vote, at any time remove such authority from the Director without prior amendment to this Code. 
6.  Declaration of Emergency. Upon a written declaration of an emergency, and with the written consent of the Mayor, the City Manager is authorized to expend such funds as may be necessary to address an immediate and present danger to the public health, safety or welfare or other circumstance that presents the potential for substantial loss to the City or its residents. If the Mayor is unavailable and the expenditure is $50,000.00 or less, the written declaration and approval of any two of the following: City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief or Public Works Director; shall be sufficient. If the Mayor is unavailable and the expenditure does or is anticipated to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), then the written declaration and approval of the City Manager and any two of the above stated persons is required. 
E.  Rules for Bid Acceptance. 
1.  Rejections. In all cases, the City Council shall have the right to reject any and all bids and to reject any and all staff award recommendations. 
2.  Sole Bidder. When only one bid is received, an award may be made to such bidder only if it is determined that: a) the price submitted is fair and reasonable; b) other prospective bidders had a reasonable opportunity to respond; and c) the bidder is both responsive and responsible. A two-thirds vote of the City Council will be required to approve such an award. In making this determination, the Council may consider whether or not there is adequate time for a re-bidding. 
3.  Contracts for Greater than 12 Months. Subject to state law, award of a contract for goods or services with an initial term of more than one year will also require a two-thirds vote of the City Council for approval. However, an option to renew or extend a pre-existing contract for up to one year may be approved by a simple majority vote, provided that the conditions of renewal or extension were included in the original bid solicitation and funds were available for the first fiscal period at the time of the original contract award. 
4.  Bidding Alternate Goods and Services. Bids that offer equivalent but alternative and more economical services, supplies or materials than those set forth in the original specification are encouraged by the City. When an alternative appears to be more advantageous to the City than the original specification, re-bidding may be recommended with the modified specifications. 
F.  Waiver of Competitive Selection for Contracts over $20,000. With the approval of 2/3 of the City Council, contracts which by their nature are not amenable to the competitive selection process, including the following, may be entered into without competitive bids or proposals: 
1.  Utility services, including electric, gas, water or telecommunication services. 
2.  A purchase of goods or services from another governmental entity. 
3.  A purchase of goods or services through a recognized governmental cooperative joint purchasing program (i.e. State of Illinois, Northwest Municipal Conference, M.A.B.A.S., etc.) 
G.  Sole source procurement in excess of $2,500.00 for non-emergency purchases of goods and services is not permitted. 
H.  Consistency with City Policy on Procurement Rules and Requirements. 
Unless specifically stated otherwise by an appropriate resolution or ordinance; all procurement shall be consistent with the City of Park Ridge Procurement Rules and Requirements as from time to time may be published by the Director of Finance and approved by the City Council. In the case of discrepancy between such rules and this Code, this Code shall prevail. 
(2014-62, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 2016-53 , § 2, 7-18-2016; Ord. No. 2018-19 , § 2(Exh. A) 6-4-2018)  
2-9-10 - PAYMENT OF BILLS 
All bills for goods or services rendered to the City shall be paid within 90 days of receipt unless within that time period the vendor is notified that a dispute exists as to the quality or quantity of goods or services furnished or the amount due therefor, or unless the contract for furnishing such goods or services otherwise provides. Whenever reasonably possible, such bills shall be timely paid so as to take advantage of any price reduction for prompt payment. No interest or other late payment penalty shall be added to such bills.  
CHAPTER 10 - DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
SECTION 
 
2-10-1 - DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
All items of personal property no longer necessary for use in the conduct of the business of government of the City shall be disposed of by one of the following methods: 
A.  Traded in as part of the purchase price for a new item of similar goods or equipment. 
B.  Sold at public sale, either by open public auction, Internet auction, or competitive sealed bid, and the Finance Director, or his/her designee, is authorized to arrange for the public sale. Notice of the public sale shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Park Ridge or metropolitan Chicago, by use of the Internet, by mailing to individuals or firms who have requested notice, or by any other means judged by the Finance Director or his/her designee to be in the best interests of the City. 
C.  Scrapped when investigation as to the probable worth of an item shows that the item has either no current value or the probable current value is exceeded by the costs to be incurred in the public sale of the item. An item of personal property may also be scrapped if it has been unsuccessfully offered for public sale. 
D.  Transferred to another public or governmental agency, after determination that the item has no probable current worth in accordance with Section 2-10-2C. 
(Ord. 2004-137, 12-20-2004)  
2-10-2 - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY POSSESSED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT 
A.  This Section is applicable to all personal property of which possession is transferred to the Police Department of the City under circumstances supporting a reasonable belief that such property was abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed except property seized during a search and retained and ultimately returned, destroyed or otherwise disposed of pursuant to order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  Property believed to be abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed shall be retained in the custody of the Police Chief of the City who shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to identify and notify the owner or other person entitled to possession thereof and shall return the property after such person provides reasonable and satisfactory proof of his ownership or right to possession and reimburses the City for all reasonable expenses of such custody. 
C.  If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the property has not been ascertained within six months after the Police Department obtained such possession, the Police Chief shall effectuate the sale of the property for cash at public sale. Property offered but not sold at such public sale may be offered and sold at a subsequent public sale. 
D.  Proceeds of the sale of property at public sale, less reimbursement to the City of reasonable expenses of custody thereof, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City. 
E.  The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may claim and recover possession of the property any time before its sale at public sale upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and reimbursing the City for all reasonable expenses of custody thereof. 
F.  No person shall be responsible for consequent damages to another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. of January, 1999)  
CHAPTER 11 - INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICIALS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
SECTION 
 
2-11-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
Official. Any person elected or appointed to any office, board or commission of the City. 
Employee. Any person formerly or presently employed by the City. 
Civil action. Any claim, demand or cause of action seeking damages, either compensatory or punitive whether or not a suit is filed in a court of law or before an administrative agency. 
Criminal action. Any action commenced by notice to appear, complaint, information or indictment charging a violation of a penal ordinance, Statute of the State of Illinois or Act of Congress. 
Costs of defense. All costs involved in preparation for and trial of any civil or criminal action, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees. Reasonable attorneys' fees shall not include any charges made by an attorney defending a civil action unless the City Council have given prior approval to the selection of the attorney and the rate to be charged and the attorney has submitted an itemized statement of services rendered. Provided, however, that approval of the attorney representing the official or employee shall not be necessary where the City as a corporation is also a party and conflict of interest could be involved. Reasonable attorneys' fees shall not include any charge made by an attorney defending a criminal action unless the City Council has given prior approval to the rate to be charged and the attorney has submitted an itemized statement of services rendered. 
Good faith. A reasonable belief that the action complained of was proper and within the scope of the officer or employee's duties to the City. The existence of a reasonable belief shall be based upon an evaluation of the facts and circumstances known to the officer or employee at the time of the action complained of. The term "action" shall include any affirmative act or any failure to act.  
2-11-2 - CIVIL ACTIONS, INDEMNITY 
Any officer or employee against whom any civil action is brought or threatened by reason of any action taken in good faith in the course of his or her duties shall be indemnified by the City for: 
A.  costs of defense actually paid or incurred by such officer or employee in connection with proceedings related to the defense or settlement of such action; 
B.  any amount for which such officer or employee becomes liable by any reason of judgment in such action; 
C.  any amount for which such officer or employee becomes liable by reason of a settlement agreement in such action if the City Council gave prior approval to the settlement terms; and 
D.  reasonable cost and expenses, including attorneys' fees actually paid or incurred by the officer or employee in any action to enforce any right under this Section if the action results in a final judgment in favor of the officer or employee. 
Provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply unless the officer or employee gives written notice of the claim, demand or cause of action to the City within ten days of the date upon which such officer or employee receives notice or service of process, delivers a copy of such notice or process to the City Attorney and thereafter cooperates fully with his attorney and any attorney representing the City in preparation and presentation of any defense.  
2-11-3 - CONSTRUCTION, NOT A WAIVER OF IMMUNITY 
The indemnification herein provided for shall not be construed as a waiver of any grant of immunity to the City or its officers or employees under any Statute or rule of common law.  
2-11-4 - WAIVER OF ACTION AGAINST EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS 
Where an action of an official or an employee is done in good faith as hereinbefore defined, the City as a corporate entity shall not prosecute any claim, demand or cause of action arising out of such action against the official or employee.  
2-11-5 - CRIMINAL ACTIONS INDEMNITY 
Any officer or employee against whom any criminal action is threatened or brought by reason of any action taken in good faith shall be indemnified by the City for: 
A.  Costs of defense actually paid or incurred by such officer or employee in connection with proceeding related to the defense of such action; and 
B.  Reasonable costs and expenses including attorneys' fees actually paid or incurred by the officer or employee in any action to enforce any rights under this Section if the action results in final judgment in favor of the officer or employee. 
Provided, however, that such criminal proceedings result in: 
A.  A finding by the trier of fact and judgment or mandate that the officer or employee was not guilty of the offense charged; or 
B.  Dismissal of the charge on motion of the officer or employee and after the time provided by law for refiling or reinstatement of the charge has lapsed; or 
C.  Dismissal of the charge on motion of the prosecuting authority and after the time for refiling or reinstatement of the charge has lapsed.  
2-11-6 - ADVANCE FOR COST OF DEFENSE 
Whenever it reasonably appears that the officer or employee is entitled to indemnity under the provisions of this Section, but before final judgment, the City shall pay a reasonable retainer to the attorney representing the officer or employee if the officer or employee so requests and provide the City with sufficient security to guarantee repayment to the City in the event that the result of the action is such that the officer or employee is not entitled to indemnity under the terms and provisions hereof.  
2-11-7 - CONTRACTUAL NATURE 
The terms and provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a binding contract between the City and its present and future officers and employees given in consideration for their services rendered to the City. The contract shall continue and be in full force and effect covering all good faith actions of officers and employees occurring prior to the repeal of this Chapter by the City Council and any action as aforesaid shall be covered by the terms hereof until terminated even through termination occurs after the repeal hereof.  
2-11-8 - INDEMNITY NOT CONSTRUED AS CONDONATION OR WAIVER 
Indemnification of an employee under the terms hereof shall not be construed as a condonation of the action nor a waiver of any right to removal of the officers or employee from office, civil service, or Fire or Police Departments. Nor shall this Chapter be construed to provide of indemnification for costs of defense against an action brought for removal from office or proceeding against employee before the Civil Service Commission or Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.  
CHAPTER 12 - AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-12-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this City at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code.  
2-12-2 - REPORT FILED 
Every such person engaged in such business in the City shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by Sections Two and Three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended.  
2-12-3 - PAYMENT REQUIRED 
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding months.  
2-12-4 - COPY OF ORDINANCE REQUIRED 
The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue a certified copy of this Ordinance not later than five days after the effective date of this Ordinance.  
CHAPTER 13 - AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-13-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this City an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of this State's government in this City at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while this Ordinance is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code.  
2-13-2 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
The tax provided for in this Ordinance shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois Address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this City.  
2-13-3 - PAYMENT REQUIRED 
The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be paid to the Illinois Department of Revenue.  
2-13-4 - COPY OF ORDINANCE REQUIRED 
The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue a certified copy of this Ordinance not later than five days after the effective date of this Ordinance.  
CHAPTER 14 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AND REBATE 
SECTION 
 
2-14-1 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT REBATE PROCEDURE 
Whenever the City Council of the City has by ordinance declared a surplus in any special assessment fund and has authorized and directed a rebate of such surplus and proper notice has been made to eligible recipients of such rebate, and thereafter any surplus funds remain unclaimed for a period of one year or more, all right, title and interest in such rebate shall be extinguished, forfeited and forever barred. The City Treasurer shall publish notice of such forfeiture in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and not less than 30 days following such notice, the City Treasurer shall transfer such unclaimed surplus plus accrued interest from the special assessment fund to the general fund of the City.  
CHAPTER 15 - PARKING LOT AND GARAGE OPERATIONS TAX[7] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
History— Ord. 82-102, 12-20-1982; Ord. 92-20, 3-2-1992; Ord. 2011-20, 3-21-2011. 
 
2-15-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section: 
Motor Vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Operator means any person conducting the operation of a parking lot or garage, as defined in this Chapter, or receiving the consideration for parking or storage of motor vehicles at such parking place. 
Parking Space means any parking stall or space, clearly identified, marked with customary striping lines designating an area set aside for the parking of a single motor vehicle. 
Parking lot or garage means any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place, whether enclosed or not, expect a public way, within the City of Park Ridge, where two or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked for hire, charge, fee or other valuable consideration in a condition ready for use, including valet parking, or where rent or compensation is paid to the owner, manager or lessee keeping or maintaining of such motor vehicles; provided, however, that said terms shall not include residential parking provided for single family homes or multiple family dwelling units wherein an arrangement for such parking is provided on a rental basis to meet the terms of the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance for off-street parking, the consideration therefore being set forth in the house or apartment lease or in a separate writing between the landlord and tenant, whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord or to the operator of the parking lot or garage, nor shall said terms include any parking lot or garage owned or operated by the City of Park Ridge. 
Person means any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative acting either for himself or for any person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstances. 
Normal business hours shall mean 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday excluding holidays.  
2-15-2 - TAX IMPOSED 
A.  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or upon any parking space in a parking lot or garage for which space the vehicle owner is charged a parking fee, as defined in this Chapter, a tax of $.50 for each such motor vehicle parked for every 24-hour period or fraction thereof. If a motor vehicle is parked in or upon a parking lot or garage space for which a charge is made on a weekly or monthly basis, the amount of tax shall be two $2.00 per week or eight dollars $8.00 per month. The parking tax applicable to a period other than daily, weekly, or monthly shall be computed by multiplying the base sum applicable to the total number of days, weeks or months in a particular period of time involved. The weekly tax shall not be increased or decreased on account of Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays falling within such weekly or monthly period of time, whether or not the motor vehicle is actually parked in or on said parking lot or garage space on such days. 
B.  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying space within said parking lot or garage, said person hereinafter referred to as "recipient." 
C.  The tax imposed by this Chapter shall not apply to residential off-street parking of house of apartment tenants required by the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance, wherein an arrangement for such tenant parking is provided in the house or apartment lease or in a separate writing between the landlord and tenant, whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord or to the operator of the parking lot or garage. 
D.  The tax herein levied shall be paid in additional to any and all other taxes. It shall be the duty of the operator of every parking lot or garage to secure said tax from the recipient of the parking privilege and to pay over to the Director of Finance said tax under procedures prescribed by the Director of Finance and as other provided in the Chapter.  
2-15-3 - RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE PUBLISHED 
The Director of Finance may make rules and regulations appropriate to and in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter.  
2-15-4 - INSPECTION 
The Director of Finance, or any person certified by the Director or the Deputy Director or representative, may enter the premises of any parking lot or garage during normal business hours for inspection and examination of books records for the proper administration of this Chapter and enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Director of Finance or the duly authorized Deputy or representative in the discharge of duties in the enforcement of this Chapter.  
2-15-5 - RECORDS TO BE KEPT 
It shall be the duty of every person operating a parking lot or garage in the City of Park Ridge to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Director of Finance, or the Deputy Director or representative authorized by the Director of Finance, shall have full access, during normal business hours, which records shall include a daily sheet showing (a) the number of vehicles parked in or on each parking lot or garage space, segregated on a daily, weekly, monthly or other basis for which a parking fee has been collected; and (b) the actual parking lot or garage tax receipts collected from all parking transactions. For the purposes of complying with the provisions of this paragraph, cash register, coin counter and computer printout data providing the required information shall be constructed as an acceptable accounting method.  
2-15-6 - CLAIM CHECKS TO BE ISSUED 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person operating a parking lot or garage in the City of Park Ridge to issue to the owner or driver parking any motor vehicle in a parking space, a distinctive ticket claim check or sticker ("ticket"). 
B.  The ticket shall bear the date and time of issuance and shall be accounted for in numerical sequence. Each ticket shall contain the name and address of the operator of the parking lot or garage upon which parking space the motor vehicles are parked. 
C.  No person shall operate a parking lot or garage as defined in this Chapter without first submitting to the Director of Finance samples of the tickets showing the starting and ending numbers, the parking lot or garage location, and the color and sizes of the tickets; or in the alternative, an operator may install an automatic entry gate system utilizing a sequentially numbered ticket dispensing device, which system shall provide the Director of Finance with printout register and/or statistical information sufficient to determine parking space usage, which system may be substituted for preprinted tickets. 
D.  No person shall operate a parking lot or garage in the City of Park Ridge in which parking is permitted on a weekly, monthly or other basis, without requiring the placement of a sticker upon said motor vehicle, which sticker shall show the name of the operator and address of the parking lot or garage upon which the motor vehicle is parked, an identification number in sequence to be placed on motor vehicle so to be parked; the number of the license plate of the motor vehicle and the issuing state; and an indication as to whether parking is on a weekly or monthly, or other basis, indicating starting and ending dates of the week, month or other period. 
E.  A sample of the weekly, monthly or other period stickers printed for the operator shall be submitted to the Director of Finance recording and said operator shall keep a book record of all such stickers issued, showing the serial number, date, license number of the motor vehicle and the parking charge imposed. The operator shall remove or cause to be removed and voided said sticker at the end of the week month or other period, and shall cause the placement of a new sticker upon the motor vehicle at the beginning of each new period with recordation thereof also placed in the operator's book. 
F.  Or, in the alternative to subparagraphs (d) and (e), the operator may install a key card system utilizing automatic gates for exiting purposes, in which event the operator shall provide the Director of Finance on or before the 30th day of each month during the operation of the parking lot or garage, a current list of the key cards purchased the previous month, which card shall contain an identification number and the amount of tax assessed as provided in this ordinance. Computer printout data or register tape (as the case may be_ shall constitute sufficient evidence of key card purchases and the appropriate amount of tax assessed.  
2-15-7 - TAX RETURNS TO BE FILED 
A.  Every person operating a parking lot or garage shall file appropriate tax returns showing the total tax receipts received with respect to each parking space for which a parking fee was charged, on or before the 30th day of the month following each preceding monthly period for which parking charges were imposed during each calendar year upon forms prescribed by rules and regulations of the Director of Finance. At the time of filing said tax returns the operator shall pay to the Director of Finance all taxes due for the period for which the return applies. 
B.  If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of 10% per year on the amount of unpaid tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected.  
2-15-8 - ACTION BY CITY ATTORNEY-SUSPENSION OF LICENSE 
A.  Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the City Attorney shall, upon the request of the Director of Finance, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.  If the Mayor, after hearing held by or for the Mayor, shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter, the Mayor may suspend or revoke all City licenses held by each tax evader. The operator shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five days after written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any City license of which he may be possessed shall be temporarily suspended. Any suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the operator of a parking lot or garage from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.  
2-15-9 - TAX TO BE PAID INTO CITY TREASURY 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Chapter, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Park Ridge and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the City.  
2-15-10 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for the first offense and not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for the second and each subsequent offense.  
2-15-11 - SAVING CLAUSE 
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
CHAPTER 16 - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD[8] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-15 and 2003-16, 3-17-2003. 
 
2-16-1 - CREATION OF FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD 
There is hereby created the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Board, which shall exercise the duties set forth herein consistent with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2.  
2-16-2 - ELECTION OF OFFICERS 
A.  The Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Board shall consist of five officers who shall be elected from the non-probationary, non-civilian members of the Park Ridge Fire Department. 
B.  Within 10 days of the effective date of this ordinance an election shall be held to elect the five officers of the Board. Three of the officers to be elected shall serve four-year terms of office. Two of the officers to be elected shall serve two-year terms of office. Thereafter elections for officers to the Board shall be conducted in March of each odd numbered year and each officer of the Board elected shall serve a four-year term of office. Officers shall take office immediately after their election. 
C.  Each Board officer shall hold office during his term unless the officer resigns from the Board or the Fire Department, retires from the Fire Department or is discharged, in which case the officer shall be immediately removed from the Board and the position deemed vacant. 
D.  Vacancies on the Board during an unexpired term shall be filled by election and such election shall be for the unexpired term.  
2-16-3 - SELECTION OF PRESIDENT, SECRETARY AND TREASURER OF BOARD 
A.  At the first meeting of the Board and every two years thereafter, the officers shall select a President, Secretary and Treasurer of the Board. Each officer may serve in such capacity so long as such officer remains on the Board. 
B.  The Treasurer of the Board shall give a sufficient bond to the City. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his duties under the statutes of the State of Illinois, this ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Board.  
2-16-4 - POWERS, DUTIES AND PROCEDURES 
A.  The Board may establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of 65 ILCS 11/10-2 and this ordinance. 
B.  The expenditure of funds received by the Board shall be made solely for maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. 
C.  The Board shall develop and maintain a list of those items the Board determines is appropriate expenditures for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. The Board shall update the listing from time to time but in no event less than every two years. No expenditures shall be made for items not set forth on the list of appropriate expenditures. 
D.  Prior to any expenditure by the Board, the Board shall submit a written statement of the proposed expenditure to the Fire Chief stating the description of the expenditure, the justification for the expenditure and the proposed location of the item to be acquired. The Fire Chief shall have the right to refuse to accept any item or its proposed location. The Fire Chief shall provide the Board with the basis of any denial, in writing. 
E.  Title to any items purchased by the Board shall be in the City.  
2-16-5 - MEETINGS OF BOARD 
A.  All meetings of the Board shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120, et al. 
B.  The President shall preside at all Board meetings. If the President is unable to attend any meeting, the Treasurer shall preside at the meeting. The Secretary shall keep record of the proceedings of any meeting and the actions of the Board. 
C.  Three officers of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting a meeting. 
D.  The President or any three officers of the Board may call a special meeting at any time. Notice of a special meeting shall be in writing signed by the President or the three officers of the Board. Such notice shall set forth the nature or the object of the special meeting. 
E.  Any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the Board. 
F.  Minutes of all Board meetings shall be filed with the City Clerk.  
2-16-6 - TAX IMPOSED 
Every corporation, company, and association which is not incorporated under the laws of this state and which is engaged in effecting fire insurance in the City of Park Ridge, shall pay to the Director of Finance for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the fire department thereof, a tax in the amount of 2% of the gross receipts received from fire insurance upon property situated within the City. All payments under the provisions of this chapter shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of July following the termination of the year for which such payments are due.  
2-16-7 - ACCOUNT 
Every person acting as representative for or on behalf of any such company or association shall, on or before the fifteenth day of July of each year, render to the Director of Finance a full, true and just account, verified by his oath of all premiums which have been received by him on behalf of the company during the year ending the preceding July first on such fire insurance policies on property located within the City. Such agent shall at the time of rendering such report, pay to the Director of Finance the sum of money for which the company, corporation, or association represented by him is chargeable, by virtue of the provisions of this Ordinance.  
2-16-8 - FAILURE TO ACCOUNT OR PAY TAX 
If the account is not rendered on or before the fifteenth day of July of each year, or if the sum due remains unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any corporation, company, or association, so in default, to transact any business in the municipality or fire protection district until the sum due has been fully paid. This provision shall not relieve any corporation, company, or association from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken in violation of this requirement.  
2-16-9 - MARINE INSURANCE 
The provisions of this ordinance shall not be applicable to receipts from contracts of marine insurance, even though they include insurance against fire, where the premium for the fire insurance is not separately specified.  
CHAPTER 17 - HOTEL TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-17-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used herein, the term "hotel" shall include the term "motel" and shall mean every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential to which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations, but shall not include rooming houses as defined in this Code. The term "permanent resident" shall mean any individual or family occupying one or more hotel rooms for 30 or more consecutive days.  
2-17-2 - REGISTER 
The landlord, proprietor, manager, keeper or clerk of every hotel shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name, and if a transient, the permanent address of every person who becomes a roomer, boarder, lodger or paying guest therein. Such register shall show the number of the room occupied by such person and the date or dates on or during which such person occupied said room. The register shall be accessible without charge to the Police Chief or Director of Finance of the City or to any of their duly authorized representatives.  
2-17-3 - TAX 
A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a hotel in the City, except rooms rented, leased or let to permanent residents, at a rate of 4% of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting. The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the user, lessee or tenant of said rooms. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.  
2-17-4 - PAYMENT AND COLLECTION 
The owner or operator of each hotel or the person to whom a certificate of registration to operate said hotel shall have been issued by the City, pursuant to this Code, shall bear jointly and severally the duty to collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel. Every person required to collect the tax shall secure said tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room at the time of collection of the price, charge or rent to which the tax applies. Such tax shall be paid monthly to the Director of Finance of the City together with a statement on forms provided by the Director of Finance showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding month. Failure to pay the tax when due shall result in a penalty for late payment of 2% per month. The Director of Finance may make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to the administration of this Chapter. The Director of Finance or the authorized agent of the City may enter the premises of any hotel for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper administration of this Chapter and for the enforcement of collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Director of Finance, or the duly authorized agents of the City, in the discharge of the duties hereunder.  
2-17-5 - PENALTY 
Failure to pay the tax hereby imposed shall be cause for revocation of any and all licenses issued to the hotel by the City, and the City Attorney may bring any appropriate legal action to enforce this Chapter and collect said tax.  
CHAPTER 18 - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-18-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions is used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section: 
Beneficial interest. Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal such interest may be, in a land trust held by a trustee for the beneficiaries of such land trust. 
Director. The Director of Community Preservation and Development of the City of Park Ridge or his designee. 
Person. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Recordation. The recording of deeds or trust documents with the Office of Recorder of Deeds or the registration of deeds with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois.  
2-18-2 - TAX IMPOSED 
A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real estate located within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge as evidenced by the recordation of a deed by any person, and a tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring the beneficial interest in real estate located within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge which is the subject of a land trust as evidenced by the trust document that is filed for recordation. The tax is imposed at the rate of $2.00 per $1,000.00 of value or fraction thereof stated in the declaration provided for in this Chapter. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees.  
2-18-3 - LIABILITY FOR TAX 
The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be borne by the grantor of any deed subject to this Chapter or by the grantor, assignor or transferee or of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in real estate within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge, unless the parties to the transfer agree otherwise.  
2-18-4 - FILING OF DECLARATION 
At such time as the tax levied by this Chapter is paid or the exemption presented as provided in Section 2-18-6, there shall be filed with the Director a fully executed and completed "Real Estate Transfer Declaration," which declaration shall be on a form provided by the Director. Such declaration shall be deemed as a confidential record.  
2-18-5 - ZONING AND SUBDIVISION VIOLATIONS 
A.  No real estate transfer stamp shall be issued for the transfer of any property or beneficial interest therein which does not conform to the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the City of Park Ridge, except that this shall not apply to a zoning or subdivision violation which: 
1.  is a legal nonconforming use, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, or 
2.  existed prior to September 2, 1975, on property which is now improved, or 
3.  was created by a predecessor in title to the present seller or grantor after September 2, 1975, on property which is now improved. 
B.  No real estate transfer stamp shall be issued for the transfer of any property or beneficial interest therein, where the transfer would result in the creation of any violation of the Zoning or Subdivision Ordinances, other than a violation relating to temporary structures or to detached accessory uses, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  No real estate transfer stamp shall be issued for the transfer of any property or beneficial interest therein as to which any fees are owed to the City for water or other municipal services, or when there exists any unsatisfied judgment in favor of the City against any seller or grantor of the property or interest. 
D.  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following transactions: 
1.  Transactions which secure debt or other obligation. 
2.  Transactions which are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation. 
3.  Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds.  
2-18-6 - EXEMPTIONS 
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall not apply to the following transactions: 
A.  transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental body or by any corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes. 
B.  transactions which secure debt or other obligation. 
C.  transactions in which deeds without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded. 
D.  transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds. 
E.  transactions which are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation. 
F.  transactions of partitions. 
G.  transactions made pursuant to merges, consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans of reorganization. 
H.  transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary corporation's stock. 
I.  transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States. 
J.  transactions involving deeds or trust documents executed prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
K.  transactions involving transfer by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir or distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy. 
L.  transactions effected by operation of law or upon delivery or transfer in the following instances: 
1.  from a decedent to his executor or administrator; 
2.  from a minor to his guardian or from a guardian to his ward upon attaining majority; 
3.  from an incompetent to his conservator, or similar legal representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a former incompetent upon removal of disability; 
4.  from a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company, or other similar entity, or nominee, or trustee therefore, to a public officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or commission or by a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part, under state or federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, not upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto; 
5.  from a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee or from such trustee to such receiver, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto; 
6.  from a transferee under paragraphs 1 to 5, inclusive, to his successor acting in the same capacity, or from one such successor to another; 
7.  from trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional trustees of the same trust; 
8.  upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, to the survivor or survivors. 
M.  Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than $100.00. 
No other instrument purporting to transfer a fee interest in real estate, including but not limited to deeds, pursuant to a judicial sale, shall be exempt. Every deed or other instrument which is exempt pursuant to this Section shall be presented to the Director so as to be appropriately marked by said Director as an exempt deed or instrument eligible for recordation without the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or instrument is presented to the Director, a certificate setting forth the facts which justify exemption shall be presented, together with the declaration required in Section 2-18-4 and a $25.00 processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-52, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 2008-09, 02-11-2008)  
2-18-7 - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX STAMPS REQUIRED 
The tax herein levied shall be collected by the Director through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by said Director in such quantities as said Director may from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be substantially in the following design: 
City of Park Ridge 
Real Estate 
Transfer Stamp 

No. 
Such stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular business hours of the City offices. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance or assignment. Any person so using and affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such marking shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch; however, the stamp shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its genuineness.  
2-18-8 - RECORDATION OF DEEDS OR TRUST DOCUMENT 
No deed or trust document conveying real property or assigning the beneficial interest in a land trust in real estate within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge shall be entitled to recordation by the Recorder of Deeds of the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois, unless such deed or trust document shall bear either a City real estate transfer tax stamp or an exemption mark from the Director.  
2-18-9 - DUTY OF TRUSTEE 
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the City of Park Ridge unless such instrument shall bear either a City real estate transfer stamp or an exemption mark from the Director.  
2-18-10 - PROCEEDS OF TAX 
All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Park Ridge and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the City.  
2-18-11 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES 
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Director the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of 1% per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the deed was recorded or the assignment of beneficial interest was accepted by the trustee. In addition, penalty of 50% of the tax shall be assessed and collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter.  
2-18-12 - CIVIL LIABILITY FOR TAX 
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Director the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, said person shall be liable to the City of Park Ridge for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The City may bring an action to collect such tax, interest and penalties in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
2-18-13 - DEED VOID 
Any transfer of real property or assignment of beneficial interest recorded or registered in violation of any portion of this Chapter shall be null and void. The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to direct the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles to indicate the invalidity of the deed or trust document on his records.  
2-18-14 - LIEN CREATED—ENFORCEMENT 
In the event a deed or trust document is filed for recordation conveying real estate or assigning the beneficial interest in a land trust in real estate within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge without the revenue stamps provided by this Chapter, a lien is declared against said real estate in the amount of the tax. The fact that the deed or trust document does not contain a Park Ridge revenue stamp or exemption mark shall constitute constructive notice of the lien. In addition, the City may record a lien for the nonpayment of the tax provided for herein. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics' liens.  
2-18-15 - FINE FOR VIOLATION 
In addition to the remaining provisions of this Chapter, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense.  
2-18-16 - SEVERABILITY 
If any clause, sentence, section, provision or part of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Chapter or its application to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby.  
CHAPTER 19 - LIQUOR TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-19-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon the retail purchase within the City of Park Ridge of alcoholic liquor in original packages or containers, at the rate of 4% of the retail purchase price of such alcoholic liquor. This tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be upon the retail purchaser of alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord 2005-33, 5-2-05)  
2-19-2 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
Each licensee engaged in the sale of alcoholic liquor in original packages or containers pursuant to a license granted by the City of Park Ridge shall have the duty, incidental to the privilege granted by the license, to collect the liquor tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the City of Park Ridge, along with an accounting therefor, on return forms provided by the City. The return and tax payment shall be filed with the Director of Finance on the same filing dates as are established for filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue of the Retailer's Occupational Tax Return Form RR-1-A.  
2-19-3 - MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
Each licensee shall have a duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of alcoholic liquor and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which shall be available in the City of Park Ridge for examination and for audit by the City upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.  
2-19-4 - LATE PAYMENT PENALTY 
If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid over to the City when due, a late payment penalty equal to 1% of the unpaid tax is added for each month, or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby.  
2-19-5 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
Failure or refusal of a licensee to comply with the terms of this Chapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the liquor license granted by the City of Park Ridge, in addition to any other penalty provided in this Chapter.  
2-19-6 - PENALTY 
In addition to any other penalty provided for herein, any person or licensee violating any provision of this Chapter upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense. Each failure to collect the tax imposed hereby and each failure to pay such tax over to the City of Park Ridge shall constitute a separate violation hereof.  
CHAPTER 20 - MOTOR FUEL TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-20-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
There is hereby imposed and levied a tax upon the retail purchase within the City of Park Ridge of motor fuel, at the rate of $0.04 per gallon or fraction thereof. This tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be upon the retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel. 
(Ord 2006-33, 4-3-06; Ord. 2010-40, 4-19-2010)  
2-20-2 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
Each motor fuel retailer in the City of Park Ridge shall have the duty to collect the motor fuel tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the City of Park Ridge, along with an accounting therefor, on return forms provided by the City. The return and tax payment shall be filed with the Director of Finance on the same filing dates as are established for filing with the Illinois Department of Revenue of the Retailer's Occupational Tax Return Form RR-1-A.  
2-20-3 - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
Each motor fuel retailer shall register with the City of Park Ridge on forms provided by the Finance Director. Each motor fuel retailer shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which shall be available in the City of Park Ridge for examination and for audit by the City upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.  
2-20-4 - LATE PAYMENT PENALTY 
If any tax imposed by this Chapter is not paid over to the City when due, a late payment penalty equal to 1% of the unpaid tax is added for each month or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby. The City may bring an action to collect any unpaid tax or penalty.  
2-20-5 - DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section. 
A.  Motor fuel. All volatile liquids compounded or used for fueling motor vehicles, including gasoline, gasohol, and diesel fuel. 
B.  Motor Fuel Retailer. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling motor fuel at retail, and not for resale.  
2-20-6 - PENALTY 
In addition to any other penalty, any person or licensee violating any provision of this Chapter upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense. Each failure to collect the tax imposed hereby and each failure to pay such tax over to the City of Park Ridge shall constitute a separate violation hereof.  
CHAPTER 21 - GAS USE TAX 
SECTION 
 
2-21-1 - TAX IMPOSED 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming in the City natural gas that is purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at the rate of $0.02 per therm. 
B.  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is upon the retail purchaser, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
C.  The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises: 
1.  To the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 2-21-2 of this Chapter on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax; or 
2.  Directly to the City on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 2-21-2 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
D.  The tax shall not apply to the use or consumption of gas by a person purchasing the gas for use in operating or propelling a vehicle. 
E.  To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the City by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Chapter if the gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the City's municipal utility tax, Article 2, Chapter 7 of this Municipal Code, as amended from time to time authorized pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (1996)). 
F.  A purchaser who purchases natural gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this Chapter with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the City on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
G.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or the State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the City. 
H.  The tax shall apply to natural gas for which the delivery to the customer is billed by a public utility on or after May 1, 1998. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
2-21-2 - COLLECTION OF TAX 
A.  The Finance Director is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter with any public utility providing natural gas service in the City. The contract shall include and subsequently conform with the following provisions: 
1.  The public utility will collect the tax with respect to natural gas delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor; 
2.  The public utility will remit collected taxes to the City no more often than once each month; 
3.  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the department; 
4.  The public utility will treat partial payments received from a customer as payments made pro rata for each item or charge billed to the customer, including the tax imposed by this Chapter; 
5.  The obligation of the public utility to collect and remit the tax shall not apply to gas the delivery of which is billed by the public utility to a retail purchaser prior to a date three months subsequent to the execution of such contract; 
6.  The public utility shall not be liable to the City for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
7.  Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
B.  A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas delivered to the customer unless: 
1.  The customer's use or consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant to Section 2-21-1E of this Chapter; or 
2.  The public utility has received a written certificate issued by the City authorizing the public utility not to collect tax on deliveries to the customer.  
2-21-3 - BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Every person that delivers natural gas which is subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this chapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the City.  
2-21-4 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The Finance Director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this Chapter.  
2-21-5 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
B.  Public utility means a public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
C.  Public utilities act means the Public Utilities Act, as amended (220 ILCS 511-101, et seq. (1996)). 
D.  Retail purchaser means any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail. 
E.  Sale at retail means any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, or furnishing or selling gas. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
CHAPTER 22 - LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES[9] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2001-02, 1-15-2001. 
 
2-22-1 - SCOPE 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the City's procedures in connection with all of the City's locally imposed and administered taxes.  
2-22-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Certain words, or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Act. The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act" 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax. Each tax imposed by the City that is collected or administered by the City not an agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the City other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Local tax administrator. The Director of Finance of the City, who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this ordinance and the Act. 
City. The City of Park Ridge, Illinois. 
Notice. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the City's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
Tax ordinance. Each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
Tax prayer. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the City.  
2-22-3 - NOTICES 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to the date fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows: 
(1)  First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or 
(2)  Personal service or delivery.  
2-22-4 - LATE PAYMENT 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically received by the City on or before the due date, or (b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City, with adequate postage prepaid.  
2-22-5 - PAYMENT 
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: first to the tax due for the applicable period; second to the interest due for the applicable period; and third to the penalty for the applicable period.  
2-22-6 - CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS 
A.  In the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is finally declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
B.  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund officially imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the City. 
C.  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
1.  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
a.  the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim, 
b.  the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
c.  the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment; 
d.  the taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return in connection with the claim; and 
e.  a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the City. 
2.  Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
a.  grant the claim; or 
b.  deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
3.  In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.  
2-22-7 - AUDIT PROCEDURE 
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements' of this ordinance. 
A.  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
1.  the tax; 
2.  the time period of the audit; and 
3.  a brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
B.  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time within 30 days may be requested by the taxpayer after the originally designated audit. 
C.  The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
D.  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the City. 
E.  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
F.  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the City's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
G.  In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax.  
2-22-8 - APPEAL 
A.  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information: 
1.  the reason for the assessment; 
2.  the amount of the tax liability proposed; 
3.  the procedure for appealing the assessment; and 
4.  the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
B.  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
C.  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties. 
D.  If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the 45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice. 
E.  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested. tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than 45 days after the expiration of the original 45-day period.  
2-22-9 - HEARING 
A.  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
B.  No continuances shall be granted except in. cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14 days. 
C.  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
D.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.  
2-22-10 - INTEREST AND PENALTIES 
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated. 
A.  Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 5% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed. 
B.  Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.  
2-22-11 - ABATEMENT 
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.  
2-22-12 - INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS 
The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.  
2-22-13 - STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS 
The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing. 
No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. 
No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.  
2-22-14 - VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE 
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.  
2-22-15 - PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES 
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirement. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City Clerk's office.  
2-22-16 - LIENS 
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
1.  timely remove the lien at the City's, expense; 
2.  correct the taxpayer's credit record and 
3.  correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.  
2-22-17 - APPLICATION 
This Chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the City's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be controlling.  
2-22-18 - SEVERABILITY 
If any section, paragraph or provision, of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.  
CHAPTER 23 - HEARING PROCEDURES[10] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-44, 7-21-2003. 
 
2-23-1 - RIGHT TO APPEAL 
A.  Except as may otherwise be provided in this Code, whenever a provision of the Park Ridge Municipal Code provides for a right to appeal an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of any ordinance of the City, the appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the following hearing procedures. 
B.  The appeal and hearing procedures contained herein shall not apply where provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code provide for a hearing process other than the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
C.  "Complainant" as used herein means the individual initiating the appeal.  
2-23-2 - TIME FOR APPEAL; NOTICE 
A.  The Complainant shall file a written notice of Appeal within 14 days of the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination complained of. 
B.  The Complainant shall file the original and three copies of the written Notice of Appeal with the City Clerk and also serve a copy on the city official whose order, requirement, decision or determination is being appealed. The Notice of Appeal shall set forth the order, requirement, decision or determination that is being appealed and shall contain sufficient information specifying the reason or reasons the order, requirement, decision or determination is in error. 
C.  The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the Notice of Appeal to the City Manager, the City Attorney and the Hearing Officer. 
D.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action committed or appealed from unless the City Official determines that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.  
2-23-3 - HEARING OFFICER 
A.  The Mayor shall appoint an individual to serve as hearing officer. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the hearing officer to conduct the hearings on any appeals, in accordance; with the procedures set forth herein. 
C.  The hearing officer shall be a person currently admitted to the bar as a duly licensed attorney; an attorney who retired from the bar while in good standing; or a member in good standing of the American Arbitration Association.  
2-23-4 - TIME AND PLACE FOR HEARING; NOTICE 
Within a reasonable time after receipt of the Notice of Appeal, the Hearing Officer shall notify the City Attorney and the administrative official, either by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally, of the time and place of the hearing of the appeal.  
2-23-5 - HEARING PROCEDURES ON APPEAL 
A.  Hearings before the Hearing Officer are not common law proceedings. The provisions of the "Illinois Code of Civil Procedure" do not apply to hearings before the Hearing Officer. 
B.  "Counsel" as used herein means a person who has been admitted to the bar as a duly licensed attorney-at-law in this State. 
C.  The Complainant shall have the burden of proof to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official is not warranted. 
D.  At the time and place of hearing, both parties may be represented by counsel, if they so desire. 
E.  The proceedings of the hearing shall be recorded by a court reporter. The record of the hearing will not be transcribed by the reporter unless requested to do so by any party of interest. The cost of the transcript shall be born by the party requesting the report of proceedings to be transcribed. 
F.  All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying and the matter will be decided solely on evidence presented at the hearing. The credibility of any witness and the weight to be given to any witness' testimony shall be determined by the Hearing Officer. 
G.  All parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses presented by the opposite party. 
H.  The matter of granting or refusing to grant a continuance of a hearing is within the discretion of the Hearing Officer. 
I.  Any facts stipulated between the parties, in writing, shall be considered as evidence in the proceeding.  
2-23-6 - SERVICE OF PAPERS 
All papers required by this Chapter to be served shall be delivered personally to the party designated or mailed, by United States mail in an envelope properly addressed, with postage prepaid, to the designated party at his last known residence as reflected by the Notice of Appeal filed with the City Clerk, except as herein otherwise provided. Proof of service of any paper may be made by the certification of any person so mailing the paper or delivering the same to the designated party personally, or by filing a return receipt showing that a paper was mailed by either registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to a party's address where it was received by a named party.  
2-23-7 - FILING 
All papers may be filed with the Hearing Officer by mailing them or delivering them personally to the Hearing Officer in care of the City Clerk, 505 Butler Place, Park Ridge, Illinois, 60068. The filing date of any paper shall be the date it was received in the City Clerk's office, in the event the paper is delivered personally or by messenger. In the event a paper is forwarded by mail, then the filing date shall be the date, which is postmarked on the envelope of such paper.  
2-23-8 - FORMS OF PAPER 
A.  All papers filed in any proceeding shall be typewritten or printed and shall be on one side of the paper only. 
B.  If typewritten, the lines shall be double spaced except that long quotations may be single spaced and indented. 
C.  All papers shall be not larger than eight and one half by 11 inches with inside margins of not less than one inch. 
D.  The original of all papers filed shall be signed in ink by the party filing the paper or by an officer, agent, or attorney thereof and copies thereof provided the opposing party or his counsel. 
E.  If papers are filed by an attorney, his name and address shall appear thereon.  
2-23-9 - COMPUTATION OF TIME 
The time within which any act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or hereafter in force in the State, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.  
2-23-10 - FINDINGS OF HEARING OFFICER 
The Hearing Officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 14 days after the hearing is completed, submit Findings of Fact and a recommendation for disposition of the appeal to the Procedures and Regulations Committee of the City Council and the parties. The Hearing Officer's recommendation shall include the reason or reasons for such recommendation.  
2-23-11 - FINAL DECISION BY PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS COMMITTEE OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
Upon receipt of the Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Hearing Officer, the Procedures and Regulations Committee of the City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official.  
2-23-12 - REVIEW OF DECISION 
All final decisions of the Procedures and Regulations Committee of the City Council regarding appeals shall be appealable to the Circuit Court of Cook County by Administrative Review.  
CHAPTER 24 - DISCLOSURES REQUIRED FROM PERSONS SEEKING CONSIDERATION OR DOING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY[11] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-27, 4-2-2007. 
 
2-24-1 - REQUIRED DISCLOSURES 
No transaction involving: 
1.  Sales, purchases, leases of real property; 
2.  Contracts with the City requiring City Council approval; 
3.  Vacations of public ways; 
4.  Zoning district amendments; 
5.  Variations, special uses or planned developments; 
6.  Subdivisions, re-subdivisions or consolidations of parcels of land; and/or 
7.  Façade grants and/or loans; 
shall be considered by any employee, commission, board or council of the City unless the person or entity applying for the relief or approval discloses, among other matters, the following information on a form to be supplied by the City: 
a.  The name of any and all current holders of legal or beneficial title to the property in question. 
b.  If there is a contract pending for the sale of the property, the name of the purchasing party. 
c.  The name of the party making the application. 
d.  With respect to a, b and c above, the following shall apply: 
i.  "Holder of title" shall mean each and every legal or beneficial owner. 
ii.  If any party whose name is required is an entity other than a natural person, then the application shall disclose the name of every natural person holding a greater than 3% interest in the entity and every director, officer and manager of such entity. If the entity is a limited partnership or a limited liability company, then the name of every limited or general partner or member shall be disclosed. If such limited or general partner is a corporate entity, then the name of every person holding a greater than 3% interest in that corporation shall be disclosed. 
iii.  "Name" shall mean name and business address. 
iv.  If during the course of the approval process, changes are made in the above information, there shall be a continuing requirement to update the information. 
The name of any City of Park Ridge employee or official who has acted as or intends to act as a consultant or vendor to any of the persons or entities required to be disclosed in a, b, c or d above.  
2-24-2 - TIME OF SUBMITTAL 
All disclosures of information required by this Chapter shall be submitted at the time of application for the consideration sought. In each instance, the material shall, in turn, be submitted to the City Council prior to the Council acting on the matter. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to keep the disclosure information current until such time as the City Council has taken final action.  
2-24-3 - ASSIGNMENT 
The assignment or transfer or agreement to assign or transfer any right, interest or permit within one year of the Council's final action shall raise a rebuttable presumption that the transfer was to a person or entity in constructive control of the applicant at the time of application. In the event such entity was not disclosed prior to the Council's original action, the penalty set forth in this ordinance section shall be applicable.  
2-24-4 - PENALTY 
Upon finding that an applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the City Council may declare the Council action on behalf of such applicant void and may direct the initiation of legal action for violation which shall be punishable by fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day upon which required information was withheld.  
2-24-5 - PUBLIC INSPECTION 
A copy of each disclosure statement filed in the course of a transaction shall be made available for public inspection upon application to the office of the City Clerk during the regular business hours of said office, and shall be included among the posted materials on the City's website in advance of the meeting at which the application will be discussed or acted upon.  
2-24-6 - BUILDING PERMIT EXEMPTED 
These requirements shall not apply to the application for a building permit.  
CHAPTER 25 - AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE[12] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-38, 4-19-2010. 
 
2-25-1 - AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT COORDINATOR 
The City Manager's designee shall be the City's Americans with Disabilities Act Coordinator ("ADA Coordinator").  
2-25-2 - COMPLAINT PROCEDURE 
An employee or community member should notify the ADA Coordinator if s/he believes that the City, its employees, officials, or agents have engaged in unlawful discrimination on the basis of disability in the provision of services, activities, programs or benefits. The City's employee manual governs employment-related complaint of disability discrimination. 
The complaint should be in writing, should be sent to the ADA Coordinator, 505 Butler Place, Park Ridge, Illinois 60068, and should contain information about the alleged discrimination (such as name, address, telephone number of complainant, and location, date, and description of the problem). Alternative means of filing complaints (such as through personal interviews or tape recording of the complaint) will be made available for persons with disabilities upon request. 
The complaint should be made as soon as possible but not later than 60 calendar days after the alleged violation. This procedure shall not affect, nor be affected by, other remedies such person may have under the law. 
The ADA Coordinator will meet with the complainant within 15 calendar days after receipt of the complaint to discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Within 15 calendar days after that meeting, the ADA Coordinator will respond to the complaint in writing and, where appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant, such as large print or audiotape. The response will explain the City's position and offer options for substantive resolution of the complaint.  
2-25-3 - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
If the ADA Coordinator's response does not satisfactorily resolve the issue, the complainant may appeal the decision, within 15 calendar days after receipt of the response, to the City Manager of his/her designee. 
Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the appeal, the City Manager will meet with the complainant to discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Within 15 calendar days after that meeting, the City Manager will respond to the complaint in writing and, where appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant. The response will explain the City's position and offer options for substantive resolution of the complaint.  
2-25-4 - MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS 
All written complaints received by the ADA Coordinator, appeals to the City Manager, and responses from these two offices will be retained by the City for at least three years.  
CHAPTER 26 - CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES 
SECTION 
 
2-26-01 - MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE 
A.  Employers located within the City shall comply with all applicable federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. 
B.  No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within the City, except those required by federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. 
C.  For the purposes of this Section, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the City or does business within the City. 
D.  This Chapter shall not apply to any employer which may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois and the United States, be made the subject of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-32 , § 2, 6-19-2017)  
ARTICLE 3 - OFFICERS AND ADMINISTRATORS[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. of 12-1999. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - MAYOR 
SECTION 
 
3-1-1 - AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT TO COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
A.  Appointments. The Mayor shall appoint with the advice and consent of the City Council: 
1.  The members and chair of all City Council Committees. 
2.  The chairmen of all Boards and Commissions of the City. 
3.  All other officers of the City whose appointment is not otherwise provided by law. 
B.  Other Authority. 
1.  The Mayor shall recommend to the City Council persons for appointment to the membership of all other City Boards, Commissions and Councils. (See Ch. 2 of this Article for resolution of the City Council's refusal to accept Mayor's recommendations). 
2.  In cases of dispute, the Mayor may determine the relative powers of City officials or Boards. 
3.  The Mayor may assign the duties of City officials (other than employees) which have not otherwise been assigned by statute, ordinance or official, written policy. 
4.  The Mayor may direct to the City Manager to investigate reasonable complaints against employees other than those covered by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or by the specific authority of a collective bargaining agreement. 
5.  The Mayor may veto the appointment of the City Attorney by the City Council. (See Ch. 2 of this Article for further description). 
(Ord. 2008-45, 7-21-2008)  
3-1-2 - RESERVED 
(Ord. 2008-45, 7-21-2008)  
3-1-3 - RESERVED 
(Ord. 2008-45, 7-21-2008)  
3-1-4 - SIGNATURE OF MAYOR 
The Mayor's signature shall appear on all licenses and permits granted by the authority of the City Council except as otherwise provided by law or by provision of this Code. In all cases where this Code requires that the signature of the Mayor shall be attached to any license, permit, contract, local improvement bond, or other written instrument, and in all cases where said provisions require the Mayor's approval in writing or endorsement in writing, the Mayor's signature shall be affixed in such manner as may be authorized by law.  
3-1-5 - SECRETARY 
The Mayor may appoint a secretary, whose duty it shall be to preserve and keep in the Mayor's office all books and papers which are customarily filed or are required by law to be filed therein; to deliver to the City Council and to the respective departments of the City all messages from the Mayor in writing, to attend the Mayor's office during the usual office hours, and to perform such other duties as may be required of such person by the Mayor.  
3-1-6 - DECORATIONS ON PUBLIC BUILDINGS 
The Mayor shall have power and authority to display or authorize the display of flags or other decorations on, in or about the City Hall, or other public building belonging to the City or public ways, on such occasions as may be deemed by the Mayor to be proper.  
3-1-7 - COORDINATOR OF EMERGENCY ACTIVITIES 
The Mayor shall appoint a coordinator of the City's Emergency Services and Disaster Agency with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall see that an emergency disaster plan is prepared and that resources are made available for the implementation of the City's disaster plan, should the need arise. The Mayor shall have all powers indicated in Article 8 of this Code.  
3-1-8 - POWERS OF MAYOR DURING CIVIL EMERGENCY 
A.  Definitions: 
1.  A civil emergency is hereby defined to be (a) an act or acts of violence by one or more persons, part of an assemblage of twelve (12) or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; (b) a threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of violence by one or more persons having individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; (c) any natural disaster or man-made calamity including but not limited to flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the City resulting in death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  General curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring or otherwise traveling upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the City excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency. 
B.  Whenever an emergency, as defined in subsection A of this Section exists, the Mayor shall have the power to declare its existence by means of a written proclamation setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency. 
C.  After proclamation of civil emergency by the Mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare. 
D.  After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the City may also in the interest of public safety or welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
1.  Order the closing of all businesses holding liquor licenses, including private clubs or portions thereof, wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted; 
2.  Order the discontinuance of the sale of liquor by any wholesaler or retailer; 
3.  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle; 
4.  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; 
5.  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for protection of life or property. 
E.  The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty-eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by proclamation of the Mayor indicating a civil emergency no longer exists. In the event that it becomes necessary to extend the proclamation beyond the initial forty-eight (48) hour period, the Mayor or Mayor pro tem shall call a special meeting of the City Council by service upon each of them, or a member of their household over the age of ten (10) years, at their home of written notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time set for the special meeting. An affirmative vote by a majority of Aldermen present at said special meeting shall be required for the extension of the proclamation of existence of a civil emergency. 
F.  Upon the issuance of a proclamation as herein authorized, the City Manager shall cause a copy of the proclamation to be published in newspapers of general circulation within the City, and shall cause copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the City: the City Hall; Police Station; and the Post Office. 
G.  Any person violating the provisions of this Section or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the City and shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
CHAPTER 2 - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. 2011-15, 2-21-2011; Ord. 2015-42, 6-1-2015. 
 
3-2-1 - MEETINGS 
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Mondays of each month; provided however, that if said day so established for meetings is a legal holiday, then said regular meeting shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first business day immediately following said legal holiday. 
A.  During the months of June, July and August, the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council may reschedule or elect not to hold any regularly scheduled meeting during said months; provided however, that action to reschedule or not to hold said regular meeting shall be effected not later than the regular meeting immediately preceding the regular meeting to be rescheduled or canceled. 
B.  The Mayor and City Council shall have the right to change the date and/or time of said regular meeting upon recommendation by the Mayor and approval by the City Council during the regular meeting preceding the meeting the date and/or time of which is to be changed. 
C.  If a regular City Council meeting falls on the day before an election held pursuant to the Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq., then the regular meeting shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first business day immediately following said election. 
(Ord. No. 2004-35, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2009-19, 3-16-2009; Ord. No. 2011-41, 6-20-2011)  
3-2-2 - SPECIAL MEETINGS 
Special meetings of the Council may be held at any time on call of the Mayor or on call of any two (2) or more aldermen. Such call shall be in writing and shall specify the business that will come before the meeting and the City Manager shall give at least forty-eight (48) hours notice thereof in writing to each Alderman and the Mayor. The business at such special meeting shall be limited to the purpose or purposes specified in the call. If all the elected Aldermen and the Mayor are present at any special meeting, no notice shall be necessary. 
(Ord. 2007-70, 9-4-2007)  
3-2-3 - PLACE OF MEETING 
All meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council Chambers, City Hall, 505 Butler Place, Park Ridge, Illinois, unless otherwise decided by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Council members at a regularly scheduled meeting.  
3-2-4 - ORDER OF BUSINESS 
When a quorum is present, the City Council shall proceed to the business before it, which shall be considered in the following order: 
A.  Roll Call 
B.  Reading of the minutes of the previous meeting 
C.  Consent agenda 
D.  Reports of City officials 
E.  Citizens wishing to address the Council on a non-agenda item 
F.  Report of boards commissions and committees 
G.  New business 
H.  Adjournment of the meeting 
(Ord. No. 2003-45, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 2004-25, 4-5-2004)  
3-2-4.1 - INAUGURATION OF NEWLY ELECTED OFFICIALS 
The term of newly elected officials of the City shall commence, and such officials shall be inaugurated at the first regular meeting of the City Council in the month of May, following election of such officials and said inauguration shall be the first order of business of the Council at that meeting. Provided, if the Cook County vote certification has not occurred prior to the first regular meeting of the City Council in the month of May, the inauguration of the newly elected officials shall take place at the next regular meeting of the City Council. 
(Ord. 2007-24, 4-2-2007)  
3-2-5 RULES OF ORDER 
The rules on parliamentary practice comprised in "Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised" shall govern the City Council in all cases to which they are applicable, except those which are inconsistent with the standing rules of the Council or of any ordinance, and except those which are inconsistent with the following rules which shall govern in all cases where they are applicable: 
A.  It shall be unnecessary for an Alderman seeking recognition to rise in his place. 
B.  The Journal of Proceedings shall not embody comments, debates or arguments except when the speaker requests such enlargement of the Journal, and then only when two-thirds (2/3) of the Municipal authorities then present consent to such enlargement. 
C.  A motion to reconsider may be made only during the meeting in which a motion has been acted upon or during the next regular meeting of the City Council. 
D.  Upon the request of any two aldermen present, any report of a committee of the Council or of any board or commission shall be deferred for final action thereon until the next meeting of the City Council after the report is made. 
E.  Voting requirements as set forth in Appendix B of The City of Park Ridge Handbook For Elected Officials, as may from time to time be amended, are adopted as part of this Municipal Code as though fully set forth in this Section 3-2-5. 
F.  Two Readings of Ordinance and Resolutions. 
1.  No Ordinance or Resolution need be presented or read at a regular City Council Meeting more than once before being acted upon, and the same may be acted upon at the same meeting at which it is first introduced, so long as the Ordinance or Resolution was read and considered at least one prior Committee meeting. 
2.  If an Ordinance or Resolution is presented for the first time at a regular City Council Meeting, however, it may be acted upon without a second reading at a subsequent Regular City Council Meeting upon a vote of two-thirds of the Aldermen present voting on a motion to waive first reading and to permit action on the Ordinance or Resolution at the meeting at which it is first introduced. 
3.  Only a majority of a quorum is required to approve the first reading of any Ordinance or Resolution, notwithstanding whether the final approval requires a greater number of votes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-42, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2016-73 , § 2, 11-21-2016)  
3-2-6 - RECORDING OF PROCEEDINGS 
The method of recording the proceedings of the City Council shall be as follows: 
A.  There shall be an electronic audio recording of regular and special and Committee of the Whole meetings of the City Council. 
B.  The only exception shall be that lengthy communications that are also contained in written reports may be omitted from the sound record if orally identified on the sound record. 
C.  Such sound recordings shall be kept by the City Clerk as a public record, properly indexed and filed, for a period of twelve (12) months after the date of the record and shall be available for playback during that period. At the conclusion of twelve (12) months the Clerk shall erase or destroy the sound recording. 
D.  In addition to such sound recording, the City Clerk shall transcribe, in writing, as a permanent written record the following portions of each meeting: 
1.  Roll Call. 
2.  All motions, resolutions and ordinances together with votes and dispositions thereof (but exclusive of arguments and discussions pertaining thereto). 
3.  Statutory and official action and parliamentary procedure. 
4.  Messages, reports, vetoes and legal opinions, if requested to be embodied in the minutes. 
5.  Written reports of committees, if requested to be embodied in the minutes. 
6.  Canvass of elections, etc. 
7.  Such limited matters as may from time to time be determined by the Council to become part of the permanent written records. 
E.  That all ordinances and resolutions be numbered by the City Clerk. The number shall appear immediately preceding the title and shall be consecutive in annual series. 
F.  That the City Clerk shall maintain an index of all resolutions and ordinances adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2007-25, 4-2-2007)  
3-2-7 - ALDERMANIC ELECTION CONTESTS  
3-2-7.1 - CONTESTING OF ELECTION 
The election of any person declared elected to the office of Alderman of any ward of the City may be contested by any elector of the ward for which such person is declared elected. The manner of conducting the contest shall be the same, as nearly as may be, as in the case of the contesting of the election of County officers under the laws of this State. (10 ILCS 5/23-1.1) 
The City Council shall be the tribunal before which such contest shall be determined.  
3-2-7.2 - STATEMENT OF GROUNDS OF CONTEST 
When the elector who has the right to bring such contest shall desire to contest the election of a person declared elected to the office of Alderman on account of the inability or failure of such person to qualify in accordance with law, or for any other legal reason, he shall, within five (5) days after the person whose election is contested has been declared elected, file with the City Clerk a statement in writing, setting forth the grounds on which he will contest the election, which statement shall be verified by affidavit. 
No objection to such statement on account of informality or insufficiency shall lie, but such contest may be dismissed by the City Council if it appears that the person bringing the contest is not a qualified elector of the ward for which the election is contested, or if the statement is not filed within the time fixed herein, or is not verified by affidavit, or has not been duly served by the delivery of a copy or by publication as hereinafter provided.  
3-2-7.3 - NOTICE 
Within five (5) days after filing his statement, the contestant in said aldermanic election contest shall also serve or cause to be served a copy thereof upon the person whose election he is contesting. In case such respondent is absent from the City or cannot be found, then service may be had by leaving a copy of such statement at the respondent's usual place of abode with some person of the family of the age of ten (10) years or upwards and informing such person of the contents thereof.  
3-2-7.4 - TESTIMONY 
Whenever the statement of the grounds of contest shall have been filed and served as aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the City Council, upon its own motion or upon the application of either party, to fix the time and place for taking the depositions of witnesses, or to cause a committee of five (5) Aldermen, chosen by the City Council to be duly authorized to conduct the hearing to take such testimony. At the time and place so fixed, the parties may proceed to take the testimony of any witnesses, in the same manner as provided by Statute for taking depositions to be used in cases in chancery before any judge, or notary public, and such taking of depositions may be continued from day to day thereafter until all the testimony shall have been taken. 
No testimony shall be taken or produced at the hearing except such as relates to the allegations set forth in the statement required to be filed with the City Clerk and served upon the respondent as herein provided.  
3-2-7.5 - RECOUNT OF BALLOTS 
In all contests of aldermanic elections, either party shall have the right to have the package or packages of ballots which have been returned to the Clerk, as required by law, opened before the committee conducting the hearing, in the presence of the officer having the custody thereof, in the presence of the contestant or his duly authorized agent or attorney, and in the presence of the person whose election is being contested, or his duly authorized agent or attorney, and to have such ballots then and there counted by such committee, and the City Council may require the same to be done by said committee in open session of the City Council or may require a recount in open session in such manner as it may direct; provided, that such ballots shall not be counted where the contest is dismissed under the provisions of Section 3-2-7.2 above.  
3-2-7.6 - PROOFS 
In all cases of contested elections the proofs shall be taken and filed with the City Clerk, as hereinafter provided, within thirty (30) days from the day fixed for taking the same; provided the City Council or the said committee may, from time to time, upon sufficient cause shown, extend the time for the taking and filing of such proofs.  
3-2-7.7 - DECLARATION 
When all the evidence shall have been taken, the committee shall file the same together with its recommendations forthwith with the City Council. The City Council shall, thereupon, without delay, consider such evidence and recommendations. The City Council may require all the testimony and proofs taken to be read in open meeting of the Council. 
Upon such report being made, the City Council shall decide according to the right of the matter, and shall declare as elected the person who shall appear by the evidence to have been elected. 
Whenever it shall appear in any case that the person receiving the highest number of legal votes is ineligible to the office because of any legal disqualification, or for other causes, it shall, for that reason, be the duty of the City Council to declare such election null and void and immediately to call a special election to fill said office.  
3-2-7.8 - FINALITY OF DECLARATION 
The decision of the City Council shall be final as to the election and qualification of any person whose election is contested or who is declared by it to have been elected Alderman.  
3-2-8 - APPOINTMENT TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
Upon receipt from the Mayor of a name for appointment to a City Board or Commission, the City Council shall, upon motion and majority vote, appoint all members of such Boards and Commissions. If the City Council does not approve a person recommended by the Mayor to fill a particular vacancy, the Mayor shall then submit a second name for such appointment. If the City Council does not approve the second person submitted by the Mayor, the Executive Committee of the City Council shall appoint a person to fill that vacancy. Further, if the Mayor fails to advance the name of a person to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the term of an existing member, then the Council liaison to that Board or Commission shall advance the name of a person for appointment and upon the failure of the City Council to approve that person on the first vote, the Executive Committee shall appoint a person other than the person not approved by the City Council, to fill such vacancy. If the Mayor fails to timely advance a name for appointment and there is no City Council liaison, the Executive Committee shall advance the name of a person to the City Council for appointment. 
(Ord. 2008-45, 07-21-2008)  
3-2-9 - APPOINTMENT OR DISCHARGE OF CITY ATTORNEY 
The City Attorney shall be appointed or discharged by the affirmative vote of four (4) aldermen. The Mayor shall have the power to veto such appointment or discharge by written notice to the City Council giving the reasons for such veto, filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the Council's affirmative vote. The veto may be overturned by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the City Council voting at the next regular meeting of the City Council. If there is a deadlock over the appointment, the City Manager shall appoint an interim City Attorney until such deadlock is broken. 
(Ord. No. 2008-45, 07-21-2008; Ord. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
CHAPTER 3 - CITY WARDS AND ELECTION PRECINCTS 
SECTION 
 
3-3-1 - WARDS CREATED 
The City is hereby divided into seven (7) wards as provided in this Chapter.  
3-3-2 - FIRST WARD 
The First Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the intersection of Oriole and Oakton, extending west along the centerline of Oakton Street to the intersection with Cumberland Avenue, then north along the centerline of Cumberland to the northern territorial boundary of the City, then west along said northern territorial boundary of the City to the centerline of Western Avenue, then south down the centerline of Western to the intersection with the centerline of Lahon Avenue, east along the centerline of Lahon to the intersection of Greenwood Avenue, then south down the centerline of Greenwood to the centerline of the Chicago & North Western Railroad right-of-way, then southeast to the centerline of Elm Street extended, then east along the centerline of Elm to the eastern territorial boundary of the City, then north along said territorial boundary of the City to the point of beginning.  
3-3-3 - SECOND WARD 
The Second Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, beginning at the center point of the intersection of Oakton Street and Western Avenue, then north along the territorial boundary of the City to the centerline of Church Street, then west to the western territorial boundary of the City, then south of the centerline of Dempster, then west to the western territorial boundary of the City, then south along said western boundary line to its intersection with the centerline of Manor Lane, then east along the centerline of Manor Lane to the centerline of Potter Road, then south along the centerline of Potter to its intersection with the centerline of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way, then southeast along said right-of-way to the intersection with the centerline of Oakton Street, then east along the centerline of Oakton to the point of beginning.  
3-3-4 - THIRD WARD 
The Third Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Manor Lane and the western territorial boundary of the City, then south along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline of Sibley Street extended, then east along the centerline of Sibley to the intersection with the centerline of Talcott Road, then south along the centerline of Talcott to a point approximately 123 feet south of Cherry Street, then east approximately 1,033 feet east along the north right-of-way line of Ashbury Court extended, then south approximately 110 feet, then east approximately 1,056 feet to the centerline of Dee Road, then north to the intersection with the centerline of Cherry Street, then east on the centerline of Cherry to the centerline of Knight Avenue, then north on the centerline of Knight to the centerline of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way, then southeast along railroad right-of-way to the intersection with Greenwood Avenue, then north on the centerline of Greenwood to the intersection of the centerline of Lahon Street, then west along the centerline of Lahon to the centerline of Western Avenue, then north along the centerline of Western to the centerline of Oakton Street then west along the centerline of Oakton to the intersection with the centerline of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way, then northwest along said railroad right-of-way to the intersection of the centerline of Potter Road, then north along the centerline of Potter Road to the centerline of Manor Lane, then west along the centerline of Manor to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 2012-44, 10-01-2012)  
3-3-5 - FOURTH WARD 
The Fourth Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the intersection of Sibley Avenue extended and the western territorial boundary of the City, then south along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline of Touhy Avenue, then east along the centerline of Touhy Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of Talcott Road, then southeast along the centerline of Talcott Road to the intersection with Western Avenue, then north on the centerline of Western to the centerline of Crescent Avenue, then east along the centerline of Crescent to the centerline of Cumberland Avenue, then north along the centerline of Cumberland along the railroad right-of-way to the centerline of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way, then northwest along the railroad right-of-way to the centerline of Knight Avenue extended, then south on the centerline of Knight to the centerline of Cherry Street, then west along the centerline of Cherry to the centerline of Dee Road, then south on the centerline of Dee to a point approximately 158 feet, then west approximately 1,056 feet, then north approximately 110 feet, then west approximately 1,033 feet along the north right-of-way line of Ashbury Court extended to the centerline of Talcott Road, then north on the centerline of Talcott to the intersection with the centerline of Sibley Avenue, then west along the centerline of Sibley Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. 2012-44, 10-01-2012)  
3-3-6 - FIFTH WARD 
The Fifth Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the intersection of the Chicago and North Western Railroad right-of-way and Elm Street extended, then southeast along the railroad right-of-way to the centerline of Cumberland Avenue, then south along the centerline of Cumberland to the centerline of Crescent Avenue, then west along the centerline of Crescent to the centerline of Greenwood, then south on the centerline of Greenwood to the centerline of Gillick Avenue, then east along the centerline of Gillick to the centerline of Cumberland Avenue, then south along the centerline of Cumberland to the centerline of Albion Avenue, then east along the centerline of Albion to the eastern territorial boundary of the City, then north along said territorial boundary to the intersection of the centerline of Elm Street, then west along the centerline of Elm to the point of beginning.  
3-3-7 - SIXTH WARD 
The Sixth Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the center point of Touhy Avenue and the western territorial boundary of the City, then south on said western territorial limit to the intersection with the centerline of Higgins Road, then southeast along the centerline of Higgins to the centerline of Cumberland Avenue, then north on the centerline of Cumberland to the centerline of Devon Avenue, then west on the centerline of Devon to the centerline of Chester Avenue, then north along the centerline of Chester to the centerline of Gillick Avenue, then west on the centerline of Gillick to the centerline of Greenwood Avenue, then north along the centerline of Greenwood to the centerline of Crescent Avenue, then west along the centerline of Crescent to the centerline of Western Avenue, then south along the centerline of Western to the centerline of Talcott Road, then northwest on the centerline of Talcott to the centerline of Touhy Avenue, then west along Touhy to the point of beginning.  
3-3-8 - SEVENTH WARD 
The Seventh Ward is that portion of the City as now established, or from time to time hereafter established, commencing at the centerline of the intersection of Higgins Road and Cumberland Avenue, then north along the centerline of Cumberland Avenue to the centerline of Devon, then west along the centerline of Devon to the centerline of Chester Avenue, then north along the centerline of Chester to the centerline of Gillick Avenue, then east along the centerline of Gillick to the centerline of Cumberland Avenue, then south along the centerline of Cumberland to the centerline of Albion Avenue, then east along the centerline of Albion Avenue to the eastern territorial boundary of the City, then south along said eastern territorial boundary of the City to the centerline of Higgins Road, then northwest along the centerline of Higgins Road to the point of beginning.  
3-3-9 - ELECTION PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED 
For the purpose of elections and referenda to be held in the City, after the effective date hereof, the seven (7) wards of said City as herein established by ordinance and as hereafter from time to time amended by ordinance are hereby established as and for the election precincts within the City.  
3-3-10 - CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY 
The division into seven (7) wards as defined in Sections 3-3-1 to 3-3-8 shall prevail regardless of any further annexations of territory to the City which may hereafter occur, and any territory hereafter annexed shall automatically and without further action on the part of the corporate authorities become part of the ward or wards to which it is contiguous.  
3-3-11 - MAP OF BOUNDARIES 
The City Clerk shall, no later than five (5) days after redistricting, annexation, disconnection or adoption of other boundary change, give written notice of such adoption and the effective date of such act to the Cook County Clerk.  
CHAPTER 4 - CITY CLERK 
SECTION 
 
3-4-1 - DUTIES 
The City Clerk shall, in addition to other duties imposed by law, perform the following: 
A.  Deliver without delay to the officers of the City and to all committees of the City Council, all resolutions and communications referred to such officers or committees by that body. 
B.  Deliver without delay to the Mayor all ordinances or resolutions which may require to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor, together with all papers on which the same are founded. 
C.  Affix the City Clerk's signature or facsimile to all licenses granted as required by this Code. 
D.  Keep the Corporate Seal and affix same to all documents and papers that are required to bear the official Seal of the City. 
E.  Conduct all duties as deputy registrar in conducting voter registration. 
F.  Publish in a newspaper the City Treasurer's annual report. 
G.  Publish ordinances in the newspaper or in pamphlet form by authority of the City Council. 
H.  Conduct all election duties as required by law. 
I.  Receive applications for and issue licenses for "going out of business" sales. 
J.  Conduct such duties as required in relation to licensing taxicabs. 
K.  Administer oaths of office. 
L.  Keep a Journal of the Proceedings of the City Council.  
3-4-2 - DEPUTY CLERK DUTIES 
The Deputy Clerk may administer the duties described in Section 3-4-1 under the authority of the City Clerk. The City Clerk is authorized to appoint in writing one Deputy Clerk from and among the regular employees of the City and may empower such Deputy to affix an authenticated signature to any and all necessary documents including certificates. Upon such appointment, the City Clerk shall report the same to the City Council and shall require the genuine signature of such Deputy to be inserted in the Journal of the Proceedings.  
3-4-3 - FILING OF ORDINANCES 
The originals of all ordinances passed by the City Council shall be filed in the City Clerk's office.  
3-4-4 - CODE CORRECTIONS AND NUMBERING 
The City Clerk shall maintain correct copies of this Code as amended from time to time in accordance with Article 1.  
3-4-5 - MAP FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION 
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep on file a copy of a map of the City showing the wards into which the City is from time to time redistricted, showing thereon the city limits of the City as they may from time to time exist.  
3-4-6 - DESTROYING OLD RECORDS 
The City Clerk is authorized to destroy Council meeting electronic recordings twelve (12) months after the date on which they are recorded.  
3-4-7 - OFFICE HOURS 
The office of the City Clerk shall be open during the same hours as are the administrative offices of the City. The office of the City Clerk shall be open for additional hours as required by law for election purposes.  
CHAPTER 6 - CITY MANAGER[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. 2013-05, 1-21-2013. 
 
3-6-1 - OFFICE CREATED 
There is hereby created the office of City Manager, an administrative office of the City. The City Manager shall be the administrative officer of the City.  
3-6-2 - APPOINTMENT 
The City Manager shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of four (4) aldermen upon recommendation of the Mayor. The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. Such qualifications are hereby declared to be of a nature as to require special training or knowledge. No Alderman or Mayor may be appointed as City Manager during the term for which he/she shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of that term. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the Mayor, with the advice and the consent of the City Council, may designate some properly qualified person as Acting City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2008-45, 07-21-2008; Ord. No. 2012-45, 9-17-2012)  
3-6-3 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-6-4 - BOND 
The City Manager shall furnish a bond to the City conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties and according to the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 15 of this Code.  
3-6-5 - COMPENSATION 
The City Manager shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as the Council shall fix from time to time in the annual budget.  
3-6-6 - DUTIES OF MANAGER 
The City Manager shall perform such duties as herein provided: 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor and to the City Council for the management and operation of all of the affairs and the departments of the City. As such administrative officer, the City Manager shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the properties of the City and of all of the departments of the City, including the Department of Public Works, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the Department of Preservation and Development, the Department of Finance and the general offices of the City. The City Manager shall also have supervision of such other administrative agencies and departments and officers as may be hereafter created by the City Council unless the management and control of such departments and officers is expressly delegated elsewhere. The City Manager shall have custody and control of all documents, including debts, mortgages, leases, contracts, judgment orders, notes, bonds and evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City except such as are directed by law or ordinance to be deposited elsewhere. Specifically, but not in limitation of the above, the City Manager shall have the following additional powers and duties: 
A.  The City Manager shall have the power to appoint and to discharge any Deputy City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Assistant to the City Manager or Administrative Assistant to the City Manager or any department head. All such appointments or discharges shall be based upon merit and the qualification or disqualification of such employees after the City Manager has reviewed the proposed appointment or discharge with the City Council. 
B.  The City Manager shall have the power to appoint and to discharge, subject to rules of the City Civil Service, any employee of the City exclusive of employees and officers of the Police Department and exclusive of regular firefighters employed on a full-time basis, and as to said excluded employees, the City Manager shall abide by the provisions of the Rules and Regulations of the Police and Fire Commission. Upon discharging any employee, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council at the next meeting following such removal a statement concerning said removal and the reasons therefor. 
C.  The City Manager may consolidate, combine or reorganize positions or units under the Manager's jurisdiction, and in the event of any consolidation or reorganization or the establishment or discontinuance of any places of employment shall notify the Civil Service Commission in writing. 
D.  The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council a proposed annual budget for the City. For the purpose of preparing the aforesaid budget, the City Manager shall follow the procedures established in Article 2, Chapter 9 of this Code entitled "Budget Policy". 
E.  As part of the budget process, the City Manager shall recommend to the Mayor and the City Council the compensation to be paid for each individual job or position in the City government. If compensation adjustments are contemplated for any job or position after the budget is adopted, such adjustments shall also be presented to the City Council for review. The only exception to this requirement is compensation for job positions covered by a collective bargaining agreement previously approved by the City Council. 
F.  The City Manager shall make all necessary purchases of goods and services for the City as provided in Section 2-9-9 of this Code. 
G.  The City Manager shall issue notices to the members of the City Council when directed so to do by that body, also to the members of the different committees and to all persons whose attendance is required before the City Council or any committee, when directed or requested so to do by either the City Council or the chairman of such committee. 
H.  The City Manager, upon receipt of a call for any such special meeting, shall prepare the notices of such meeting and cause them to be served on the members of the City Council not later than twenty-four (24) hours next preceding the hour set for such special meeting. 
I.  The City Manager shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, agendas for all public meetings of the City Council and its committees and commissions. 
J.  The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom by the Mayor except when his/her removal is under consideration by the Council. The City Manager shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. 
K.  The City Manager may make investigations into the affairs of the City or any department or division thereof and shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning City services and City administration. 
L.  The City Manager shall devote his/her entire time to the discharge of official duties. 
M.  The City Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Council consistent with the City ordinances or the Statutes of the State of Illinois. 
N.  The City Manager, and such assistants as are designated by the City Council, shall be conservators of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 2008-45, 07-21-2008; Ord. No. 2010-80, 11-15-2010)  
3-6-7 - CHAIN OF COMMAND 
No officer of the City shall dictate the appointment of any person to, or his/her removal from, office by the City Manager or by any of his/her subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, officers shall deal with the administrative service through the City Manager and officers shall not give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.  
CHAPTER 7 - CITY ATTORNEY 
SECTION 
 
3-7-1 - DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby established an administration department of the Municipal government of the City which shall be known as the Department of Law, and which shall consist of the City Attorney and such assistants and clerks as may be provided for in the annual budget.  
3-7-2 - CITY ATTORNEY 
There is hereby created the office of City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be appointed and discharged as set forth in Section 3-2-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, 7-18-2005; Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
3-7-3 - DUTIES 
The City Attorney shall perform the following duties: 
A.  Superintend and, with assistants and clerks, conduct all the law business of the City. 
B.  Appear for and protect the rights and interests of the City in all actions, suits and proceedings brought by or against it or any City Officer, board or department, including actions for damages when brought against such officer in his official capacity. 
C.  Appear for and defend any member, officer or employee of the Police Department or Fire Department who is sued personally for damages claimed in consequence of any act or omission or neglect of official duties or in consequence of any alleged negligence while engaged in the performance of such duties. 
D.  Certify to the City Manager all judgments rendered against the City as of the date following the last day on which appeal may be made, when in the opinion of the City Attorney no further proceedings are proper; provided, however, that when the City Attorney is of the opinion that an appeal is not justified, he/she may certify such judgment to the City Manager at any time. 
E.  The City Attorney shall be conservator of the peace.  
3-7-4 - DELIVERY TO SUCCESSOR 
Upon the resignation from office thereof, or removal therefrom, the City Attorney shall forthwith, on demand, deliver to his/her successor in office all deeds, leases, contracts, books and papers in his/her hands belonging to the City, or delivered to the City Attorney by any of its officers, and all papers or information in actions prosecuted or defended by the City Attorney then pending and undetermined, together with a register thereof and record of the proceedings therein.  
3-7-5 - LEGAL OPINIONS 
The City Attorney shall, when required so to do, furnish written opinions upon subjects submitted by the Mayor or the City Council.  
3-7-6 - DRAFTING OF ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS 
The City Attorney shall draft such ordinances as may be required by the City Council. The City Attorney shall draw any deeds, leases, contracts or other papers required by the Business of the City, when requested to do so by the Mayor or the City Council.  
3-7-7 - CODE REVISION 
The City Attorney shall have general supervision of the revision of ordinances and the insertion of general ordinances into this Code.  
CHAPTER 8 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
SECTION 
 
3-8-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT 
There is hereby established an administrative department of the City which will be known as the Department of Finance.  
3-8-2 - OFFICES CREATED 
There is hereby created the office of the Director of Finance, an administrative office of the City. The Director of Finance shall also serve as the City Collector and City Treasurer. There are also created such positions as assistants, accountants, secretaries, clerks, cashiers and others as provided in the annual budget approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-8-3 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Director of Finance shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council, as set forth in Section 3-6-6 of this Code. Such appointment shall be based upon demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in the management of government affairs effecting local finance. The Director of Finance shall be responsible to the City Manager for the effective management and control of the financial activities of the City. 
The Director of Finance shall have the following powers and responsibilities: 
A.  To appoint and remove nonexempt personnel in accordance with Civil Service Rules and Regulations; 
B.  To appoint and remove exempt personnel; 
C.  To establish operational practices of the Finance Department, and to enforce rules and regulations; 
D.  To delegate such responsibilities as may be deemed necessary; 
E.  To investigate complaints made regarding the performance of the department or activities of the personnel therein and to initiate remedial or disciplinary action; 
F.  To supervise and record the issuance and sale of all bonds, notes and obligations; 
G.  To perform the duties required by law and the ordinances and resolutions of the City Council; 
H.  To perform all related administrative and executive functions; 
I.  To serve as the Ex Officio Treasurer of the Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund ("Firefighters' Pension Board"). Should the Mayor appoint the Director of Finance as one of the Mayor's two appointees to the Firefighters' Pension Board, then the Director of Finance would be an active, rather than an Ex Officio, member of the Firefighter's Pension Board. 
J.  To serve as the Ex Officio Treasurer of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund ("Police Pension Board"). Should the Mayor appoint the Director of Finance as one of the Mayor's two appointees to the Police Pension Board, then the Director of Finance would be an active, rather than an Ex Officio, member of the Police Pension Board. 
K.  To be one of the check signers for the City; 
L.  To perform all duties, including filing reports, required for any TIF District of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-65, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-8-4 - MONEY AND RECEIPTS 
The Director of Finance shall receive all monies belonging to the City and shall give every person paying into the Treasury a receipt therefor specifying the date of payment and the amount paid.  
3-8-5 - DEPOSIT OF FUNDS 
The Director of Finance shall be required to keep all City monies in such place or places of deposit as may be designated by ordinance. 
No such ordinance shall be passed by which the custody of such money shall be taken from the Director of Finance and deposited elsewhere than in some regularly organized bank or banks. Prior to making such deposit, the designated banks shall have furnished the last two (2) sworn statements of resources and liabilities as furnished to the Comptroller of Currency and Auditor of Public Accounts, which said two (2) sworn statements shall be furnished to the Director of Finance. Each bank so designated as a depository for such funds, accounts or monies, shall furnish to the said Director of Finance of the City a copy of all bank statements which it is required to furnish to the Comptroller of Currency and Auditor of Public Accounts of the State of Illinois, which acting as such depository. 
The total amount of all such deposits not collateralized or insured by an agency of the federal government and deposited in a bank herein designated as a depository, shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus of such bank and such Director of Finance shall not be discharged from the responsibility for any such funds or monies deposited in any bank in excess of such limitations. 
The Director of Finance shall invest funds of the City not needed for immediate expenditure in securities as authorized by the State of Illinois.  
3-8-6 - ACCOUNTS 
The Director of Finance shall keep a separate account of each fund and the debits and credits belonging thereto in suitable accounting records as required by law and in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).  
3-8-7 - REGISTER OF WARRANTS 
The Director of Finance shall prepare and keep a register of all warrants presented giving their numbers, their amount, their accounts, the funds on which drawn, the payee and the dates of their payment when paid.  
3-8-8 - PAYROLL RECORD 
The Director of Finance shall prepare and keep a record of all payroll checks paid, giving their numbers, their amount, the funds on which drawn, the person to whom payable, the dates of their payment when paid.  
3-8-9 - PURCHASING PROCEDURE 
The Director of Finance shall establish procedures for making of all purchases, by contract or otherwise for all departments of the City, of supplies, materials and equipment for use in all departments of the City.  
3-8-10 - LICENSE PLATES AND EMBLEMS 
The Director of Finance shall deliver all license plates, badges, tags or emblems to the licensee in accordance with the provisions of this Code, and keep a record of the issuance thereof.  
3-8-11 - ASSESSMENT ROLLS 
Immediately upon receipt of any special assessment roll from the County Court, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to make a correct copy of same in accounting records for that purpose to be provided by the City, after which the roll shall be deposited in a safe place in the office of the Director of Finance.  
3-8-12 - RECORDS 
The Director of Finance shall have custody and control of all financial documents, including debts, mortgages, leases, contracts, judgment orders, notes, bonds and evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City, except such as are directed by law or ordinance to be deposited elsewhere.  
3-8-13 - DESTROYING OLD RECORDS 
The Director of Finance is authorized to destroy old worksheets and records as allowed by law and the ordinances and resolutions of the City Council.  
3-8-14 - REPORTS 
At the end of each calendar month, and more often if required by the City Council, the Director of Finance shall submit a report to the City Council showing the state of the treasury at the end of such period. 
The Director of Finance shall report to the City Council as often as required, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures as shown by the books up to the time of said report together with the related budgeted amounts where applicable. 
The Director of Finance shall give such additional reports and information concerning the fiscal matters of the City as may from time to time, be required by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-8-15 - BOND 
The Director of Finance shall furnish a bond of the City conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties, and according to the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 15 of this Code.  
CHAPTER 9 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
SECTION 
 
3-9-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT 
There is hereby established an administrative department of the City which shall be known as the Police Department.  
3-9-2 - POSITIONS CREATED 
There are hereby created the following positions in the Police Department: 
A.  Police Chief. 
B.  Such number of deputy chiefs, commanders, lieutenants, sergeants and patrol officers as are provided in the annual budget approved by the City Council. 
C.  Such number of civilian crossing guards to adequately man the number of crossing guard locations as provided for in the annual budget, approved by the City Council.  
3-9-3 - POLICE CHIEF 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Police Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council, as set forth in Section 3-6-6 of this Code. Such appointment shall be based upon demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in the management of governmental affairs affecting public safety. The Police Chief shall be responsible to the City Manager for the effective management and control of police services within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
3-9-4 - VIOLATION OF DUTY 
Any member of the Department who shall neglect or refuse to perform any duty required by the provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations as established by the Police Chief shall be subject to disciplinary action.  
3-9-5 - POWER OF ARREST 
The members of the Police Department shall have power to arrest all persons in the City found in the act of violating any law or provision of this Code or aiding and abetting in any such violation, and shall arrest any person found under circumstances which would warrant a reasonable person in believing that such person had committed or is about to commit an offense.  
3-9-6 - PROCESS SERVING 
The members of the Police Department shall have the power and authority and it shall be their duty to serve and execute warrants and other processes for the summoning, apprehension and commitment of any person charged with violation of any provision of this Code, or with any offense against the laws of the City or State.  
3-9-7 - RESISTING A POLICE OFFICER 
Any person who shall resist any officer of the Police Department in the discharge of his/her duties, or shall in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent the officer from discharging his/her duty as such officer, or shall offer or endeavor to do so, and whoever shall in any manner assist any person in the custody of any member of the Police Department to escape, or attempt to escape from such custody or attempt to rescue any person in custody, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.  
3-9-8 - UNLAWFUL REPRESENTATION 
No person shall falsely assume or pretend to be a Police Officer or a member of the Police Department, or without being a member of the Police Department, wear in public the uniform adopted as the police uniform. 
No person shall counterfeit or imitate or cause to be counterfeited or imitated any badge, sign, or signal or device adopted by the Police Department, nor shall any person use or wear any badge, sign, or signal or device adopted or used by said department, or any similar in appearance, without authority so to do from the Chief. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than ten ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 1-1999)  
3-9-9 - APPOINTMENT AS PARK DISTRICT POLICE 
The police officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to accept and recognize their and each of their appointments as police officers of the Park Ridge Park District; provided however, that in the performance of any duties in said respect, they shall at all times remain under the command of the officer and the chain of command of the Police Department, and provided further that there shall be no additional duties placed upon the respective officers of the Police Department by virtue of their appointment as officers of the Park District. The Police Chief is authorized to designate as conservators of the peace any police officer employed by the Park Ridge Recreation and Park District, subject to such limitations and controls upon the exercise of such authority as the Police Chief may deem appropriate. Such designation may be terminated by the Police Chief at any time without cause.  
3-9-10 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City under the terms and provisions of Section 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois. To the extent that any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, the provisions of this Chapter shall supersede the said State Statute. 
(1992 Code)  
3-9-11 - COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS 
Employees of the Police Department, designated by the Chief as Community Service Officers, shall be conservators of the peace.  
3-9-12 - LUTHERAN GENERAL HOSPITAL SECURITY 
Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/3-9-4, security officers employed by Lutheran General Hospital shall be designated conservators of the peace subject to individual approval by the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall establish, in writing, such limitations and controls upon the exercise of such authority as may be appropriate to limit the authority to the issuance of parking citations on hospital property while such employee is on duty. The authorization may be terminated by the Police Chief at any time without cause. The designation of conservator of the peace shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval by the Police Chief and may be renewed upon subsequent approval of the Chief. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid by the hospital for each authorization, to cover the cost of background investigation. 
(Ord. of 1-1999)  
CHAPTER 11 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
SECTION 
 
3-11-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT 
There is hereby established an administrative department of the City which shall be known as the Fire Department.  
3-11-2 - POSITIONS CREATED 
There are hereby created following positions in the Fire Department: 
A.  Fire Chief. 
B.  Such number of Deputy Chiefs, Battalion Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants and Firefighters as are provided in the annual budget approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, 4-15-2002)  
3-11-3 - FIRE CHIEF 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council, as set forth in Section 3-6-6 of this Code. Such appointment shall be based upon demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in the management of government affairs affecting public safety. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the City Manager for the effective management and control of fire and rescue services within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
3-11-4 - VIOLATION OF DUTY 
Any member of the Fire Department who shall neglect or refuse to perform any duty required of him by the provisions of this Code or the rules and regulations as established by the Fire Chief shall be subject to disciplinary action.  
3-11-5 - FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU 
The Fire Chief shall provide for a Fire Prevention Bureau consisting of such personnel as may be authorized in the annual budget to effectively discharge the duties and functions of said Bureau. This Bureau shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to carry on a campaign against fire and life safety hazards in violation of the laws of the City, to see that the fire prevention regulations of the City, incorporated as Article 7 of this Municipal Code, are rigidly observed and enforced, and to cause a campaign of public education against fire and life safety hazards to be conducted on a regular basis. 
The Fire Chief and all personnel authorized by him shall have the right to enter any building, structure or premises, whether completed or in the course of construction, for the purpose of determining whether such building, structure or premises have been and are being constructed and maintained in accordance with the fire regulations and the laws of the City and of the State of Illinois. The Fire Chief or his duly authorized representation shall have the authority to direct the owner or person in possession of any premises determined by him to be hazardous to correct and abate any condition so determined by him to be hazardous and unsafe. 
The Chief shall direct the Fire Prevention Bureau to make regular inspections with sufficient frequency to secure efficient supervision of all buildings, structures and places used for commercial purposes, or occupied or frequented by large numbers of persons, and of all school buildings, churches, public halls, institutional properties, theaters, multiple dwellings, and all places of amusement, recreation or employment in order (a) to determine the safety of the occupants of such buildings, structures or places in the event of fire panic or accident; (b) to examine plans, construction stages, working order and repair of all doors, fire evacuation facilities, and fire-fighting appliances, and condition and freedom from obstruction of exits, corridors, stairways, fire evacuation facilities and their approaches, the disposition, arrangement and protection of stock, combustible materials and rubbish, heating devices and ovens, flammable fluids and chemicals, toxic chemicals, explosives and the protection of hazardous machinery, appliances and apparatus; and (c) to ascertain whether the fire regulations and the laws of the City and of the State of Illinois pertaining to life safety, fire and fire prevention are being efficiently carried out. It shall be unlawful to exclude authorized Fire Department personnel from any such building, structure or premises.  
3-11-6 - PRESCRIBING LIMITS AT FIRE 
The Fire Chief or other officer in command may prescribe limits in the vicinity of a fire or other emergency within which no person excepting those who reside therein or who are otherwise involved, firefighters, police officers, and those admitted by any officer of the Fire Department shall be permitted to go.  
3-11-7 - REMOVAL OF PROPERTY 
The Fire Chief or other officer in command shall have power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of said property from fire or to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining properties.  
3-11-8 - DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS 
The Fire Chief, or in his absence the officer in command, may direct the tearing down and removal of any building structure, fence or other property for the purpose of retarding or preventing the progress or spreading of any fire, and in case of need may take whatever steps are necessary during the progress of a fire for the purpose of extinguishing or checking the same. Said authority shall also apply in cases of non-fire emergencies wherein the Fire Department is involved, such as toxic chemical spills and related happenings.  
3-11-9 - POLICE POWER OF FIREFIGHTER 
The Fire Chief or any regular member of the Fire Department shall have the power and authority during the time of a fire or other emergency to arrest any person or persons who refuse to obey any such firefighter while acting in the discharge of his duties, or any person or persons interfering with or hindering the efforts of the Fire Department or any member thereof in the discharge of his duty while enroute to or at the scene of a fire or other emergency, and in the event of such arrest it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and all regular firefighters so arresting such person to take such person into court to be dealt with according to law. Said Fire Chief and all regular firefighters shall during such time be severally vested with the usual power and authority of police officers to command all persons to assist them in the performance of their duties as firefighters. All members of the Fire Department including, Fire Marshals and Fire Inspectors within the Fire Prevention Bureau, shall be conservators of the peace.  
3-11-10 - HINDERING FIREFIGHTERS: DAMAGING APPARATUS 
Any person who will willfully any hindrance to any officer, firefighter or other person in the performance of his duty at a fire or other emergency, or who shall willfully in any manner destroy damage or deface any fire-fighting or other emergency apparatus or equipment belonging to the Municipality shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a manner as hereinafter provided.  
3-11-11 - DRIVING OVER HOSE 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street or alley by order of the Chief or other proper officer, without the consent of the Chief, officer or member in charge of said hose, and any person violating this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a manner as hereinafter provided.  
3-11-12 - UNLAWFUL ENTRY ON FIRE DEPARTMENT PROPERTY 
It shall be and is hereby declared unlawful for any person to enter the Fire Department facilities or properties, or any place where the equipment and apparatus of the Fire Department is stored, at any time except on business pertaining to the Fire Department or except with the authorization of the Chief or officer in charge.  
3-11-13 - IMPERSONATING A FIREFIGHTER 
Any person not a member of the Fire Department who shall impersonate a regular firefighter or officer of the Fire Department at a fire or other emergency, or going to or returning from a fire or other emergency, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a manner as hereinafter provided.  
3-11-14 - SALVAGING PROPERTY 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a firefighter to take away and remove from the scene of a fire or other emergency any property salvaged from said fire or other emergency unless and until proof of ownership be satisfactorily made to the Chief or officer in command at such fire or other emergency, and such removal of said property as aforesaid shall be a misdemeanor and subject to fine as hereinafter provided.  
3-11-15 - UNAUTHORIZED USE OF EQUIPMENT 
Any person who shall use any fire engine, hose, vehicle or apparatus belonging to the City for any private purpose, or who shall remove the same or any part thereof from its place of deposit, or who having the control thereof shall permit such engine, hose or vehicle to be used for any private purposes aforesaid, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a manner as hereinafter provided.  
3-11-16 - FOLLOWING OR BLOCKING FIRE TRUCK PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any automobile, truck or other vehicle to pass from behind or to follow a fire truck within three hundred feet (300') when such truck is on its way to a fire, or to drive or park an automobile, truck or other vehicle within a distance of one City block of any fire. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, truck or other vehicle in such a manner as to block the speedy progress of such fire truck, and it shall be the duty of the driver thereof, upon receiving an emergency signal, to forthwith drive his vehicle to the right side of the street and there stop until such fire truck or emergency vehicle has passed, and any violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor and such person shall be subject to a fine in a manner as hereinafter set forth.  
3-11-17 - POWER TO COMMAND CITIZENS 
Every male person above the age of twenty-one (21) years who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire and shall render all the assistance in his power and in such manner as he may be directed in the extinguishment of the fire and in the removal of any protection of property, and any person refusing to obey such orders shall upon conviction be fined in the sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), provided no person shall be bound to obey any such officer unless such officer's official character shall be made known to such person.  
3-11-18 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.  
3-11-19 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City under the terms and provisions of Section 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois. To the extent that any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, the provisions of this Chapter shall supersede the said State Statute.  
CHAPTER 12 - EXEMPT POSITIONS IN FIRE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE DEPARTMENT 
SECTION 
 
3-12-1 - CREATION OF EXEMPT POSITIONS 
The following positions shall be exempt from provisions if the Illinois Statutes known as the Fire and Police Commissioners Act: (a) Police Chief; (b) Fire Chief; (c) Deputy Chief of Police; (d) Deputy Fire Chief; (e) Fire Battalion Chief, (f) Fire Captain; (g) Commander of Police (h) Lieutenant of Police. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, 4-15-2002)  
3-12-2 - APPOINTMENT TO EXEMPT POSITIONS 
The Police Chief is empowered to appoint individuals to fill the positions of Lieutenant of Police, Commander of Police and Deputy Chief of Police. The Fire Chief is empowered to appoint individuals to fill the positions of Deputy Fire Chief, Fire Battalion Chief and Fire Captain. 
(Ord. No. 2002-14, 4-15-2002)  
3-12-3 - REMOVAL FROM EXEMPT POSITIONS 
The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall also be empowered to remove any of their appointees from an appointed position when in the judgment of the Chief the needs of the City so require. In all actions involving the appointment or removal of an individual, the Police Chief and Fire Chief shall be guided by the requirements of the City and the demonstrated merit of the individuals involved, including (a) supervisory and management abilities and attitudes; (b) contributions to the improvement of public safety activities of the City; (c) work quality and quantity; (d) technical competence. In the event of such removal, the individual shall revert to the highest permanent rank approved by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.  
3-12-4 - PERMANENT RANKS 
Police officers or firefighters presently holding appointment to supervisory or management positions by action of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners will continue to hold such ranks permanently subject, however, to any action by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners resulting from any disciplinary proceedings that may be instituted in the future. Promotional appointments by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners will be limited to the first supervisory level in the Police and Fire Department; i.e. police sergeant or fire lieutenant.  
3-12-5 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City under the terms and provisions of Section 6 of Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois. To the extent that any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, the provisions of this Chapter shall supersede the said State Statute.  
CHAPTER 13 - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
SECTION 
 
3-13-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT 
There is hereby established an administrative department of the City which will be known as the Department of Community Preservation and Development.  
3-13-2 - OFFICE CREATED 
There are hereby created the offices of Director of Community Preservation and Development, Building Coordinator, Zoning Coordinator, and Environmental Health Coordinator. There are also created such positions as assistant directors, inspectors, planners, officers, technicians, administrative assistants and others as are provided in the annual budget approved by the City Council.  
3-13-3 - DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Director of Community Preservation and Development shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council, as set forth in Section 3-6-6 of this Code. Such appointment shall be based on demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in the management of government affairs related to City planning and community development. The Director shall be responsible to the City Manager for the effective management and control of the community preservation and development activities of the City. 
The Director of Community Preservation and Development shall have the following powers and responsibilities: 
A.  To appoint and remove nonexempt personnel according to Civil Service Rules and Regulations; 
B.  To appoint and remove personnel; 
C.  To establish operational practices of the Department and to enforce rules and regulations; 
D.  To delegate such responsibilities as may be deemed necessary; 
E.  To investigate complaints made regarding the performance of the Department or activities of the personnel therein and to initiate remedial or disciplinary action. 
F.  To perform the duties required by law and the ordinances and resolutions of the City Council; 
G.  To perform all related administrative executive functions. 
(Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
3-13-4 - BUILDING COORDINATOR; ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH COORDINATOR 
The Building Coordinator, Zoning Coordinator and Environmental Health Coordinator shall be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Manager. The Building Coordinator shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed for the "Building Official" in Article 15, Article 16, Article 18, and in any other applicable provision of this Code. The Zoning Coordinator shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed for the "Zoning Administrator" in the Zoning Ordinance of the City, in Article 19 of this Code, and in any other applicable provision of this Code. The Environmental Health Coordinator shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed for the "Environmental Health Officer" in Article 5, Article 22, and in any other applicable provision of this Code.  
3-13-5 - ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Environmental Health Officer shall be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Manager. The Environmental Health Officer shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed for the "Environmental Health Officer" in the Health Code, Article 5 of this Municipal Code.  
3-13-6 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION 
The Department of Community Preservation and Development shall provide general direction, coordination, supervision and control so as to preserve the existing character of Park Ridge as a high quality residential community. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
3-13-7 - GROWTH MANAGEMENT 
The Department of Community Preservation and Development shall establish a planning process for formulating and evaluating community goals and objectives, and for determining the implications of public decisions and private development.  
3-13-8 - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
The Department of Community Preservation and Development shall have the following regulatory enforcement responsibilities: 
A.  Enforce the Building Code of the City; 
B.  Enforce the Zoning Ordinance of the City; 
C.  Enforce Health, Sanitation, Nuisance Control and Property Maintenance Ordinances and Regulations.  
CHAPTER 14 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
SECTION 
 
3-14-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT 
There is hereby established an administrative department of the City which will be known as the Department of Public Works.  
3-14-2 - OFFICES CREATED 
A.  There is hereby created the office of the Director of Public Works, an administrative office of the City. There are also created such positions as engineers, superintendents, foresters, foremen, water plant operators, mechanics, technicians, engineering inspectors, maintenance men, administrative assistants and others as are provided in the annual budget approved by the City Council. 
B.  The Director of Public Works, Assistant Public Works Director, Superintendent of Public Works, Assistant Superintendent of Public Works, City Engineer, and Engineering Technician shall be conservators of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 2003-58, 10-20-2003)  
3-14-3 - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS 
Upon vacancy of said office, the Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice and consent of the City Council, as set forth in Section 3-6-6 of this Code. Such appointment shall be based upon demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in the management of government affairs affecting public works. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible to the City Manager for the effective management and control of the public works activities of the City. 
The Director of Public Works shall have the following powers and responsibilities: 
A.  To appoint and remove nonexempt personnel in accordance with Civil Service Rules and Regulations; 
B.  To appoint and remove exempt personnel; 
C.  To establish operational practices of the Department of Public Works, and to enforce rules and regulations; 
D.  To delegate such responsibilities as may be deemed necessary; 
E.  To investigate complaints made regarding the performance of the Department or activities of the personnel therein and to initiate remedial or disciplinary action; 
F.  To perform the duties required by laws and ordinances of the City Council; 
G.  To perform all related administrative and executive functions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, 2-21-2011)  
3-14-4 - DUTIES 
The Director of Public Works shall be charged with the planning, budgeting, design and maintenance of public streets, sidewalks, alleys, water supply and distribution facilities, sewers, parking lots, plant materials and City equipment.  
CHAPTER 15 - BONDS OF OFFICERS 
SECTION 
 
3-15-1 - CONDITIONS OF BONDS 
The respective bonds which are required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois to be filed by the officers as prescribed by said Statutes (65 ILCS 5/5-3-9), shall be payable to the City, conditioned upon the faithful performance of duties of said respective officers, according to law and the ordinances of the City; provided however, that the obligation of said respective sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and operated whether under the laws of the State or of the United States of America, wherein such respective officer has placed funds in his custody, if such bank has been approved by the City Council as a depository of said funds.  
3-15-2 - AMOUNT OF BONDS 
The bonds to be executed and filed by said respective officers shall be in the following amounts: 
Penal sum of Clerk's bond ..... $5,000.00 
Penal sum of Mayor's bond ..... $3,000.00 
Penal sum of Treasurer's bond—The Treasurer's bond shall be in an amount that is not less than the greater of $50,000 or 3 times the latest Federal census population or any subsequent census figure used for Motor Fuel Tax Purposes 
Penal sum of City Manager's bond ..... $100,000.00 
(Ord. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-15-3 - PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS 
The premium payable to surety companies acting as sureties on the bonds so obtained, executed and filed by and on behalf of the above named officers, or any other officers of the City, wherein the City is named as the obligee, shall be paid by the City through its Treasurer.  
CHAPTER 16 - COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013. 
 
3-16-1 - SALARY OF MAYOR 
The salary of the Mayor of the City shall be and is hereby fixed at the sum of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per annum, payable in equal monthly installments. 
(Ord. No. 2000-63, 10-16-2000)  
3-16-2 - SALARY OF ALDERMEN 
The salary of each Alderman of the City shall be and is hereby affixed at the sum of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per annum payable in equal monthly installments.  
3-16-3 - SALARY OF CITY CLERK 
The salary of the City Clerk shall be and is hereby fixed at the sum of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) per annum, payable in equal monthly installments. 
(Ord. No. 2000-65, 10-16-2000)  
3-16-4 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2013-05, 1-21-2013)  
3-16-5 - SALARIES OF OTHER OFFICERS AND ADMINISTRATORS 
The salaries of other officers and administrators shall be as annually determined and fixed in and by the adoption of the annual budget.  
CHAPTER 17 - EXEMPT POSITIONS OF THE CITY STAFF 
SECTION 
 
3-17-1 - CREATION OF EXEMPT POSITIONS 
Positions deemed exempt from the provisions of the Illinois Statutes known as Civil Service in Cities and exempt from the provisions of the City Code known as the Civil Service Commission Rules and Regulations shall be designated by the City Manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 2003-58, 10-20-2003)  
3-17-2 - APPOINTMENT TO EXEMPT POSITIONS 
The Director of Public Works, Director of Finance, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Director of Community Preservation and Development, Assistant City Manager, Human Resources Director and Information Technology Director, are hereby authorized to appoint individuals to those positions designated and maintained by the City Manager's office, within their respective departments, based upon job-related qualifications and merit, subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
As concerns any exempt position related to Library services, the Library Director is hereby empowered to appoint individuals to said positions subject to the approval of the Library Board. 
(Ord. 2003-58, 10-20-2003)  
3-17-3 - REMOVAL FROM EXEMPT POSITIONS 
The Director of Public Works, Director of Finance, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Director of Community Preservation and Development, Assistant City Manager, Human Resources Director, and Information Technology Director are authorized to remove any of the those appointees designated and maintained by the City Manager's office, when the needs of the City so require. In all actions involving the removal of an individual, the department head shall be guided by the requirements of the City and the demonstrated merit of the individuals involved including: (1) supervisory and management abilities and attitude; (b) work quality and quantity; (c) technical competence. A written report from the department head detailing the circumstances warranting removal shall be submitted to the City Manager for his concurrence before such action becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 2003-58, 10-20-2003)  
3-17-4 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City under the terms and provisions of Section 6, Article VII of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois. To the extent that any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-1, the provisions of this Chapter shall supersede the said State Statute.  
CHAPTER 18 - GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS AND STATE GIFT BAN ACT 
SECTION 
 
3-18-1 - ADOPTION OF ACT 
A.  The Governmental Ethics and State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.) is hereby adopted as required by Section 83 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/83). 
B.  The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited by the Act is prohibited by any elected or salaried official and any employee of the City. All non-salaried appointed officials are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter.  
3-18-2 - ETHICS OFFICER 
To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by Section 35 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/35), the City Attorney is appointed to serve as the Ethics Officer of the City. The Ethics Officer's duties shall be as provided in Section 35 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/35).  
3-18-3 - LOCAL ETHICS COMMISSION; COMPLAINTS 
A.  To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by the Act, the Mayor and the Chairpersons of each of the Standing Committees of the City Council shall constitute the Local Ethics Commission. 
B.  The Local Ethics Commission shall have the power and duties set forth in Section 55 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/55). 
C.  To the extent that any of its provisions may be applicable, Section 45 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/45) shall be applicable to the Local Ethics Commission. 
D.  The complaint procedure and the enforcement and penalty provisions of the Act and this Chapter shall be as are provided in Sections 60, 65, and 70 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/60, /65, /70). 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
ARTICLE 4 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2009-29, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2010-08, 1-18-2010; Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010. 
Note— All Boards and Commissions may not be listed on this page and may be listed in a separate area in the Municipal Code. This may include the following Board or Commission: Fair Housing, Public Art, Liquor, Appearance, Mayor's Advisory Board and Sister Cities. Please use the index as a search reference. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
SECTION 
 
4-1-1 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby created the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City hereinafter referred to as the Commission.  
4-1-2 - MEMBERS AND TERMS 
Commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall appoint a chairman from among its members to serve for two (2) years. The members of the Commission shall serve for a term of four (4) years or until their successors have been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the members whose place has become vacant in the same manner provided for the appointment of members. 
(Ord. No. 2007-88, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 2012-13, 2-20-2012)  
4-1-3 - RESIGNATIONS 
The City Council may accept the resignation of any member desiring to resign and upon such acceptance such office shall be considered vacant.  
4-1-4 - ORGANIZATION, RULES AND RECORDS 
The Commission shall appoint a secretary and such other officers as may in its judgment be necessary. The Commission shall adopt rules for transactions of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.  
4-1-5 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Commission shall have such powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be given to it by law, and shall have, as are now provided by law, the following powers and duties: 
A.  To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan for the City and areas outside its Municipal boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning responsibilities of the Commission. However, in no event shall the plan be binding on territory outside of said Municipal boundaries which is located in any miles beyond said Municipal boundaries. Upon its adoption by the City Council, the Comprehensive plan shall constitute the Official City Plan. 
•  The plan shall be prepared for the general purpose of guiding the present and future development of the City in a coordinated and harmonious manner so as to best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, efficiency, aesthetic quality and general welfare of the community. Among other things, the plan shall concern itself with the promotion of a desirable and convenient distribution of population, adequate provision of housing and commercial services, promotion of good civic design and arrangement, preservation of the environmental quality, adequate provision for traffic circulation, promotion of public safety, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, adequate provision of public facilities and services, and promotion of economic and fiscal stability. 
•  Upon adoption, the plan shall serve as a statement of official policy with respect to the City's objectives for the future, as a guide to decision making at both the public and private level, and as a legal document providing policy framework and support for the City's zoning ordinance and other land use statutes. 
•  The Comprehensive Plan shall contain a statement of goals, objectives and policies intended to guide the physical and economic development of the City along with land use, transportation and community facilities plan elements. The plan may also include additional elements such as housing, historic preservation, downtown revitalization and energy conservation, which in the judgment of the Commission, will further advance the purposes of the plan. 
•  The elements of the plan may be expressed in words, graphics or other appropriate form. Said elements shall be interrelated, each element relating to each of the other elements and to the statement of goals and objectives, principles, policies and standards. 
•  The plan shall be adopted in accordance with provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. Thereafter, the Commission may from time to time recommend any changes or amendments to the adopted plan. 
B.  To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of such Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  To give aid to the officials of the City charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the Comprehensive Plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  To promote public interest in and understanding of the Comprehensive Plan and related planning matters. 
E.  To hear and review all matters upon which the Commission is required to recommend or approve pursuant to the zoning ordinance, including review and make final decisions on certain site plan reviews; make recommendations to the City Council on special use applications; make recommendations to the City Council on planned development applications; make recommendations to the City Council on zoning amendment applications; initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to make reports of its recommendations to the City Council; and adopt rules, procedures and guidelines pertaining to the administration and interpretation of those sections of the Zoning Ordinance over which the Commission has jurisdiction. 
F.  To receive and review all plats of subdivision and recommend with respect thereto to the City Council pursuant to the subdivision regulations, in Article 6, Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code. 
G.  To initiate, direct and review from time to time studies of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other land use controls, and make reports of its recommendations to the City Council. 
H.  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers now or that may hereafter be granted as may from time to time be legally conferred by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-1-6 - COMPENSATION 
The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation unless specific provision is made therefor by the City Council.  
4-1-7 - REVIEW 
Final administrative decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be subject to review by a court of law in the manner provided by the applicable Illinois Statutes. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
CHAPTER 2 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-88, 12-03-2007. 
 
4-2-1 - BOARD ESTABLISHED 
Pursuant to the powers granted by Illinois law, there is hereby created the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City hereinafter referred to as the Board. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. 2005-65, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-2-2 - MEMBERS AND TERMS 
The board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall appoint a chairman from among its members to serve for two (2) years. The members of the Board shall serve a term of five (5) years or until their successors have been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner provided for the appointment of members. 
(Ord. 2012-13, 2-20-2012)  
4-2-3 - RESIGNATIONS 
The City Council may accept the resignation of any member desiring to resign and upon such acceptance such office shall be considered vacant. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-2-4 - ORGANIZATION, RULES AND RECORD 
The Board shall appoint a vice chairman, a secretary and such other officers as may in its judgment be necessary. The Board shall adopt rules for transactions of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-2-5 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Board shall have the following powers, as are now or may hereafter be given to it by law, and shall have, as are now provided by the Zoning Ordinance, the following powers and duties: 
A.  To hear and make final decisions on appeals of any zoning interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Administrator. 
B.  To make final decisions on applications for minor variances and to make recommendations to the City Council on applications for major variances. 
C.  To hear and report to the Mayor and City Council on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-2-6 - COMPENSATION 
The members of the Board shall receive no compensation unless the City Council provides for such compensation. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
4-2-7 - REVIEW 
All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals from decisions of the Zoning Administrator, or on minor variances, shall in all instances be final administrative determinations, and shall be subject to review by a court of law in the manner provided by the applicable Illinois Statutes. The Board shall determine whether or not to recommend approval by the City Council and if the Board does not recommend approval, such decision shall constitute final administrative action denying the major variances and no further action shall be taken by the Board. If the Board shall determine to recommend approval of the major variance by the City Council, the City Council may grant the major variance by enactment of an ordinance. 
(Ord. 2007-88, 12-03-2007)  
CHAPTER 3 - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— In the general election held within the City of Park Ridge on April 15, 1947, there was submitted to the electors of the City the proposition as to whether the City of Park Ridge and the electors thereof shall adopt and become entitled to the benefits of "An Act to Regulate the Civil Service of Cities." As appears by the Journal of Proceedings on April 22, 1947, a motion was presented and adopted by the City Council accepting and declaring the adoption of said Civil Service Act by reason of the fact that a majority of the votes cast upon said proposition were for such provision. On June 24, 1947, as appears by the Journal of Proceedings of the meeting of the City Council on said date, the Mayor of Park Ridge issued his proclamation declaring the Civil Service Act in force within the City. The Civil Service Commission is established in the City of Park Ridge by virtue of said referendum and proclamation. 
 
4-3-1 - APPOINTMENT 
The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the City Council no sooner than the next regular meeting of the City Council after the announcement of the name of the appointee by the Mayor for staggered terms as set forth in the Statute in such case made and provided. Not more than two (2) shall be of the same political party. (65 ILCS 5/10-1-1)  
4-3-2 - RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
The Civil Service Commission Rules and Regulations dated February 7, 2005 are hereby adopted under Home Rule Powers granted pursuant to Section 6(A), Article VII of the 1970 Constitution. Said rules, on file for public inspection, are expressly incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein. 
In the event the aforesaid rules and regulations conflict with any of the terms and conditions of 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1, the terms and provisions of this Section shall operate to supersede said Statute under the Home Rule Powers granted to the City under the aforesaid Home Rule Power provisions of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. 
(Ord. of 2005-09, 2-7-2005)  
CHAPTER 4 - FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS 
SECTION 
 
4-4-1 - CREATION OF BOARD 
Pursuant to the home rule authority of the City, there is established a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. This Board currently consists of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. The term of office shall be three (3) years. Political party affiliation shall not be considered in making such appointments. Members of the Board shall not be required to file a fidelity bond. The Board shall elect from among its members a chair to serve for the term of the City's fiscal year. 
(Ord 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004)  
4-4-2 - POWERS OF BOARD 
The powers and procedures of the Board shall be as provided by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners Statute (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1, et seq.) (the "Act"),as amended, and the Fire Department Promotion Act (50 ILCS 742/1, et seq.), as amended, except where such statutes are inconsistent with the provisions of this Home Rule Chapter or the Administrative Rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City of Park Ridge ("Rules"), which have been approved by the City Council under its home rules powers, in which case the provisions of this Chapter and the Rules shall control, unless home rule preemption applies. 
(Ord. of 1-1999; Ord. No. 2012-52, 11-7-2012)  
4-4-3 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The Board shall make such rules and regulations ("the Rules") for the administration of its affairs and the conducting of hearings as may be necessary providing that such rules shall not be inconsistent with this Chapter. These Rules shall be approved by the corporate authorities of the City in accordance with its home rule powers as provided by Article VII, Sections 6 and 10(a) of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 and the Board from time to time as they are amended. The current set of the Rules, and each amended version thereof after approval by the City Council and the Board, are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2012-52, 11-7-2012)  
4-4-4 - TESTING OF FIRE AND POLICE RECRUITS 
The approved Rules of the Board shall set forth the procedures, criteria and qualifications concerning the recruit testing process. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004)  
4-4-5 - MILITARY EXPERIENCE 
In determining the eligibility of any candidate for original appointment and/or promotion, the Board may consider, in addition to other factors, the candidate's job-related military experience, if any, and may attach thereto whatever weight or value it may deem appropriate.  
4-4-6 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ELIGIBILITY LIST 
The Board shall establish separate lists of qualified persons eligible for original appointment and for promotion in the Police Department and in the Fire Department, as provided for in the approved Rules of the Board. The name of each person placed on an eligibility list shall remain thereon for the time period prescribed by the approved Rules of the Board and at the expiration of said time period, or as otherwise provided for in the approved Rules, said name shall be stricken from the list. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004)  
4-4-7 - APPOINTMENT 
A.  Basis of Appointment for Fire Department: Under Illinois Public Act 97-251 (effective August 4, 2011), the process and related standards for hiring new full-time firefighters was altered and the current version of the Board's Rules have been updated to comply with the new requirements, which amended the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners Act of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, et seq.). Appointments to entry-level firefighter positions for which a final eligibility list has been established shall be made in accordance with the Rules. After certification to the Board in writing by the City Manager of a vacancy or vacancies in the entry level rank, as designated by the Chief, the Board shall make conditional offers of appointment to fill the vacancy or vacancies, subject to City budgetary considerations. Such offers of appointment shall be conditioned on successful completion by such applicants of all required examination elements required by the Rules as well as receipt of the State of Illinois certification as an Emergency Medical Technician/Paramedic. 
B.  Basis of Appointment for Police Department: Whenever a vacancy exists in a position within the Police Department that is subject to the jurisdiction of the Board, and the City's budget allows for it to be filled, the Police Chief shall so notify the Board. The Board shall immediately provide the Police Chief with the list of qualified persons eligible for appointment to the vacant position. In the case of appointments to entry level or promotional positions, the Police Chief shall, after considering the qualifications of the candidates on the eligibility list, appoint any candidate from the list to fill a vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2012-52, 11-7-2012)  
4-4-8 - PROBATION 
A probationary period, and any extensions thereof, for members of the fire department and members of the police department shall be governed by the applicable provisions of Illinois state law, the Rules and the City Employee Manual. 
(Ord. of 1-1999; Ord. of 2012-52, 11-7-2012)  
4-4-9 - REDUCTIONS IN FORCE 
When it becomes necessary to reduce the number of personnel in the Fire Department or the Police Department, the Police Chief or Fire Chief, as the case may be, shall notify the Board as to the number of personnel in each rank to be eliminated. The Board shall then determine which personnel shall be laid off. Permanent employees shall be laid off in reverse order of seniority unless the Chief shall certify to the Board that it is essential to the operation of the Department that an employee having special skills be retained in preference to an employee with greater seniority.  
4-4-10 - DISCIPLINE 
The terms, conditions, penalties and procedures concerning discipline are set forth in the approved Rules of the Board, as amended from time to time, and they are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord 2004-20, 3-15-2004)  
4-4-11 - FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING CERTIFICATION 
The City elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act, as amended. 
An entry level applicant for the position of firefighter must complete all required training, including certification as a "Firefighter II" by the Illinois State Fire Marshal pursuant to the Certified Firefighter Basic Training Course as prescribed by the Illinois Fire Protection Personnel Standard and Education Commission, and be accepted into the City's emergency medical service system within his or her probationary period. It is the responsibility of the applicant, at his or her cost, to have already successfully completed the Emergency Medical Technician/Paramedic certification as prescribed by the Illinois Fire Protection Personnel Standard and Education Commission in order to be eligible to participate in the examination process and to be hired to an entry level position or a lateral hire position within the Fire Department. 
Any person appointed to the Fire Department of the City shall not become a regular member of said Fire Department until and unless he or she shall complete, pursuant to said Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, as amended, the approved training course and receives the required certifications. In the event that a person fails to pass the approved training course(s) or fails to obtain the required certifications within his or her probationary period, the City reserves the right to terminate the employment relationship. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2012-52, 11-7-2012)  
4-4-12 - ILLINOIS POLICE TRAINING CERTIFICATION 
An entry-level applicant for the position of police officer must complete all of the requirements of the Illinois Police Training Act, as amended, including the Basic Training Course as provided by the Illinois Governmental Law Enforcement Officers Training Board, within his or her probationary period. All lateral entry-level applicants must provide documentation that they have fulfilled all of the requirements of the Illinois Police Training Act, as amended. 
Any person appointed to the Police Department of the City shall not become a regular member of said Police Department until and unless he or she shall complete all of the requirements of the Illinois Police Training Act, as amended, including the Basic Training Course as provided by the Illinois Governmental Law Enforcement Officers Training Board. In the event that a person fails to satisfy all of the requirements of the Illinois Police Training Act within his or her probationary period, the City reserves the right to terminate the employment relationship. 
(Ord. No. 2004-20, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2012-52, 11-07-2012)  
CHAPTER 5 - POLICE PENSION BOARD[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund is established in the City of Park Ridge as provided in 40 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq. 
 
CHAPTER 6 - FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION BOARD[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The Board of Trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund is established in the City of Park Ridge as provided in 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. 
History— Ord. No. 2007-06, 1-8-2007. 
 
CHAPTER 7 - FARMERS MARKET COMMITTEE[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-52 , § 1, adopted July 18, 2016, repealed Ch. 7, §§ 4-7-1, 4-7-2, which pertained to Electrical Commission and derived from Ord. No. 2004-59, adopted Sep. 2, 2004. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2017-53, § 1, adopted October 2, 2017, added a new Ch. 7. 
 
4-7-1 - COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby created the Farmers Market Committee. The Farmers Market Committee's objective will be to administer and promulgate rules for the operation of the Farmers Market in a manner not inconsistent with Article 12, Chapter 7 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 1, 10-2-2017)  
4-7-2 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee is charged with the duties set forth in Article 12, Chapter 7 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code and such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the City Council. The Committee is empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of the Farmers Market in a manner which protects the pubic health and safety and which results, to the extent practicable and in light of all lawfully available revenue sources, in the Farmers Market being a self-sustaining enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 1, 10-2-2017)  
4-7-3 - MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE 
A.  The Committee shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Each Committee member will serve a three-year term or until his or her successor has been appointed. The terms of the original appointees shall be staggered so that one-third of the members' terms expire each year. 
B.  The Committee shall appoint from among its members up to two Market Masters, who shall be charged with the duties set forth in Article 12, Chapter 7 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code and such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the Committee. 
C.  The Market Master(s) shall serve a one-year term or until a successor has been appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 1, 10-2-2017; Ord. No. 2019-13 , § 1(Exh. A), 2-4-2019)  
CHAPTER 8 - COMMUNITY HEALTH COMMISSION[7] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2005-53, 9-6-2005. 
 
4-8-1 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby created the Community Health Commission. The Park Ridge Community Health Commission's mission is to educate and encourage Park Ridge residents to take action to live healthy lives and promote environmental health and sustainability in the City of Park Ridge. The Commission is charged to develop and implement educational programs and identify resources that can help address health and sustainability issues to assist the community. 
(Ord. No. 2016-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
4-8-2 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
The Commission shall be charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
1.  Expand overall communication with the community at large to promote healthy living and awareness of opportunities to improve individual, family, and community health. 
2.  Explore various approaches that will promote improvements in health, quality of life, and sustainability throughout the community. 
3.  Work on community efforts to promote healthy behaviors with residents, school officials, businesses, and others. 
4.  Focus on community education and efforts regarding disease prevention, education, and management; general wellness and safety; substance abuse and mental health; emergency preparedness and resilience; environmental health and sustainability; and other community health issues as they arise. 
5.  Make a visible difference in the health of the people and the environment in Park Ridge. 
(Ord. No. 2016-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
4-8-3 - MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION 
There shall be 11 Commissioners appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
The organization of the Commission, including the selection of a Chairperson, shall be determined by the Commissioners. Commissioners will serve three-year terms with no more than four members' terms expiring each year. 
In addition to the 11 Commissioners, the Commission should provide for participation of representatives from the Park Ridge Police Department, School District 207 and School District 64, the Park Ridge Park District, and Lutheran General Hospital. The representatives of the Police Department, Park District, Hospital, and the School Districts are non-voting representatives, are selected by their respective bodies and may be changed at any time. 
The Commission shall include a Park Ridge Alderman acting as the Commission's liaison to the City Council, who is also a non-voting representative. 
(Ord. No. 2016-41 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 9 - BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF PUBLIC LIBRARY 
SECTION 
 
4-9-1 - ESTABLISHMENT 
The library previously established by the City as a public library under the "Act to authorize cities, villages, incorporated towns, and townships to establish and maintain free public libraries and reading rooms" shall be continued as the Park Ridge Public Library (75 ILCS 5/1-0.1).  
4-9-2 - BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a Board of Directors of nine (9) members of the library no sooner than the next regular meeting after announcement of the name of the appointee, not more than one of which members shall be a member of the City Council, which Board of Directors shall have all the powers provided in the above cited Statute. A Director shall hold office for three (3) years and until his successor is appointed. Such term shall commence on July 1 and each year the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint three (3) Directors no sooner than the next regular meeting after the announcement of the name of the appointee to take the place of the three (3) retiring Directors.  
CHAPTER 10 - O'HARE AIRPORT COMMISSION[8] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
History— Ord. 2009-29, 4-20-2009. 
 
4-10-1 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby created the O'Hare Airport Commission. The O'Hare Airport Commission's objective will be to provide a forum for public discussion and serve as an advocate for reasonable sound and environmental levels associated with flights flying to and from O'Hare Airport over Park Ridge. The Commission shall conduct research; educate the public; and advocate for improvements.  
4-10-2 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
The Commission shall be charged with the following duties and responsibilities: 
1.  Monitor sound and air quality. 
2.  Research and advocate for a decrease in the frequency of flights over Park Ridge. 
3.  Make recommendations to the City Council on potential and proposed legislation that will affect the decibel level in homes and schools in Park Ridge. This shall include funding sources for soundproofing, tax benefits for homeowners, and encouragement for quieter aircraft. 
4.  Communicate regularly with City staff, elected officials and the public on the Commission's progress. 
5.  Make recommendations to the City Council on potential and proposed legislation that will affect aircraft- and airport-related public health and environmental issues that may impact Park Ridge.  
4-10-3 - MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION 
The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Commission shall include a Park Ridge Alderman with a two-year term, acting as the Commission's liaison to the City Council. The initial terms of three of the Commissioners shall end on July 1, 2011, three shall end on July 1, 2012, and three shall end on July 1, 2013. After these initial terms, Commissioners will serve three-year terms with no more than three members' terms expiring each year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 3-20-2017)  
CHAPTER 11 - ANIMAL COMMISSION[9] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-15, 02-03-2010. 
 
4-11-1 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby created the Animal Commission. The Animal Commission's objective will be to make determinations regarding whether a particular animal is a Dangerous Animal or At-Risk Animal, as defined by Section 5-8-1 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
4-11-2 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
The Commission is charged with the duties as set forth in Sections 5-8-20 and 5-8-26 and such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the City Council. The Commission will review information submitted by the Police Chief or his/her designee regarding a particular animal at an open meeting. After review of that information, the Commission will determine whether the animal is a Dangerous Animal or At-Risk Animal.  
4-11-3 - FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
The Commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Each Commissioner will serve a three-year term or until his or her successor has been appointed.  
CHAPTER 14 - YOUTH SERVICES COMMISSION 
SECTION 
 
4-14-1 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby established a Youth Services Commission which shall consist of at least 12 members to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The appointees shall include four non-aldermanic adults, one liaison member from the City Council, one member from the Park Ridge Park District, one member from the Park Ridge Public Library and a minimum of four of the members shall be youth currently attending Park Ridge high schools or shall be residents of Park Ridge. If possible, there shall be youths from each of the following grades: freshman, sophomore, junior and senior. If there are no applicants from a particular grade, a youth from another grade may be appointed to fill that position. The City Council liaison shall be the chair of the Commission. Each of the members will have an equal vote and the Commission shall report directly to the Mayor and the City Council. For the initial term, two of the adult members shall be appointed for two years and two of the adult members shall be appointed for three years. Following the initial terms aforesaid, the term of office for all adult members shall be three years or until a successor has been appointed, whichever comes last. The term of office of a student member shall be for up to two years or until a successor has been appointed, whichever comes last. All terms shall begin on July 1 for the year of appointment and end on June 30 in the year when the term is to end. Notwithstanding the term of office described above, any student member who graduates from high school during the course of his/her term shall no longer be eligible to serve on the Youth Commission, his/her term shall terminate and the number of members of the Commission shall be reduced by one, subject to the minimum number of members described above. In addition to the members, the Commission should provide for participation of a representative from the Park Ridge Police Department. The representative of the Police Department shall be selected by the Police Chief and may be changed at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 2005-26, 4-18-2005; Ord. No. 2005-56, 9-6-2005; Ord. 2009-20, 3-16-2009; Ord. 2010-115, 12-20-2010; Ord. No. 2012-61, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. 2016-09 , § 1, 2-15-2016; Ord. No. 2016-59 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2016)  
4-14-2 - FUNCTIONS 
The functions of the Youth Services Commission shall be as follows: 
1.  To provide a forum for public discussion of any and all topics related to the activities of youth of the City. 
2.  To provide an organization for recommending appropriate action to the Mayor and City Council for services and activities relating of the youth of the City. 
3.  To act as an ombudsman for youth. 
4.  To facilitate coordination for various community youth groups. 
5.  To submit recommendations on any of the above matters to the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-59 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2016)  
CHAPTER 15 - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD 
SECTION 
 
4-15-1 - CREATION OF BOARD 
Pursuant to the home rule authority of the City of Park Ridge, there is hereby created the Emergency Telephone System Board. The Board shall consist of the following five (5) members: the Chairman of the Public Safety Committee of the City Council; the Police Chief; the Fire Chief; a resident of Park Ridge appointed by the Mayor; and the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20, 4-1-2013)  
4-15-2 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Emergency Telephone System Board shall have the powers and duties set forth in 50 ILCS 750/15.4, subject to approval by the City Council.  
CHAPTER 16 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[12] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-08, 01-18-2010. 
 
4-16-1 - CREATION; MEMBERS 
A.  There is created the Park Ridge Historic Preservation Commission, which shall consist of nine (9) voting members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall serve for terms of five (5) years which may be extended until the respective successor of each member is appointed. For the initial appointments only, such appointment may be for less than a five-year term in order to assure that not all terms expire at the same time. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of any unexpired term. Members may be appointed for no more than three (3) consecutive terms and shall serve without compensation. 
B.  All members of the Commission shall be residents of the City. Not fewer than five (5) members shall be selected from the following: licensed attorney at law, licensed real estate salesperson or broker, licensed architect, registered professional engineer, licensed landscape architect, a person with a bachelor's degree or better in city planning, anthropology, history, art, building construction or finance. If the field requires professional licensure, then a person who retired from that field while in good standing shall be deemed qualified whether such licensure is current or not.  
4-16-2 - ORGANIZATION; RULES; MEETINGS; REMOVALS; CONFLICTS 
A.  The mayor shall appoint a chairman from among the members of the Commission for terms of two (2) years or until such time as the mayor appoints a new chairman. The chairman shall preside over all meetings. 
B.  A representative from any of the various City departments may serve, ex officio, as a nonvot-ing liaison to the Commission when so appointed by the City Manager. 
C.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times or at the call of the chairman. The Commission shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
D.  A quorum shall consist of five (5) members. The transaction of business shall be made by a majority vote of those members in attendance while a quorum is present. However, the adoption, modification or rescission of any rule or part of a rule shall require the affirmative vote of five (5) members. 
E.  The Commission shall meet not less often than quarterly. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  The mayor may, with the advice and consent of the City Council, remove any member for incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. 
H.  Any member of the Commission having a pecuniary or personal interest in any matter coming before the Commission shall disclose such interest to the other members and such interest shall be made a matter of record. Any member having such an interest shall not present or speak on such matter nor shall he or she vote or in any way use his or her personal influence on such matter. He or she shall not be counted in determining a quorum for consideration of such matter. 
(Ord. 2012-13, 2-20-2012; Ord. No. 2018-17 , § 1, 6-4-2018)  
4-16-3 - POWERS AND DUTIES 
Provided that no monies may be spent or debt incurred without the prior consent of the City Council, the Commission shall have the authority to do the following: 
A.  Conduct public hearings for the purpose of making recommendations to the City Council for the designation of landmarks and historic districtswithin the corporate limits of the City in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Article 23. 
B.  Issue Certificates of Appropriateness and Certificates of EconomicHardship in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Article 23. 
C.  Review decisions of the Director with respect to whether a proposed work is an alteration or normal maintenance and repair. Such a review shall not require a hearing. 
D.  Retain, upon approval by the City Council, such specialists as may from time to time be required. 
E.  Engage in mutual cooperation with City departments and other Commissions on matters affecting landmarks or historic districts. 
F.  Make suggestions and recommendations relative to the nomination of a landmark or historic district to state and national registers. 
G.  Foster the marking and maintenance of landmarks and historic districts as may be appropriate of each and as may aid the public in visiting such areas in convenient and appropriate surroundings. This may include the providing of a plaque or other appropriate indicia of status. 
H.  Recommend the City's acquisition by donation or purchase of a fee or lesser interest in a landmark or historic district. This may include, but not be limited to easements, covenants and leasehold interests. 
I.  Recommend the City's acquisition by donation or purchase of a fee or lesser interest in property which is within the publicview and adjacent to or immediately surrounding a landmark or historic district when the adjacent property's alteration, clearance or maintenance is important for the proper preservation and use of a landmark or historic district. 
J.  Recommend the City's reconstruction, maintenance, operation or transfer of a landmark or historic district in accordance with the purposes, procedures and standards set forth in Article 23. 
K.  Recommend to the City Council appropriate covenants and restrictions to protect landmarks and historic districts. 
L.  Receive funds from federal, state and private sources for deposit in a separate account of the City to be referred to as the Preservation Fund. Monies from this fund may only be loaned or expended by the Commission with approval of the City Council in furtherance of the purposes set forth in Article 23. If the Commission is dissolved, any amounts remaining in the fund shall be applied by the City Council to further the purposes of Article 23. If any amounts remain in the fund after a period of one (1) year following the Commission's dissolution, then such funds may, if permitted by law, be applied by the City Council for such general corporate purposes as it may deem appropriate. 
M.  Recommend the issuance of bonds by the City Council to further the purposes of Article 23. 
N.  Cooperate with other governmental bodies or agencies and not-for-profit organizations with purposes similar to those set forth in Article 23. 
O.  Undertake surveys and research efforts to identify potential landmarks or historic districts within the City. As part of such a survey or research effort, the Commission may review and evaluate any prior surveys or studies by any responsible person or group and compile appropriate descriptions, facts or photographs. No City funds may be used for such survey or effort unless approved by the City Council. No City staff may be used for such survey or effort without the permission of the City Manager. 
P.  Undertake education and advocacy efforts within the City with respect to historic preservation. However, no City funds may be used for such efforts unless approved by the City Council. No City staff may be used for such efforts without the permission of the City Manager. 
Q.  Establish and publish design guidelines with respect to any permit, designation or certificate required by Article 23.  
4-16-4 - DEFINITIONS 
The terms of this Chapter are defined in Section 23-1-3.  
CHAPTER 17 - GENERAL CONDITIONS OF APPOINTMENT 
SECTION 
 
4-17-1 - PURPOSE 
The Corporate Authorities find that the appointment of a member to any board or commission is an inherently political act and may reflect on the policies and priorities of the appointing authority. Furthermore, the Corporate Authorities desire to ensure the members of the City's several boards and commissions represent the City in the best possible light and devote appropriate effort for the office to which they are appointed. For the foregoing reasons, the Corporate Authorities find that conducting a criminal background check on candidates for boards and commissions and enforcing attendance requirements for appointees shall help ensure such members represent the City in the best possible light, do not cause any embarrassment to the City and facilitate the prompt and efficient conduct of City business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016)  
4-17-2 - SCOPE OF APPLICATION 
The rules and procedures set forth in this Chapter shall apply to the appointment by the Mayor (the "Appointing Authority") of any person, 18 years old or greater, to the following boards and commissions and shall be supplemental to any other procedures described for the appointment of members to the respective boards and commissions: 
1.  Planning and Zoning Commission, 
2.  Zoning Board of Appeals, 
3.  Civil Service Commission, 
4.  Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, 
5.  Police Pension Board, 
6.  Firefighters' Pension Board, 
7.  Electrical Commission, 
8.  Community Health Commission, 
9.  Board of Directors of Public Library, 
10.  O'Hare Airport Commission, 
11.  Animal Commission, 
12.  Youth Services Commission, 
13.  Emergency Telephone System Board, 
14.  Historic Preservation Commission, 
15.  Fair Housing, Public Art, 
16.  Liquor, 
17.  Appearance, and 
18.  Sister Cities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016)  
4-17-3 - NON-FINGERPRINT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK 
After the completion of all other pre-appointment procedures, and when the Appointing Authority is prepared to appoint a candidate or present a candidate for confirmation, the Appointing Authority shall request the candidate to submit to a non-fingerprint criminal background check to be conducted at the City's expense. The requirement for a non-fingerprint criminal background check shall also apply as a condition of re-appointing an incumbent member of a board or commission for whom the term of appointment has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016)  
4-17-4 - REVIEW OF RECORDS; CONFIDENTIALITY 
The results of the criminal background check shall only be reviewed by the Appointing Authority and shall not be discussed, disclosed, or referenced during any meeting. The City shall adopt appropriate safeguards to secure the privacy of the results of the criminal background check. The criminal background check results are prohibited from disclosure under 20 ILCS 2630/7 and shall be exempt from the Freedom of Information Act under Section 7(1)(a) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016)  
4-17-5 - INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT 
In the event the results of the criminal background check reveal the candidate or member has been convicted in any court located in the United States of any infamous crime, bribery, perjury, or other felony, the Appointing Authority shall conduct an individualized assessment of: (a) the circumstances related to the conviction, (b) how long ago it occurred, (c) whether the candidate has completed any non-detention portion of the sentence resulting from that conviction, and (d) how it affects the candidate's ability to perform the duties of the office to which he/she may be appointed or reappointed. The Appointing Authority may conduct an interview with the candidate or member and consider any documents or records presented by the candidate or member as part of the individualized assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016)  
4-17-6 - ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENT 
Should any member become incapable of attending at least 75% of all meetings for such Board or Commission, this may be considered by the Appointing Authority as cause for removal in the manner described in Sections 3.1-35-10 or 11-13-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, or as otherwise applicable. Failure to meet the minimum attendance requirement may be considered good cause for removal of any member appointed to any Board or Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , 2(Exh. A), 1-18-2016; Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 1, 6-4-2018)  
ARTICLE 5 - HEALTH[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. No. 2004-26, 4-5-2004; Ord. No. 2013-46, 9-16-2013. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER 
SECTION 
 
5-1-1 - POSITION CREATED 
There is hereby created in the Department of Community Preservation and Development, the position of Environmental Health Officer. Upon vacancy of this position, the Environmental Health Officer shall be appointed by the Director of Community Preservation and Development. Such appointment shall be based upon the demonstrated ability, knowledge and experience in applying scientific and practical principles for the control of but not limited to air, water, waste, food, drink, chemicals, cosmetics, drugs, shelter, undesirable biological organisms, rodents, insects, birds, other vermin and other external and internal physical conditions of human environment to the extent and solely for the purpose that these activities promote and preserve health, safety, comfort and well being of mankind. In addition, screening, testing, devising and evaluation of materials, methods and equipment shall be done to accomplish the above applications.  
5-1-2 - DUTIES 
The Environmental Health Officer shall carry out all acts and duties prescribed by the environmental health laws of the City and of the Illinois State Statutes and to perform such other acts and duties as may be required.  
5-1-3 - POWERS 
The Environmental Health Officer shall be given specific power to make inspections and for that purpose may enter buildings, structures and premises in order to enforce the environmental health laws of the City and to that end shall make such orders, requirements, decisions and determinations as are necessary with respect to the enforcement of the environmental health laws. The Environmental Health Officer may also delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary. While in the performance of his duties he shall have the authority of a conservator of the peace.  
5-1-4 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
Whenever a section of this Article has been violated, the Environmental Health Officer or his designated representative, and such assistants, as may be acting under his direction and authority shall issue a written notice setting forth the alleged violations, and advising the owner or any occupant, operator, or agent that such violations must be corrected. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-1-5 - INTERFERENCE WITH THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH OFFICER 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent the Environmental Health Officer from discharging or performing his duty. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 
 
5-2-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this Article. 
Commissary. Catering establishments, restaurants, or other places in which food, beverage or ingredients, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared or stored. 
Equipement. Includes but is not limited to stoves, ranges, hoods, slicers, mixers, meat blocks, tables, counters, refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables, protective eyewear, handrails, washers, dryers and similar items other than utensils, used in the operation of food service establishments, retail food stores, tanning facilities, laundries, barber shops, beauty shops, etc. 
Extermination.. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigation, trapping, or by any other means. 
Furniture. Tables, chairs, stools, etc. used by the customer and not serving any equipment use. 
Health authority. The Environmental Health Officer of the City or his designated representative, and such assistants, as may be acting under his direction and authority. 
Infestion. The presence, within or around a building or structure of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
Litter. Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. Litter includes, but is not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, wood, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal, animal or human excreta, any nauseous or offensive material or liquid of any kind, any object which creates a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or a fire hazard or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been discarded, abandoned, disposed or otherwise stored improperly. 
Operator. (Business) Person responsible for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating or maintaining a food service establishment, retail food store, vending machine, laundry, barber shop, day care facility, tanning facility, beauty shop, etc. 
Owner. (Realty) Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
A.  Shall have legal or beneficial title to any premise, building or structure with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
B.  Shall have charge, care or control of any premise, building or structure; as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
Park. A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the City, owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Premises. A platted lot or part thereof, or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any building or structure. 
Public nuisance. The term "public nuisance" shall have the meaning as provided in Section 14-1-1 of the Municipal Code of the City. 
Public place. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings; and any and all public school buildings and grounds. 
Standard refuse container. A receptacle of not more than 32 gallons capacity, of impervious material and sturdy construction with a tight fitting cover, equipped with at least two handles properly placed to facilitate handling. Plastic bags shall also be deemed a standard refuse container; provided, however, that they are stored prior to pickup day in a manner which will prevent them from being torn and the contents strewn; that is, they shall be stored inside an acceptable refuse container. For purposes of this definition, pick-up day shall be deemed to be that time during which garbage receptacles are permitted on City parkways under the terms and provisions of Section 5-12-7 of this Article. Dumpsters shall be deemed a standard refuse container on property used for multiple family purposes or commercial purposes. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 3 - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 
SECTION 
 
5-3-1 - COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a food service establishment within the City, as hereinafter defined, to violate any of the terms and provisions of the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to sanitation of food service establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-2 - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE 
The State of Illinois, Department of Public Health rules and regulations pertaining to the sanitation of food service establishments effective on August 1, 2016, codified as Title 77 Illinois Administrative Code Part 750, inclusive (the "Food Code"), are hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-3 - PUBLICATION IN PAMPHLET FORM 
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to publish said Rules and Regulations herein adopted by reference by maintaining a copy thereof for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk in the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-4 - PERMITS 
No person shall operate a food service establishment who does not have a valid permit issued by the Health Authority. Only a person who complies with the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations of Food Service Sanitation shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. Permits are not transferable. When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation, or similar such defects exist in an established food facility that may require a significant expenditure to correct, but are not considered to be an imminent health hazard, a conditional license or permit may be granted at the discretion of the Health Authority. A conditional permit may be issued to operate for a period not to exceed 90 days and may be renewed not more than once. A valid permit shall be posted in every food service establishment. The food service Health Permit is in addition to the certificate of registration required under Section 12-2-2. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-5 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
A.  Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the Health Authority. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of proposed food service establishment and the signature of each applicant. 
B.  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the Health Authority shall inspect the proposed food service establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
C.  The Health Authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if the inspection reveals that the proposed food service establishment complies with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-6 - PERMIT CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
A.  A food service establishment permit shall be issued to the operator for the premises stated in the application and shall not be transferable. 
B.  A permit for a temporary food service establishment shall be valid for a period not to exceed two weeks. The permit shall state "Temporary Food Service Establishment" and the time for which it is valid. The permit shall be issued to the operator for the premises stated in the application, and shall not be transferable. 
C.  In enforcing the provisions of this Code, the Health Authority shall assess existing facilities or equipment that were in use before the effective date of this Code based on the following considerations: 
1.  Whether the facilities or equipment are in good repair and capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition; 
2.  Whether food-contact surfaces comply with the Illinois Food Code; 
3.  Whether the capacities of cooling, heating, and holding equipment are sufficient to comply with the Illinois Food Code; and 
4.  The existence of a documented agreement with the permit holder that the facilities or equipment will be replaced as specified under the Illinois Food Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-7 - SUSPENSION OF PERMIT 
A.  The Health Authority may without warning, notice or hearing suspend any permit authorized by this Article if the operator does not comply with the requirements of this Article, or if the operation of the food service establishment does not comply with the requirements of this Article, and the operation of the establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required in Section 5-3-7C. 
B.  When a permit is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the operator shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for hearing. 
C.  When a permit is suspended, the operator or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the operator within ten days. The Health Authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-8 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
A.  The Health Authority may, after providing an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for violations of any of the requirements of this Article, or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of his duties. 
B.  Prior to revocation, the Health Authority shall notify, in writing, the operator, or the person in charge, of the specific reasons for which the permit is to be revoked, and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the operator within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-9 - SERVICE OF NOTICES 
A notice provided for in this Article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-10 - APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION 
Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make a written application for a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-11 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
The inspection frequency for a food service establishment shall be based on its Risk Type. Additional inspections of the food service establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article. (Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-12 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article. The Health Authority shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-13 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form set out in Section 5-3-16. The Inspection Report Form shall summarize the requirements of this Article and shall set forth the grading criteria used to determine whether the establishment passes or fails the inspection. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section of this Chapter or the Food Code violated, shall state the correction to be made, and shall specify the time frame for correction of the violations. A copy of the completed Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection and the operator shall sign acknowledgment of receipt. The completed Inspection Report Form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. 
(Ord. 2008-20, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-14 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
Except as specified in this section, the Operator shall correct core items by a date and time agreed to or specified by the Health Authority but no later than 90 calendar days after the inspection. 
A.  Except as specified in subsection B of this section, an operator shall at the time of inspection correct a violation of a priority item or priority foundation item of this Code and implement corrective actions for a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan provision that is not in compliance with its critical limit. 
B.  Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the Health Authority may agree to or specify a longer time frame, not to exceed: (1) 72 hours after the inspection, for the operator to correct violations of a priority item; or (2) ten calendar days after the inspection, for the Operator to correct violations of a priority foundation item or HACCP plan deviations 
C.  The Health Authority may approve a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits specified under this section if a written schedule of compliance is submitted by the operator and no health hazard exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule for compliance. 
D.  When evidence of pests are noted during an inspection, the Operator shall take corrective action by engaging the services of a Pest Control Business licensed by the State of Illinois. The Operator shall provide evidence of such engagement as well as reports of corrective action taken by the Pest Control Business by a date and time agreed to or specified by the Health Authority. At a minimum, engagement of the Pest Control Business by the Operator shall continue until, upon a subsequent inspection, no evidence of pests are noted by the Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 3-21-2018)  
5-3-15 - INSPECTION REPORT 
An Inspection Report Form similar to the Food Establishment Inspection Report described in Appendix A to Title 77 Illinois Administrative Code Part 750 shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-16 - RATING SCORE 
Establishments shall maintain a sanitation level that will result in a pass rating. 
(Ord. 2008-20, 4-7-2008; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-17 - INTERPRETATIONS; PURPOSE 
A.  Interpretation of the provisions of the Park Ridge regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Food Service Establishments, Chapter 3, shall be based on the current edition of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, Model Food Code. 
B.  The Health Authority shall apply this Code to promote its underlying purpose of safeguarding public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented when offered to the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-18 - EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF ADULTERATED OR MISBRANDED FOOD 
Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article. The Health Authority may, upon written notice to the operator or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes to be in violation of the Rules and Regulations of Food Service Sanitation of the Illinois Department of Public Health. The Health Authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. 
No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The Health Authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at the hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the operator or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-19 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a food service establishment is constructed, altered or remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials of work areas, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. All newly constructed or remodeled food service establishments or mobile food service establishments shall conform in its construction to the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-20 - PRE OPENING INSPECTION 
Whenever plans and specifications are required to be submitted by Section 5-3-19 of this Article, the Health Authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-21 - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF PARK RIDGE 
Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the City may be sold within the City if such food service establishments conform to the provisions of this Article or to substantially equivalent provisions. The Health Authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments are located. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-22 - VARIANCES 
A.  The Health Authority may grant a variance by modifying or waiving the requirements of this Code if in the opinion of the Health Authority a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the variance. If a variance is granted, the Health Authority shall retain the information specified under subsection B of this Section in its records for the food establishment. 
B.  Before a variance from a requirement of this Code is approved, the information that shall be provided by the operator requesting the variance and retained in the Health Authority's file on the food establishment includes: 
1.  A statement of the proposed variance of the Code requirement citing relevant section numbers from this Chapter and/or the Food Code; 
2.  An analysis of the rationale for how the potential public health hazards and nuisances addressed by the relevant sections will be alternatively addressed by the proposal; and 
3.  A HACCP plan, if required by the Illinois Food Code, that includes the information relevant to the variance requested. 
C.  If the Health Authority grants a variance, or a HACCP plan is otherwise required under the Illinois Food Code, the operator shall: 
1.  Comply with the HACCP plans and procedures that are submitted and approved as a basis for the modification or waiver; and 
2.  Maintain and provide to the Health Authority, upon request, records specified under the Food Code that demonstrate that the following are routinely employed: 
a.  Procedures for monitoring the critical control points, 
b.  Monitoring of the critical control points, 
c.  Verification of the effectiveness of the operation or process, and 
d.  Necessary corrective actions if there is failure at a critical control point. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-23 - WHEN A HACCP PLAN IS REQUIRED 
A.  A permit applicant or permit holder shall submit to the Health Authority for approval a properly prepared HACCP plan as specified under the Food Code if: 
1.  Submission of a HACCP plan is required according to the Food Code; 
2.  A Variance is required under the Food Code; or 
3.  The Health Authority determines that a food preparation or processing method requires a variance based on a plan submittal, an inspectional finding, or a variance request. 
B.  Before engaging in reduced oxygen packaging without a variance, a permit applicant or permit holder shall submit a properly prepared HACCP plan to the Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
5-3-24 - EMERGENCY CESSATION OF OPERATIONS 
A.  Except as specified in subsection B of this Section, an operator shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the Health Authority if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical or water service, sewage backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross insanitary occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health. 
B.  An Operator need not discontinue operations in an area of an establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health hazard. 
C.  If operations are discontinued under subsection A or otherwise according to law, the operator shall obtain approval from the Health Authority before resuming operations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-28 , § 1, 4-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 3.1 - OUTDOOR CAFÉS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2004-26, 4-5-2004. 
 
5-3.1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Outdoor café. An outdoor food service area operated adjacent to and in conjunction with a restaurant or fast food restaurant or on a rooftop deck of a restaurant or fast food restaurant. This definition shall include sidewalk cafés and private outdoor cafés located on private property. 
Private outdoor café. An outdoor café on private property. 
Public area. A public sidewalk and/or public right of way. 
Sidewalk café. An outdoor café on the public sidewalk and/or public right of way. 
(Ord. No. 2010-47, 5-03-2010)  
5-3.1-2 - OUTDOOR CAFÉ LICENSE 
No person or entity shall operate an Outdoor Café without a valid Outdoor Café license. This license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Chapter, including a Health Permit as issued by the Health Authority.  
5-3.1-3 - ELIGIBILITY; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE 
An Outdoor Café license shall be granted only to the operator of a restaurant or fast-food restaurant which is in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance and which holds a valid Health Permit for a food service establishment or retail food store, as provided in Sections 5-3-4 and 5-4-4. An application for an Outdoor Café license shall be on a form as provided by the Director of Community Preservation and Development and shall require at least the following: 
A.  The name and mailing address of the applicant. 
B.  A detailed drawing to scale of the proposed site indicating the following: the existing façade, the points of ingress and egress, the proposed location of the tables, chairs, serving equipment, planters, borders, awnings, umbrellas and other facilities to be included in the seating area. If the proposed café is to be a Sidewalk Café, the drawings must also include the location of existing public improvements, including fire hydrants, street signs, street lights, traffic signals, bus shelters, mail boxes, trees and tree grates, parking meters, planting boxes or planting areas, fire escapes or other overhead obstructions and any other public obstruction. 
C.  A copy of a valid Health Permit. 
D.  The annual license fee.  
5-3.1-4 - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 3, FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 
An Outdoor Café must comply with the regulations of Chapter 3, Food Service Establishments, Chapter 4, Retail Food Store and all other State and City health regulations.  
5-3.1-5 - REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL OUTDOOR CAFÉS 
A.  General Standards: 
1.  All tables, chairs and other equipment shall be constructed and set up in such a manner as to be easily removed during winter months or any other time required by the City. 
2.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the Outdoor Café shall be restricted by the liquor license governing the restaurant. 
3.  The Outdoor Café shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
4.  An outdoor Café may only be open from between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day. 
5.  The proprietor shall be required to provide additional outdoor trash receptacles for the Outdoor Café as required by the City's Health Authority. All trash receptacles shall be kept clean and covered. 
6.  An Outdoor Café permit shall be subject to an annual review. 
7.  An Outdoor Café must be located on an impervious surface. 
8.  Outdoor Café seating will be included when figuring the restaurant's maximum occupancy to determine compliance with the State Plumbing Code public toilet facility requirements. 
9.  No food may be stored, cooked or otherwise prepared in the Outdoor Café area. 
10.  No soiled food service equipment, utensils or tableware may be kept in the Outdoor Café area. 
11.  All clean food service equipment, utensils or tableware must be covered at all times. 
12.  The Outdoor Café shall be accessible to the disabled, and the Licensee shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and City laws, ordinances and regulations concerning accessibility and non-discrimination in the providing of service. 
13.  The Outdoor Café shall not obstruct any fire exit, fire escape or other required means of ingress and egress. 
14.  In no event shall the operation of the Outdoor Café interfere with the passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or reduce the open portion of the public sidewalk to less than five feet, clear of all obstructions, measured from edge of the sidewalk closest to the curb, lamppost or parking meter. In addition, no seating or other equipment shall be closer than five feet to any tree, trellis, tree wall or government sign. 
15.  In no event shall the operation of, or placement of equipment or furnishings for, the Outdoor Café obstruct access to any taxi stand, bus stop, crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut, parking space or any other public property. The furnishings or equipment shall not obstruct access to any fire hydrant, fire escape or fire door, or obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign. Whether the placement of equipment or furnishings obstructs access to any of the foregoing shall be the sole determination of the City Manager or his designee. 
16.  Outdoors furnishing materials and finishes shall be durable, smooth and easily cleanable and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
17.  Pets may be allowed in an Outdoor Café area only with approval from the Health Authority. Health Authority approval will be based upon compliance with each of the following criteria: 
a.  The owner of the food establishment would request approval. 
b.  The Outdoor Café must be open and available for use by the public including customers and non-customers. 
c.  The Outdoor Café must be on or immediately adjoining a public area. 
d.  The Café may not be enclosed by a border. 
e.  There may be no wait staff service in the Outdoor Café. 
f.  Food sold by the establishment for consumption in the Outdoor Café must be packaged for off premise consumption and only single service utensils and tableware may be provided. 
18.  Rooftop decks must comply with all building codes, fire codes, and all other applicable public health and safety codes. 
B.  Design Standards: 
1.  Canopies that are attached to the building will be permitted for a Private Outdoor Café only when in conformance with the regulations set forth in the Municipal Code, the Zoning Ordinance and the Appearance Commission rules and procedures. No additional canopy for a Sidewalk Café shall be permitted. 
2.  All outdoor furnishings shall be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot so that the furnishings will not be moved by the wind. 
3.  Trash receptacles shall be constructed of an impervious material and be of sturdy construction equipped with a tight fitting cover. 
C.  Submittal Requirements: 
1.  The following shall be submitted at the time of application: 
a.  A completed application form with a letter from the building owner granting permission for the Outdoor Café. 
b.  A twenty-dollar ($20.00) application fee. 
c.  A Site plan, drawn to accurate scale, illustrating the location of the proposed Outdoor Café. 
d.  Catalog cuts and/or photographs of all furniture and other equipment to be located within the Outdoor Café. 
e.  A Plat of Survey of the property, which shall include the right-of-way between the building and the curb. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2010-47, 5-03-2010)  
5-3.1-6 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SIDEWALK CAFÉS 
In addition to the requirements set forth above, issuance and continued enjoyment of an Outdoor Café license for a Sidewalk Café, shall be conditioned on the following: 
A.  Sidewalk Café may be located only along that portion of the perimeter of the restaurant building that is co-terminus with the interior of the restaurant and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
B.  A Sidewalk Café may only be open between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day. 
C.  The licensee shall provide the City, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, the following: 
1.  An agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City for any and all claims for liability or damages arising from the operation of the Sidewalk Café; and 
2.  A certificate of general liability insurance and workers compensation insurance. The amount of required general liability coverage shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) annual aggregate. The City shall be named as an additional insured on the face of the certificate and the insurer shall have no less than a B++ rating by the most recent AM Best Insurance Rating Guide. 
D.  The Licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the Public Area used for the Sidewalk Café and the replacement of damaged public property, including brick pavers. No furniture or furnishings may be attached by any means to the Public Area or any other public property. Maintenance shall include daily cleaning of the area by an employee of the Licensee. 
E.  The Licensee shall submit a plan showing the manner in which the furnishings and equipment will be stored during the hours that the Sidewalk Café portion of the restaurant is closed. The plan shall be subject to the City's approval. All furnishings and equipment left outside shall be moved as close to the building wall as may be practical during the hours when not in use. 
F.  The Licensee shall submit a detailed drawing showing the placement of every item of furniture or equipment to be used as a part of the Sidewalk Café. The proposed locations shall be subject to the review and approval of the City. 
G.  Any seating area where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed shall be enclosed by a border and shall be supervised at all times by an employee of the restaurant. No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the Sidewalk Café, except to the interior of the restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, 4-7-2008)  
5-3.1-7 - TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL; REVOCATION; TERMINATION 
A.  Term. Each Outdoor Café license shall be valid for a term of one year. A renewal application shall provide the same information as an original application, but copies of the previous year's site plan may be used if there are no changes from the prior submission. 
B.  Suspension. Outdoor Café licenses may be suspended or revoked by the Health Authority as provided in Section 5-3-7 and 5-3-8 of this Code. 
C.  License Not Property. An Outdoor Café license shall not constitute personal property. The City shall retain at all times, the right to terminate any Outdoor Café license, or may completely eliminate this class of license, upon 30 days written notice to the license holder(s). Should the City terminate any license other than for reason of a violation of City regulations, the City shall refund to the Licensee the pro-rated portion of the annual fee paid by the Licensee. If an Outdoor Café subsequently becomes subject to any Zoning Ordinance regulations, those regulations shall apply to each Outdoor Café irrespective of the date of its establishment. No Outdoor Café shall be deemed, either now or hereafter, to be a legal nonconforming use.  
5-3.1-8 - ANNUAL LICENSE FEE 
The annual fee for an Outdoor Café license shall be $50.00 plus $5.00 for each seat available for use on public property. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 4 - RETAIL FOOD STORES 
SECTION 
 
5-4-1 - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE 
The State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to the sanitation of retail food stores and any future revisions or amendments thereto are hereby adopted as a Municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part hereof.  
5-4-2 - UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE RULES AND REGULATIONS OF ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a retail food store within the City, as hereinafter defined, to violate any of the terms and provisions of the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-4-3 - PUBLICATION IN PAMPHLET FORM 
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to publish said Rules and Regulations herein adopted by reference by maintaining one copy thereof for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk of the City.  
5-4-4 - PERMITS 
No person shall operate a retail food store who does not have a valid permit issued by the Park Ridge Health Authority. Only a person who complies with the State of Illinois Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. Permits are not transferable. A valid permit must be posted in every retail food store. The Retail Food Store Health Permit is in addition to the certificate of registration required under Section 12-2-2.  
5-4-5 - ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT 
A.  Any person desiring to operate a retail food store shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the Health Authority. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location of the proposed retail food store and the signature of each applicant. 
B.  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the Health Authority shall inspect the proposed retail food store to determine compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
C.  The Health Authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if the inspection reveals that the proposed retail food store complies with the requirements of this Article.  
5-4-6 - SUSPENSION OF PERMIT 
A.  The Health Authority may, without warning, notice or hearing suspend any permit authorized by this Article if the operator does not comply with the requirements of this Article, or if the operation of the retail food store does not comply with the requirements of this Article, and the operation of the establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required in Section 5-4-6C. 
B.  When a permit is suspended, retail food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the operator shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for hearing. 
C.  When a permit is suspended, the operator or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the operator within ten days. The Health Authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.  
5-4-7 - REVOCATION OF A PERMIT 
A.  The Health Authority may, after providing an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for violations of any of the requirements of this Article or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of his duties. 
B.  Prior to revocation, the Health Authority shall notify, in writing, the operator, or the person in charge, of the specific reasons for which the permit is to be revoked and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the operator within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.  
5-4-8 - SERVICE OF NOTICES 
A notice provided for in this Article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Health Authority.  
5-4-9 - APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION 
Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make a written application for a new permit.  
5-4-10 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
An inspection of a retail food store shall be performed in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Code, 77 Il. Adm. Code 615.310 et seq. Additional inspections of the retail food store shall be performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008)  
5-4-11 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any retail food store at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article. The Health Authority shall be permitted to examine the records of the retail food store to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used.  
5-4-12 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a retail store is made, the findings will be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. The inspection report shall summarize the requirements of this Article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to be made. A perfect score is 100 points. Each violation is categorized and has a corresponding value. To calculate the score, the point value for each violation is deducted from the 100 point score. A copy of the completed Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed Inspection Report Form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008)  
5-4-13 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified or, if not specified, as set forth below. 
A.  All violations of four or five weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but within ten days following inspection. Within 15 days after the inspection, the Health Authority shall receive from the operator a written report stating that the four or five point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction. 
B.  All one or two point weighted items shall be corrected within a specified period of time or as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection. 
C.  When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within 48 hours, unless otherwise specified. One or more re-inspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction. 
D.  In the case of temporary retail food store, all violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease retail food operations until authorized to resume by the Health Authority. 
E.  If an imminent health hazard occurs or exists because of an emergency occurrence such as a sewage backup, fire, flood, possible disease transmission, smoke damage, waterline break, power outage, refrigeration failure, cessation of potable running water or similar event, the establishment shall immediately cease operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008)  
5-4-14 - EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF ADULTERATED OR MISBRANDED FOOD 
Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article. The Health Authority may, upon written notice to the operator or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes to be in violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores of the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rule 2.01, 2.02, 2.03, 2.04, 2.05, 2.06, 2.07, or any other rule of this Article. The Health Authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to the hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The Health Authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at the hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the operator or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Article.  
5-4-15 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a retail food store is constructed, altered or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a retail food store, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials of work areas, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. All newly constructed, altered or remodeled retail food stores shall conform in its construction to the requirements of this Article.  
5-4-16 - PRE OPENING INSPECTION 
Whenever plans and specifications are required to be submitted by Section 5-4-15 of this Article, the Health Authority shall inspect the retail food store prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this Article.  
5-4-17 - RATING SCORE 
Establishments shall maintain a sanitation level that will result in an inspectional rating score above 60. 
(Ord. No. 2008-20, 4-7-2008)  
5-4-18 - INTERPRETATIONS 
Interpretation of the provisions of the Park Ridge regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores, Chapter 4, shall be based on the current edition of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, Model Food Code. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 5 - SANITARY VENDING OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES 
SECTION 
 
5-5-1 - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE 
The State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations, pertaining to the sanitary vending of food and beverages and any future revisions or amendments thereto are hereby adopted as a Municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part thereof.  
5-5-2 - UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE RULES AND REGULATIONS OF ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a food or beverage vending machine within the City, as hereinafter defined, to violate any of the terms and provisions of the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations pertaining to the Sanitary Vending of Food and Beverages.  
5-5-3 - PUBLICATION IN PAMPHLET FORM 
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to publish said Rules and Regulations herein adopted by reference by maintaining one copy thereof for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk in the City.  
5-5-4 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any time when the operator or any employee is present, upon any private or public property within the City, or its police jurisdiction, where vending machines or commissaries are operated, or from which such machines are otherwise serviced, for the purpose of determining compliance with this Article. The operator shall make provision for the Health Authority to have access, either in company with an employee or otherwise, to the interior of all vending machines operated by him. The Health Authority shall be permitted to examine records to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used.  
5-5-5 - COMMISSARIES OUTSIDE JURISDICTION OF THE HEALTH AUTHORITY 
Food from outside the jurisdiction of the City may be sold within the City if such commissaries conform to the provisions of the Food Service Establishment Sanitation Regulations of the City, or equivalent provisions. To determine extent of compliance with such provisions, the Health Authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in the jurisdictions where the commissary or commissaries are located.  
5-5-6 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a food or beverage machine is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. A copy of the completed Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the vending machines at the conclusion of the inspection. The inspection report shall summarize the requirements of this Article. The completed Inspection Report Form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.  
5-5-7 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
A.  The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period specified or as soon as possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection. 
B.  If an imminent health hazard occurs or exists because of an emergency occurrence such as a sewage backup, fire, flood, possible disease transmission, smoke damage, waterline break, power outage, refrigeration failure, cessation of potable running water or similar event, the vending machine shall immediately cease operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Health Authority.  
5-5-8 - EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF ADULTERATED OR MISBRANDED FOOD 
Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article. The Health Authority may, upon written notice to the operator or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes to be in violation of the Rules and Regulations pertaining to the Sanitary Vending of Food and Beverages of the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health Rule 1.01, 1.20, 2.01, or any other rule of this Article. The Health Authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to the hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment where the vending machine is located. The Health Authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at the hearing the hold order may be vacated, or the operator or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Article.  
5-5-9 - INTERPRETATIONS 
Interpretation of the provisions of the Park Ridge regulations pertaining to the Sanitation of Retail Food Stores, Chapter 4, shall be based on the current edition of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, Model Food Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 6 - BODY CARE ESTABLISHMENTS 
SECTION 
 
5-6-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Body Care Establishment. A store, establishment or place of business in which one or more persons are engaged in the practice of nail technology, esthetics, naprapathy, acupuncture, barbering, or cosmetology. The practice of nail technology, esthetics, naprapathy, acupuncture, barbering, and cosmetology shall have the meaning as specified in Chapter 225 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
Equipment. Includes but is not limited to counters, refrigerators, sinks, washing machines, dryers, handrails, and similar items other than furniture used in the operation of a body care establishment. 
Furniture. Includes but is not limited to tables, chairs, stools, and similar items other than equipment used in the operation of a body care establishment. 
Health Authority. The Environmental Health Officer of the City or his designated representative, and such assistants as may be acting under his direction and authority. 
Operator. Any person responsible for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating, or practicing nail technology, esthetics, naprapathy, acupuncture, barbering, and cosmetology at a body care establishment. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.  
5-6-2 - STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Floors, floor coverings and walls in areas where hair is cut or washed shall be constructed of a smooth, easily cleanable and non-absorbent material. Floors, walls and ceilings in areas that may be exposed to water or steam such as toilet rooms and showers shall be constructed of a smooth, non-absorbent and easily cleanable material. 
B.  Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall provide a minimum of 30-foot candles of light in hair cutting and dressing areas. 
C.  The ventilation in body care establishments shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Code. The ventilation system shall be designed to properly remove any potential air contaminants specific to the type of body care establishment. 
D.  The plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. An adequate supply of both hot and cold running water shall be provided. 
E.  The minimum number of toilet fixtures as required by this Code shall be provided. Toilet fixtures shall be of a sanitary design and readily cleanable. Toilet facilities, including rooms and fixtures, shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair. Toilet tissue shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials and such receptacles in toilet room used by women shall be covered. 
F.  Body care establishments shall provide at least one service sink. 
G.  In addition to the plumbing fixture requirements contained in this Code, body care establishment shall provide a lavatory that is located in or in close proximity to each room used for nail technology, esthetics, naprapathy, acupuncture, barbering, or cosmetology in order to permit convenient use by all employees before and after serving a patron. 
H.  The building, structure or portion thereof where a body care establishment is located shall be maintained in conformance to Article 22 entitled, "Property Maintenance Code". 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-6-3 - SANITARY REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Employee outer clothing shall be clean. 
B.  Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands immediately before and after serving a patron and immediately after using the toilet. 
C.  All towels, sheets or other cloth materials shall be properly laundered after each use. 
D.  Soiled linens shall be stored in covered non-absorbent containers or washable laundry bags. 
E.  All powders, lotions, creams and other cosmetics shall be kept in clean covered containers, which are properly labeled and shall be dispensed in a sanitary manner. Alum or other astringents used to stop the flow of blood shall be applied in powdered or liquid form only. The stick form shall not be used. 
F.  No animal or pets shall be kept in or allowed to enter a body care establishment. This exclusion does not apply to support animals trained to assist disabled persons. 
G.  Unless disposable blades are used, razors, after having been stropped and before being placed on the skin of the patron, shall be dipped into a sanitizing solution. 
H.  Clean towels, sheets, or other cloth materials, shall be stored in a sanitary manner. Employees shall use separate and clean towel, sheet or other cloth material for each patron. Unless a separate and clean apron or cape is used for each patron, a separate and clean towel or fresh paper shall be place around the neck to prevent the apron or cape from touching the skin. Headrests shall be covered with a separate clean towel or fresh paper for each patron or they may be thoroughly sanitized after each patron. 
I.  All implements, instruments, equipment and furniture including combs, brushes, scissors, tweezers, razors, headrests, neck dusters, shears, head coverings, hairpins, bobby pins, curlers, etc., used in a body care establishment shall be thoroughly sanitized, with a compound that has the same germicidal effect as 100 parts per million of available chlorine as a hypochlorite, after having been used on or in contact with a patron and shall be stored in a sanitary manner thereafter. In acupuncture establishments, only pre-sterilized, single-use, disposable needles shall be used. 
J.  Body care establishments shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Floors, walls, furniture, equipment and other fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair. Hair droppings shall be stored in a covered waste container. Acupuncture needles shall be stored and disposed as required in the State Regulations for potentially infectious medical waste.  
5-6-4 - HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL OF PERSONNEL 
No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a body care establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of contaminating anything with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals; nor shall any service be performed on any person known to have any such disease or condition, unless adequate measures are used to prevent transmission. 
The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
A.  The immediate exclusion of that person from any body care establishment. 
B.  The adequate medical and bacteriological examination of the person, of his associates, and his and their body discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-6-5 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
Inspections of body care establishments may be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this Article.  
5-6-6 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any body care establishment at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article.  
5-6-7 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a body care establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. The Inspection Report Form shall summarize the requirements of this article. A copy of the Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.  
5-6-8 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period specified or as soon as possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection.  
5-6-9 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a body care establishment is constructed, altered, or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a beauty/barber shop, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction, altered or remodeled beauty/barber shops shall conform in their construction to the requirements of this Article.  
5-6-10 - PRE-OPENING INSPECTION 
The Health Authority shall inspect a body care establishment prior to the start of Operations to determine compliance with the requirement of this Article.  
5-6-11 - STATE LICENSE 
No person may engage in the practice of nail technology, esthetics, naprapathy, acupuncture, barbering, or cosmetology in the City of Park Ridge without a license from the State of Illinois as required by Chapter 225 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
CHAPTER 7 - LAUNDRIES 
SECTION 
 
5-7-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Laundry. Any establishment where washing, cleaning, dyeing, or repair of fabric or wearing apparel takes place on the premises.  
5-7-2 - HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL OF PERSONNEL 
No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or any acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a laundry establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of contaminating anything with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals; and no person known or suspected of being affected with any such disease or condition shall be employed in any such area or capacity. If the manager or person in charge of the establishment has reason to suspect that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease, he shall notify the Health Authority immediately. The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
A.  The immediate exclusion of that person from any laundry activities. 
B.  The clothing, which may have been handled by the suspected employee, shall be re-cleaned. 
C.  The adequate medical and bacteriological examination of the person, of his associates, and his and their body discharges.  
5-7-3 - HYGIENIC PRACTICES 
Employees shall conform to good hygienic practices. 
A.  Employees shall consume food only in designated dining areas. An employee dining area shall not be so designated if consuming food there may result in contamination of clean laundry, equipment or utensils. 
B.  Employees shall not use tobacco in any form while engaged in handling clean laundry. Employees shall use tobacco only in designated areas. An employee tobacco use area shall not be designated for the purpose if the use of tobacco there may result in the contamination of clean laundry. 
C.  Employees shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and shall conform to good hygienic practices during working periods in laundry establishments.  
5-7-4 - TOILET FACILITIES 
Each laundry establishment shall be provided with adequate, conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees. Toilet fixtures shall be of a sanitary design and readily cleanable. Toilet facilities, including rooms and fixtures, shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet tissue shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials, and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. When toilet facilities are provided for patrons, such facilities shall meet the requirements of this Section.  
5-7-5 - COIN-OPERATED CLEANING FACILITIES 
Every coin-operated cleaning facility or establishment wherein cleaning of any material is accomplished or undertaken by carbon tetrachloride, perchlorethylene, or any other hydro-carbon or chlorinated hydro-carbon, naphtha or any other chemical, shall be attended by at least one attendant during all hours of operation.  
5-7-6 - PROVISION FOR CLEANLINESS AND SANITARY CONDITION 
Every place used as a laundry or dry cleaning establishment shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, including, but not limited to its floors, sidewalls, ceilings, woodwork, fixtures, tools, machinery and utensils. All rooms used in connection with such laundry or dry cleaning establishment shall be provided with adequate ventilation by means of windows, air shafts, air ducts or other mechanical apparatus, if needed, so as at all times to insure a free circulation of fresh air in such laundry or dry cleaning establishment. In any laundry or dry cleaning establishment maintained or operated under the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be arranged that all water upon the floor of any such washroom shall immediately run into drains or gutters to be connected with the sewers of the City and every such laundry or dry cleaning establishment shall be provided with adequate plumbing and drainage facilities, including wash sinks and water faucets.  
5-7-7 - NO CONTACT BETWEEN CLEAN AND SOILED ARTICLES 
In any laundry or dry cleaning establishment maintained or operated under the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be arranged that no soiled linen or clothing shall come in contact with clean laundry, and that no clean wearing apparel shall be packaged in containers in which soiled wearing apparel have been received, unless said containers have been cleaned and sanitized as approved by the Health Authority.  
5-7-8 - LAUNDRY ROOMS NOT USED FOR GENERAL LIVING PURPOSES 
No apartments or rooms used for the purpose of washing, starching, ironing or drying wearing apparel, table or bed linen, towels or other clothes in any laundry or dry cleaning establishment, shall be used by any person for general living, cooking or sleeping purposes.  
5-7-9 - DRAINS AND VENTILATION 
Rooms including toilet rooms, areas and equipment, from which aerosols, obnoxious odors or noxious fumes or vapors may originate, shall be vented effectively to the outside in compliance with all City and State statutes, ordinances and regulations. All plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois State Plumbing Code and the Park Ridge Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-7-10 - ANIMALS 
Animals shall be excluded from any room in a laundry where clean clothing is stored or handled.  
5-7-11 - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 
The building, structure or portion thereof where a laundry is located shall be maintained in conformance to Article 22 entitled, "Property Maintenance Code". 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-7-12 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
Inspections of laundries shall be performed at least once every 12 months. Additional inspections of the laundries shall be performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article.  
5-7-13 - ACCESS 
The Environmental Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any laundry at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article.  
5-7-14 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a laundry is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. The Inspection Report Form shall summarize the requirements of this Article. A copy of the Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed Inspection Report Form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.  
5-7-15 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period specified or as soon as possible.  
5-7-16 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a laundry is constructed, altered or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a laundry, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials of work areas, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. All newly constructed, altered or remodeled laundries shall conform in their construction to the requirements of this Article.  
5-7-17 - PRE-OPENING INSPECTION 
The Environmental Health Officer shall inspect a laundry prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 8 - ANIMALS[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010. 
 
5-8-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Animal. Any vertebrate creature except homo sapiens. 
At large. To be off the premises of the owner, not confined or under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family over 12 years of age by a leash. 
At-risk animal. 
A.  Any animal that has inflicted a single unprovoked bite or nip on a person's extremity without abrading the skin; or 
B.  Any animal that has inflicted an unprovoked single bite on another domestic animal and did not maul the other animal; or 
C.  Any individual animal that has a trait, characteristic, or generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness, or unprovoked attacks upon persons or other domestic animals; or 
D.  Any animal which has been declared by the Animal Commission, in consultation with the Health Authority, to have exhibited any of the traits or behaviors described in (A) through (C) above; or 
E.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter, no animal shall be deemed At-Risk solely on the grounds that it (1) bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its Owner; (2) harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it; or (3) bites, attacks, or menaces (but does not maul) another domestic animal in a dog park owned by a park district organized under the laws of the State of Illinois. 
Bite. Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any cat, dog or other animal capable of transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been wounded, pierced or has incurred a break or abrasion of the skin. 
Cat. All members of the classification, Felis catus. 
Confined. Restriction of the cat, dog or other animal at all times by the owner in a manner that will isolate the cat, dog or other animal from the public and other cats, dogs or other animals. 
Dangerous animal. 
A.  Any animal that has inflicted an unprovoked bite or attack on a person resulting in injuries that include, but are not limited to broken skin or that has bitten, attacked, or mauled another domestic animal, and has inflicted an injury greater than that described in Paragraph B of the definition of "At-Risk Animal"; or 
B.  Any dog which has been trained as an attack dog or guard dog, except such dogs which may be used by or at the direction of the Park Ridge Police Department; or 
C.  Any animal which has been declared by the Animal Commission, upon consultation with the Health Authority, to have exhibited any of the traits or behaviors described in (A) above; or 
D.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter, no animal shall be deemed dangerous solely on the grounds that it (1) bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its Owner; (2) harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it; or (3) bites, attacks, or menaces (but does not maul) another domestic animal in a dog park owned by a park district organized under the laws of the State of Illinois; or 
E.  Any individual animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of persons or other animals. 
Dog. All members of the classification, Canis familiaris. 
Guard dog. A dog used in commercial business or by a Municipal department for the purposes of patrol and protection. 
Leash. A cord, thong or chain not more than ten feet in length, by which an animal is controlled by the person accompanying it. 
Maul. To injure (1) due to failure to release upon submission; (2) by inflicting multiple bites that break the skin in multiple places; or (3) by shaking and/or pulling of bitten animal or person that exacerbates damage to animal or person or otherwise inflicting similar, serious injuries. 
Owner. (Animal) Includes any person owning, harboring, or keeping an animal, and the occupant of any premises on which an animal remains or to which it customarily returns daily is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal within the meaning of this Article. 
Proper control. On the enclosed premises of its Owner or on a leash and under the control of a person of age and capacity to restrain the animal in a reasonable and responsible manner. 
Service animal. An animal trained in obedience and task skills to meet the needs of a disabled person. 
Stray animal. Any animal that is at large. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, 8-21-2006; Ord. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-2 - LICENSE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog or cat within the City unless a dog or cat license shall have first been secured from the City. Each day such dog or cat does not have a license shall constitute a separate offense. Any unlicensed dog or cat is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. No license for a Dangerous Animal shall be issued to an Owner who is renting a residential premises unless the landlord has issued a signed consent that the Dangerous Animal is allowed to reside on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-3 - APPLICATION 
Applications for dog or cat licenses shall be made to the Department of Finance and shall state the name, breed, sex, color and the Cook County Rabies Inoculation Certification Number of the dog or cat proposed to be licensed. No license shall be issued for any dog or cat unless such dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law.  
5-8-4 - FEES 
Any Owner of any dog or cat within the City shall pay an annual tax or license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each such dog or cat, except that (A) Any Owner of any At-Risk Animal shall pay an annual tax or license fee of twenty-five ($25.00) for each At-Risk Animal; and (B) any Owner of any Dangerous Animal shall pay an annual tax or license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each Dangerous Animal. With respect to a Dangerous Animal, each Owner shall provide evidence of a current owner's or renter's insurance policy covering the address where the Dangerous Animal is kept or resides. 
Such annual tax or license fee shall be payable immediately upon the acquiring of any unlicensed dog or cat, and shall be valid for the remainder of the term of issue. Licenses shall be valid for one year from and after June 15 of each year, and the annual license fee shall be due and payable on June 15 of each year. The license fee shall be reduced by 50% if the applicant obtained the animal after December 15 of the license year or if the applicant was not a resident of the City prior to December 15 of the license year. 
(Ord. 2006-30, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-5 - REGISTRATION AND TAG 
The Department of Finance shall keep a record of all licenses issued on which shall also be entered the number of the license tag issued, as herein provided. The Department of Finance shall provide each year such number of metallic tags, having stamped thereon the term for which the license is paid, and also the number of the tag, and it shall be the duty of the Department of Finance to deliver one of said metallic tags numbered to correspond with the number of the registry of said dog or cat to the person having paid the license upon any such dog or cat. Such license tag shall be attached to a collar securely placed and kept about the neck of the dog in addition to a current Cook County Rabies Inoculation Tag. For cats, such license tags may either be attached to a collar placed and kept about the neck of the cat or kept by the owner as evidence of having obtained a license for his or her cat.  
5-8-6 - DOGS, CATS, NUMBER LIMITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the City more than a combined total of four dogs and/or cats over the age of three months in or about any dwelling unit. Violation of this Section 5-8-6 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-52, 9-19-2011)  
5-8-7 - DOGS AND CATS AT LARGE 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a dog to run or be at large within the corporate limits of the City. Any dog found running or being at large within the corporate limits of the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a cat to run or be at large within the corporate limits of the City unless such cat is neutered; inoculated against rabies; licensed for the current year; and wearing a tag identifying the owner of such cat. Any cat which is not neutered, inoculated against rabies, licensed for the current year, and wearing a tag identifying the owner of such cat found running or being at large within the corporate limits of the City is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
C.  The Health Authority or any authorized member of the Police Department may order any cat creating a public nuisance by its howling, viciousness, defecation, killing of wildlife or repeated unwanted presence confined to its owner's premises regardless of whether such cat is neutered, inoculated against rabies, licensed for the current year, and wearing a tag identifying the owner of such cat. It shall be unlawful for any person that has been issued a notice ordering the confinement of the cat owned by such person to permit such cat to run or be at large within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. 2007-43, 5-21-2007)  
5-8-8 - IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS 
A.  Animals may be impounded in any of the following circumstances: 
1.  If the animal has been deemed a public nuisance in accordance with this Chapter; 
2.  If the owner or keeper of an animal fails to take it to a licensed veterinary hospital in accordance with Section 5-8-12; 
3.  If the animal is dangerous, mad, vicious, suffering from rabies or has bitten another animal inflicted with rabies in accordance with Section 5-8-16; 
4.  If the animal is an animal prohibited by Section 5-8-18; 
5.  If the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal as defined by this Chapter and is not kept confined within a building or secure enclosure in accordance with Section 5-8-20; and 
6.  If the animal is being treated cruelly or improperly as described in Section 5-8-23. 
B.  Whenever an animal is impounded, the owner, when known, will be notified that the animal has been impounded and of the process for redemption of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-43, 5-21-2007)  
5-8-9 - ANIMAL NOISE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his or her animal to bark, whine, howl, or in any manner disturb the quiet of any person or neighborhood so as to cause an annoyance or discomfort to the public. All such animals are hereby declared a public nuisance.  
5-8-10 - ANIMAL BITES 
Any animal, which bites or injures any person so as to cause an abrasion of skin, shall be taken by the owner within 24 hours to a licensed veterinary hospital to be examined and confined for a period of ten days all at the expense and cost of the owner or keeper of such animal. Exceptions: 
A.  If the Police Department is presented with evidence that such animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law prior to the biting, such animal shall be confined in the house of its owner for a period of ten days. At the end of the ten-day period, the owner is responsible to ensure that the animal shall again be examined by a licensed veterinarian. 
B.  If the animal does not have a valid rabies inoculation and a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal may be confined in the house of its' owner, such animal shall again be examined by a licensed veterinarian on the fifth day after the first examination and then again on the tenth day. 
C.  Owners of guard dogs that have bitten a person in performance of guard duty and have been officially registered with Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control shall not be required to obtain a veterinary examination of the dog, but shall report the health of the animal to the Police Department and the Cook County Department of Animals and Rabies Control on the first and tenth day following the bite. 
D.  If during the ten-day home confinement time period an animal bites or attacks another person, the animal's owner or keeper shall be required to immediately place such animal in a duly licensed veterinary hospital where such animal shall be confined for ten days, all at the expense and cost of the owner or keeper of such animal, which said expense and cost shall be paid on demand. 
E.  In all cases where the animal dies for any reason before the tenth day following the bite, the owner shall forthwith deliver the animal to the Police Department from where it will be sent for rabies virus analysis. 
F.  When an animal confined for biting shows signs of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead a person to believe that such animal may have rabies, the owner or veterinarian shall notify the Police Department and the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control immediately by telephone or in person of these signs. The Police Department shall immediately notify the physician attending the victim and if the animal is in home confinement, advise the owner that the animal is to be examined by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner. In the event that the owner fails to furnish proof of compliance within 24 hours, the Police Department shall immediately notify the City Attorney who shall seek an immediate order compelling compliance by the owner. 
G.  In the event it is documented that any animal has bitten or caused personal injury on three separate occasions wherein the victim required medical treatment or such animal has caused a severe personal injury in an unprovoked attack on one occasion wherein the victim's injuries were classified by the attending physician as being life threatening or the animal has caused the death of a person or domestic animal on one occasion, it shall be the duty of the owner to make provisions for the animal's destruction within 72 hours after the most recent injury when the injury is a bite attributed to the animal. The animal shall then be delivered to the Police Department from where it will be sent for rabies virus analysis. 
H.  In the event the owner does not comply with subsection G of this Section within the 72 hours, the Police Department is empowered to make provision for the animal's destruction with the owner paying all costs. The animal shall then be sent for rabies virus analysis. 
I.  Owners of caged rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats and mice that have been owned over 30 days shall not be required to obtain a veterinary examination when their caged animal has bitten a person, but shall report the health of the biting animal by telephone or in person to the Police Department and the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control on the first and tenth day following the bite. 
If the caged animal has been owned less than 30 days, the owner shall be required to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian on the date of the bite and then again at the end of ten days. The owner shall report the incident to the Police Department and the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control. 
J.  Stray animals including cats and dogs that have bitten a person shall be apprehended and held for ten days or less. In the event the officer cannot apprehend a biting stray animal without subjecting himself to bodily injury, the animal may be destroyed (without unnecessary damage to the head) by the police officer or any designated person. When the biting stray animal is not held for ten days, it shall be destroyed in a humane manner unless otherwise directed by the Police Chief. The animal shall then be sent for rabies virus analysis. 
K.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal when notified that such animal has bitten any person or has injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of skin, to sell, give away or dispose of said animal until such animal has been examined by a licensed veterinarian after the ten-day confinement period. 
L.  Any animal that cannot be safely taken up without subjection to bodily injury may be destroyed, without unnecessary damage to the head, by a police officer or any duly authorized person. Whenever an animal is destroyed by such persons, the animal shall be sent for rabies virus analysis unless it has been determined that such animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law. 
M.  If an animal without provocation attacks or injures any person or other animal the Owner of the animal shall, in addition to any civil proceedings between the private parties, be in violation of this Chapter for failure to properly control the animal, as defined in this Chapter, and shall be subject to penalties as set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, 8-21-2006; Ord. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-11 - ANIMAL BITE REPORT PROCEDURES 
The Police Department is empowered to investigate all animal bite incidents. The Department shall accept bite reports from medical victims and their families, animal owners and any other person having knowledge of a bite.  
5-8-12 - FAILURE TO TAKE ANIMAL TO LICENSED VETERINARIAN 
In the event that such owner or keeper of any animal upon receiving notice that his animal has bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of skin fails to take such animal to a licensed veterinary hospital within 24 hours, it shall be lawful for any police officer to seize and impound such animal at a licensed veterinary hospital where it shall be confined for ten days at the expense of the owner payable on demand.  
5-8-13 - REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS 
Any animal impounded under the provisions of this Chapter may be redeemed by any person within seven days from the date of impounding. Except that if an animal has been impounded after biting or causing injury to any person, such animal shall not be redeemable until after a full ten-day confinement period. Animals may be redeemed upon payment by such person to the pound keeper or to the person in charge of the impounded animal for the City, the following sums: 
A.  A redemption fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) to the City of Park Ridge for the first impoundment in a calendar year, a redemption fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City of Park Ridge for the second impoundment in a calendar year and a redemption fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) to the City of Park Ridge for the third impoundment in a calendar year. 
B.  If the dog or cat has not been licensed for the current year, then the amount of the license fee, and 
C.  If unable to present proof of current rabies inoculation, and registration, the cost for the rabies inoculation and registration. 
D.  The cost for the board of the animal for the period it was impounded. The cost of keeping impounded animals shall be determined from time to time by the City Manager. 
E.  The cost for any required examination by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-14 - FAILURE TO REDEEM IMPOUNDED ANIMALS 
If such animal is not redeemed within seven days after being impounded or if the owner of an animal that has been impounded is unknown and the animal is not redeemed within five days, the pound keeper or the person in charge of the pound shall: cause such animal to be destroyed in a humane manner and the body thereof to be incinerated; or, offered for adoption; or, otherwise disposed of by the pound as a stray animal in accordance with all laws that exist or may hereafter exist. If the animal impounded is under confinement for rabies observation and is not redeemed within four days following the final examination, such animal shall be dealt with as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, 8-21-2006)  
5-8-15 - RECORDS OF DELIVERY OF ANIMALS 
The Police Chief shall cause to be kept under his direction a record of the disposition of each animal redeemed, destroyed, delivered to an institution or otherwise disposed of, and shall in said record note the date of disposition and the name of the person to whom said animal has been delivered, together with the amount so paid by such person.  
5-8-16 - ANIMAL REMOVAL 
If the owner of any dangerous, mad or vicious animal, or any animal suffering from rabies, or any animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies refuses to deliver such animal to a police officer or any person duly authorized hereunder upon request, such officer may, without warrant, enter upon the premises where such animal is located to seize and impound such animal. In the event such officer cannot seize any such animal without subjecting himself to bodily injury, he may destroy it. Knowledge by such officer of one or more of the foregoing facts, the affidavit of a citizen of the City stating same or a certificate from a licensed veterinarian that such animal is suffering from rabies, shall be authorization for such officer to enter such premises and either impound such animal or destroy it.  
5-8-17 - HUNTING 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully hunt or engage in killing any animal in the City other than prescribed by law or ordinance.  
5-8-18 - PROHIBITED ANIMALS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any cattle, goats, swine, horses, poultry, fowl or pigeons of any kind, nature or description or any animal defined as a dangerous animal in 720 ILCS 585/0.1 et seq. All cattle, goats, swine, horses, poultry, fowl or pigeons or any animal defined as a dangerous animal in 720 ILCS 585/0.1 et seq. so harbored, kept or maintained are declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-68, 8-21-2006)  
5-8-19 - MAINTAINING PENS 
It shall be unlawful to own, keep or use any yard, pen, place or premises in or upon which any permitted animal shall be confined, kept or harbored so as to create a public health or safety hazard or public nuisance.  
5-8-20 - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
Owners of Dangerous Animals shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All Dangerous Animals must be confined within a building or secure enclosure approved by the Police Chief or his/her designee. 
B.  Whenever the Dangerous Animal is off the premises of its Owner it must be securely muzzled and confined by a leash or cage and must be under the direct control and supervision of the Owner or a family member, 16 years of age or older. The leash shall not be more than six feet in length. 
C.  Within ten days after receiving the designation of a "Dangerous Animal", the Owner of a Dangerous Animal shall post City-approved signage on all entrances to the Owner's property. Such sign shall state, "Dangerous Animal". The lettering shall be clearly legible and at least two inches in height. The sign shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the fence enclosing the yard of the residence or gate thereto. Where a Dangerous Animal is also kept within the residence, the sign shall be posted at all entrance doors to the building or residence. 
D.  No Dangerous Animal may be permitted outside the building where it resides except if it is: (1) crated; or (2) under Proper Control; or (3) in a self-locking enclosure consisting of a solid or chain link fence that is not more than five feet in height with no means of escape. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall allow any exceptions to any requirements in the Zoning Ordinance. All gates on fences at residences and on enclosures where a dangerous animal is kept or resides shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching mechanisms designed to securely close and lock the gate. 
E.  No Dangerous Animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dangerous animal to exit the building or premises on its own volition. No such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen doors or screen windows are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
F.  Any person owning or harboring or having the care of a Dangerous Animal shall maintain an insurance policy in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) insuring the person against any claim, loss, damage or injury to persons, domestic animals, or property resulting from the acts of the Dangerous Animal. Such person shall produce evidence of such insurance upon the request of a police officer and/or animal control officer and shall present evidence of such insurance as a condition to obtain an animal license. 
G.  Every Owner of a Dangerous Animal must spay/neuter the animal at the Owner's expense and have an identifying microchip implanted in the Dangerous Animal at the Owner's expense. The microchip must be implanted by a veterinarian. The Owner or keeper shall provide the microchip number to the Finance Department for inclusion in the licensing records. 
H.  The Owner of an animal deemed or designated by the Animal Commission to be a Dangerous Animal may appeal the designation by filing a written request with the City Manager, within ten days of such designation for review of the designation. The request shall include proof that that animal has a current City license and facts to support the Owner's belief that the animal is not a Dangerous Animal. The City Manager shall render a written decision within 14 business days of receipt of the request for review. The review process may be conducted by written correspondence and non face-to-face interview or hearing is necessary. 
I.  The Dangerous Animal must receive private obedience training from a certified, licensed trainer and have passed the obedience test related to the training within 90 days of being designated as a Dangerous Animal. 
J.  No Dangerous Animal may be kept at and no City license shall be issued for ownership of a Dangerous Animal for a residence that is within 500 feet of a school, public park, playground, daycare facility, or other similar facility. This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Dangerous Animals who reside at such a residence prior to the effective date of this amendatory ordinance of 2010 and for whom valid City licenses evidencing such residency has previously been obtained, or 
2.  Dangerous Animals who reside at a residence within 500 feet of a school, public park, playground, daycare facility, or other similar facility that is constructed after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance of 2010 and for whom valid City licenses evidencing such residency has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-21 - REFUSAL TO REMOVE ANIMALS 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any animal which is a public nuisance or a public health or safety hazard to refuse or neglect to remove or kill or cause such animal to be removed or killed contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.  
5-8-22 - CONTROL OF DEFECATION 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have in his or her immediate possession an appropriate device for removing animal excrement whenever such person permits or causes an animal under his or her control to be on property not owned or possessed by such person. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to remove the excrement left by any animal under his or her control that was deposited on any public or private property not owned or possessed by such person. Excrement that is removed shall be placed in a standard refuse container located upon the property owned or possessed by the person in control of such animal. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow animal excrement to accumulate in any yard, pen, building, structure or premises so as to cause an annoyance or discomfort to the public. The accumulation of animal excrement is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.  
5-8-23 - ANIMAL CARE 
A.  No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
B.  No person shall beat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal. 
C.  No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct or carry on any animal fight or any other type of contest, game or fight of a similar nature, nor any simulated version of same that involves baiting or inciting an animal toward intent to fight. 
D.  No person shall be permitted to keep animals to violation of the "Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act" or the "Illinois Animal Welfare Act" in Chapter 8 of the Illinois Revised Statutes. 
E.  No owner may abandon any animal. 
F.  No person shall keep any animal within a building, structure or vehicle or upon any premises without food, water or proper care and attention for a period of time sufficient to cause undue discomfort or suffering. If the owner cannot be located after reasonable search, or if the owner shall be known to be absent due to injury, illness, incarceration or other involuntary circumstance, it shall be the duty of the Department of Police to act upon the complaint as directed by the "Illinois Humane Care for Animals Act". 
G.  No person shall bring or cause to have brought into the City, sell, offer for sale, barter or display living baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl, turtles or rabbits which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color or give away as pets or sell, offer for barter or give away at no cost or as novelties or prizes. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit legitimate commerce in poultry for agriculture or food purposes. 
H.  No person shall keep or permit to be kept or display for exhibition purposes any wild animal contrary to Federal, State or Local laws or regulations. 
I.  No person shall allow animal feces to accumulate in any yard, pen or premises in or upon which an animal shall be confined or kept so that it becomes a health hazard to the residing animal. 
J.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal which: 
1.  Runs uncontrolled; 
2.  Molests persons or chases vehicles; 
3.  Attacks other animals; 
4.  Damages property other than the owner's. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-8-24 - POWERS OF ENFORCING OFFICERS 
The enforcing officers of this Chapter are hereby given specific power to make investigations and inspections and for that purpose may enter buildings, structures and premises without warrant in order to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to that end are hereby empowered to make such orders, requirements, decisions and determinations as are necessary with respect to the enforcement of this Chapter.  
5-8-25 - INTERFERENCE 
No person shall hinder or molest the Police Chief, or any police officer or any person duly authorized hereunder, while engaged in the performance of any duty enjoined by the provisions of this Chapter and any person so hindering or molesting said Police Chief, police officer, or such other person as authorized, shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-8-26 - AT-RISK ANIMALS 
Owners of At-Risk Animals shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Whenever the At-Risk Animal is off the premises of its Owner it must be securely leashed or in a cage and must be under the direct control and supervision of the Owner or a family member, 16 years of age or older. The lease shall not be more than six feet in length. 
B.  Every Owner of an At-Risk Animal shall, at the Owner's expense, have an identifying microchip implanted in the At-Risk Animal by a veterinarian. The Owner or keeper shall provide the microchip number to the Finance Department for inclusion in the licensing records. 
C.  The Owner of an animal deemed or designated by the Animal Commission to be an At-Risk Animal may appeal the designation by filing a written request with the City Manager, within 10 days of such designation for review of the designation. The request shall include proof that that animal has a current City license and facts to support the Owner's belief that the animal is not At-Risk. The City Manager shall render a written decision within 14 business days of receipt of the request for review. The review process may be conducted by written correspondence and no face-to-face interview or hearing is necessary. 
D.  The At-Risk Animal must receive obedience training from a certified, licensed trainer and have passed the obedience test related to the training within 90 days of being designated as an At-Risk Animal. 
E.  Upon written request of the Owner, if an At-Risk Animal has had no further incidents, the Animal Commission, in its sole discretion, may withdraw the At-Risk Animal designation not less than two years after the At-Risk Animal has passed obedience training. If the request is denied, the Owner may file a written request with the City Manager, within ten days of the Animal Commission's decision, for review of the designation by following the procedure in Paragraph D above. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
5-8-27 - UNLAWFUL USE OF PREMISES 
No Person shall permit premises owned or controlled by him or her to be used for the purpose of dog fighting nor permit a dog to engage in dog fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait, or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 2010-15, 2-3-2010)  
CHAPTER 9 - DAY CARE CENTERS 
SECTION 
 
5-9-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Child. Means any person under 18 years of age. 
Cot. Means a portable bed, mattress, cushion, or similar pad which a child may use for sleeping or resting upon which may be placed directly on the floor or elevated not more than 12 inches above the floor. 
Day care center. "Day Care Center" means any childcare facility that receives more than eight children for daytime care during all or part of a day and/or is operating under a license issued by the State of Illinois. The term "Day Care Center" includes facilities commonly called "child care centers," "day nurseries," "nursery schools," "kindergartens," "pre schools," "play groups," and "centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped". 
Infant. Means a child from six weeks to 15 months of age. 
Parent(s). Person(s) assuming legal responsibility for the care and protection of a child on a 24-hour basis; including guardian or legal custodian. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-9-2 - COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS 
Every day care center within the City, as defined herein, shall be operated in conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City and State. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-9-3 - PHYSICAL PLANT 
A.  The building or portion of the building to which children from the center have access shall be used solely for a program of childcare during the hours that the center is in operation. 
B.  All walls, floors and ceilings, equipment, toys, furnishings and cribs shall be maintained in good repair and free from characteristics which may be hazardous or injurious to children including lead-based paint and sharp and rough edges. 
C.  A telephone shall be on the premises, easily accessible for use in an emergency. 
D.  The space used for an activity area shall not include space for exit passages and fire escapes, which must be clear, or administrative space, storage areas, bathroom, kitchen or other space required for equipment that is not used for direct activity with children. 
E.  Adequate storage space shall be provided for all equipment and supplies including cots and bedding. Equipment or supplies, which might be harmful to children, shall be kept in areas inaccessible to children. 
F.  Extension cords shall not be used. Electrical outlets not being used shall be covered or be otherwise shock resistant.  
5-9-4 - THERMAL AND LIGHTING PROVISIONS 
A.  Any thermal hazards (radiators, hot water pipes, steam pipes, heaters) shall be out of reach of the children by the use of partitions, screens or other means. 
B.  During the heating season and during periods of occupancy by children, the room temperature shall not be less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit and not more than 74 degrees measured three feet above the floor. The facility shall be provided with adequate natural or mechanical ventilation. 
C.  Areas where children read, play, or participate in other activities shall be equipped with lighting sufficient to provide a minimum of 50-foot candles measured two feet above the floor. Artificial light sources shall be protected from hazards of breakage by installation of covers or shields. 
D.  Windows shall be a minimum of two feet above the floor or shall be made inaccessible to children by means of screens, partitions or similar means. All windows shall be equipped with drapes, venetian blinds, or adjustable shades.  
5-9-5 - FURNISHINGS 
Furnishings and equipment shall be durable, safe and scaled to the size of the children and shall meet or exceed the following requirements: 
A.  Child size chairs shall be used. 
B.  Tables shall be of appropriate height and of a size to accommodate a comfortable small group of not more than eight to ten children. 
C.  Lockers, cubicles, or separate hooks and shelves shall be provided for each child's personal belongings, including towels, washcloths, combs and toothbrushes.  
5-9-6 - RECREATION AREA AND EQUIPMENT 
A.  Play space shall be safely enclosed or otherwise protected from traffic and other hazards, with protective surfaces such as grass, pea gravel, mulching and wood chips in areas where climbing apparatus is used and with surfaces suitable for children's wheeled vehicles and pull toys. 
B.  Play areas shall be well drained and maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. 
C.  If an area not connected with the facility such as a public park or playground is used for play or recreation, the children shall be closely supervised both during play and while traveling to and from the area. 
D.  Outdoor equipment shall be placed so as to avoid collisions and accidents while still permitting freedom of action by the children. 
E.  Supports for climbing apparatus and large equipment shall be securely fastened. 
F.  Sandboxes, if provided, shall be covered when not in use and shall be cleaned daily of animal fecal matter if present.  
5-9-7 - WATER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
Toilets and lavatories shall be readily accessible to the children and staff and shall meet or exceed the following requirements: 
A.  If toilets and lavatories are not child sized, safety steps shall be provided. 
B.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided. 
C.  Mild soap and sanitary towels shall be available and used. Common towels and common washcloths are prohibited. 
D.  Hot water supplied to lavatories, bathing facilities, and other plumbing fixtures used by children shall be tempered or thermostatically controlled to provide water at a minimum temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit (100 0 F) and a maximum temperature of not higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (120 0 F). 
E.  The following ratio of lavatories and toilet facilities shall be provided: 
Number of Children 
in Day Care Facility 	Toilet 	Lavatories 
1—10 	1 	1 
11—25 	2 	2 
26—50 	3 	3 
51—75 	4 	4 
76—100 	5 	5 
101—125 	6 	6 
126—150 	7 	7 
151—175 	8 	8 
 
F.  Bathroom door locks shall be openable from the outside. 
G.  Toilets shall be within close proximity to the children's activity areas. If this is not possible in existing facilities, an adult shall accompany children four years of age and younger. 
H.  Drinking water shall be available to children of all ages from an approved fountain and/or individual disposable cups. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-9-8 - FOOD SERVICES 
If food is served, the facilities shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code governing food service establishments.  
5-9-9 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Litter storage and disposal shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
5-9-10 - ANIMAL CARE AND PEST CONTROL 
Animal care and pest control shall be maintained at all times and shall meet or exceed the following requirements: 
A.  All outer openings shall be effectively protected against the entrance of insects and rodents by tight fitting self-closing doors, closed windows, screening or other means. 
B.  Pesticides and rodenticide shall be administered only by a certified pest control operator. Chemicals for insect and rodent control shall not be applied in areas accessible to children when children are present in the facility. 
C.  If the facility has dogs and cats, they shall be immunized for any disease which can be transmitted to humans. A licensed veterinarian shall certify that the animals are free of diseases communicable to the children and free of any vectors of disease. 
D.  The keeping of an animal shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code governing animals.  
5-9-11 - HOUSEKEEPING 
A.  Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. 
B.  Toys, table tops, furniture, toilets, refuse containers, beds and other equipment used by children shall be easily cleanable and shall be cleaned and sanitized at least once each week and when they become soiled or contaminated with matter such as food, body secretions, and/or excrement. 
C.  Only equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of the establishment shall be stored on the premises. The premises shall be free of any accumulation of litter.  
5-9-12 - SLEEPING 
A.  Day care facilities shall provide a separate crib, bed, or cot for each child. 
B.  No two children shall share the same cot, crib or bed in any day care facility unless separate sets of clean sheets and other bedding are provided each user, and the cot, crib, or bed has been sanitized. 
C.  Clean sheets or blankets shall be provided at least once a week or as frequently as needed when wet and soiled. 
D.  Waterproof mattress covers or undersheets for cribs, beds or cots shall be provided for all children who are bedwetters. 
E.  Each cot, bed or crib shall be identified with the name of the child. 
F.  When cots are in use, at least two feet of space on at least two sides between cots shall be provided. 
G.  Young infants who cannot turn over alone shall be placed on their abdomen for their naps and immediately after feeding unless a physician has ordered otherwise.  
5-9-13 - DIAPERING OF CHILDREN 
A.  The following equipment shall be provided: 
1.  If the child's cot, bed or crib is not used, a firm, non-porous, safe table that can be cleaned and sanitized may be used. 
2.  A handwashing sink shall be in the diaper changing area. 
3.  An easily cleanable covered container for soiled items including soiled disposable diapers or soiled cloth diapers shall be within reaching distance of the table. 
4.  Cleaning and sanitizing solutions, toweling, etc., shall be kept on a convenient shelf out of reach of children. 
B.  If a table is used, the table surface shall be cleaned and sanitized after each use with a fresh solution of an iodophor, phenolic, chlorine or any other approved sanitizing solution and dried. The chemical sanitizing agent shall provide the equivalent bactericidal effect of a solution containing 100 ppm of available chlorine. 
C.  Disposable diapers or a diaper service shall be used. 
D.  Responsibility of Personnel: 
1.  All personnel involved in diapering shall wash their hands after diapering each child. 
2.  Personnel shall discard soiled diapers in a covered container. 
E.  Cleaning of the child's skin: 
1.  Remove as much fecal matter as possible prior to cleansing. 
2.  Cleanse skin with mild soap and water. 
3.  Washcloths used for cleaning, if not disposable, must be placed immediately after use with soiled linens for laundering.  
5-9-14 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
A.  A first aid kit and a chart or handbook of first aid instructions that complies with the State of Illinois Licensing Standards for Day Care Centers shall be available for staff use. 
B.  Each facility must include a designated area for children who become ill. Such space shall be adequately ventilated and heated, and equipped with a bed or cot and materials that can be sanitized easily. Linen and disposable bedding shall be changed after each use. If the area is not a separate room it shall be separated from space used by other children by a partition, screen, or other suitable means. It shall be in close proximity to toilet and lavatory facilities, and where health and sanitation measures can be carried out without interruption of activities of other children and staff. 
C.  Medications shall be administered only upon the direction of a physician. 
D.  All toxic materials including medications and cleaning agents shall be properly labeled and stored in a segregated area inaccessible to children. 
E.  If formula or food is brought by the parent for his child, it shall be labeled and properly stored and served. 
F.  Hands of staff members shall be washed and dried before each feeding of individual children. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-9-15 - DISEASE CONTROL OF PERSONNEL 
No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a day care center in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of contaminating anything with pathogenic organisms, or transmitting disease to other individuals. 
The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
A.  The immediate exclusion of that person from any day care center activity. 
B.  The adequate medical and bacteriological examination of the person, of his associates, and his and their body discharges.  
5-9-16 - SWIMMING POOLS 
A.  All swimming pools shall be constructed and operated in conformance with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
B.  The use of portable wading pools, splash pools and other basins is prohibited.  
5-9-17 - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 
The building, structure or portion thereof where a day care center is located shall be maintained in conformance to Article 22 entitled, "Property Maintenance Code". 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-9-18 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
Inspections of day care centers may be performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article.  
5-9-19 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter a day care center at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article.  
5-9-20 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a day care center is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. The Inspection Report Form shall summarize the requirements of this Article. A copy of the Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.  
5-9-21 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period specified or as soon as possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection.  
5-9-22 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a day care center is constructed, altered or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a day care center, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials of work areas, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. All newly constructed, altered or remodeled day care centers shall conform in their construction to the requirements of this Article.  
5-9-23 - PRE-OPENING INSPECTION 
The Health Authority shall inspect a day care center prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the requirements of this Article.  
CHAPTER 10 - SWIMMING POOLS 
SECTION 
 
5-10-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Hot tub. A hydrotherapy spa constructed of wood with sides and bottom formed separately; and, the whole shaped to join together by pressure from surrounding hoops, bands or rods; as distinct from spa units formed of plastic, concrete, metal, and other materials. 
Private residential swimming pool. A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground; provided, further that such private residential swimming pool is maintained by a person or persons primarily for the sole use of members of dwelling units or guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. 
Public hydro therapy spa. A unit designed for public recreational and therapeutic use, which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each user. It may include, but not be limited to hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold-water mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa include, but is not limited to, therapeutic pool, hydrotherapy pool, whirlpool, hot spa, hot tubs, etc. This includes spas for community use, at apartments, condominiums and other groups or associations, clubs, churches, camps, schools, institutions, Y.M.C.A.'s, Y.W.C.A.'s, parks, motels, hotels and other commercial establishments. 
Swimming pool (Above ground). Any pool whose sides rest fully above the surrounding earth. 
Swimming pool (In ground). Any pool whose sides rest in partial or full contact with the earth. 
Wading pool (Public). A public pool used and intended only for small children and having a maximum depth of less than 30 inches. It is not used for swimming nor instruction in swimming. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-10-2 - COMPLIANCE 
Every private residential swimming pool and public swimming pool, wading pool, hydrotherapy spa and hot tub constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
5-10-3 - PUBLIC POOLS 
Public swimming and wading pools, their equipment and operation, shall comply with the minimum sanitary requirements for the design and operation of swimming pools and bathing beaches, prescribed under the "Illinois Swimming Facility Act, 210 ILCS 125/1 et seq." 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-10-4 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Properly prepared plans and specifications for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of a private residential swimming pool and public swimming pool, hydrotherapy spa and hot tub shall be submitted to the Health Authority and Building Official for review and approval before construction, installation, enlargement or alteration is begun. The plans shall include type and model of skimmers, pumps, filters, and disinfection equipment; and the swimming pool requirements set forth in Article 15. No building permit shall be issued until approval for the skimmers, pumps, filters and disinfection equipment has been obtained from the Health Authority or Building Official.  
5-10-5 - PRE-OPERATIONAL INSPECTION 
Whenever plans and specifications are required by Section 5-10-2 of this Chapter to be submitted to the Health Authority and Building Official, the Health Authority and/or Building Official shall inspect the swimming pool, spa or hot tub prior to the start of the operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with all applicable requirements of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
5-10-6 - RECIRCULATION POOLS 
All private residential swimming pools and public swimming pools, hydrotherapy spas and hot tubs shall be of the re-circulation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool, spa or hot tub by pumps; the water drawn from the pool, spa or hot tub being clarified before returning to the pool, spa or hot tub. Each pool, spa or hot tub shall be provided with appropriate disinfection equipment.  
5-10-7 - SKIMMERS 
A.  In every private residential swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided for each 800 square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. When more than one skimmer is required they shall be located at least 30 feet apart. In every public hydrotherapy spa and hot tub, at least one skimming device shall be provided for every 100 square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. 
B.  All skimmers shall comply in all respects with the National Sanitation Foundation "Standards Relating to Recessed Automatic Surface Skimmers for Swimming Pools", or equivalent. 
C.  Skimming devices shall not protrude from the wall into the swimming area. 
D.  When rim type overflow systems are used, the corresponding section of the State of Illinois Minimum Sanitary Requirements for the design and operation of swimming pools and bathing beaches shall apply.  
5-10-8 - WATER SUPPLY 
Water shall be secured either from the City or any other sanitary source approved by the Health Authority or Building Official. Water shall not be drawn to fill the pool from the City water supply at any time that the City Manager may determine that a water shortage exists.  
5-10-9 - INLETS 
A.  In every private residential swimming pool and public hydrotherapy spa and hot tub circulation system, inlets shall be located to produce uniform circulation of water and to facilitate the maintenance of a uniform disinfectant residual throughout the entire pool, spa or hot tub. Where skimmers are used, the inlet(s) shall be located so as to help bring floating particles within range of the skimmers. Inlets for private residential swimming pools shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches below the pool overflow level. 
B.  Inlet(s) from the re-circulating system shall be designed so as not to constitute a projecting surface hazardous to the bathers. 
C.  The number of inlet(s) for private residential swimming pools shall be based on either one inlet per 600 square feet of pool area or one inlet per 15,000 gallons of pool capacity, whichever is greater. 
D.  Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the make-up water is added directly to the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches above the upper rim of the pool. If the make-up water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of discharge shall be at least six inches above the rim of the tank. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection. The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet six inches above the floor, platform or ground upon which a person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve. 
E.  The systems supplying re-circulated water and make-up water to the pool shall be constructed in conformance with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code and the Illinois State Plumbing Code.  
5-10-10 - OUTLETS 
A.  All private residential swimming pools and public hydrotherapy spas and hot tubs shall be provided with a means to permit the pool, spa or hot tub to be completely and easily emptied. Floor and wall outlets must be covered by a grating which is not readily removable by bathers. Outlet openings of the grating in the floor or wall of the pool shall provide sufficient area so the maximum velocity of the water passing through the grate will not exceed two feet per second, or shall be of the anti-vortex type. The maximum width of grate openings shall be one-half inch. Sidewall outlets shall be designed so as not to create a vortex of sufficient velocity to be hazardous to bathers. 
B.  Piping carrying pool, spa and hot tub waste water shall be installed as an indirect connection to the sewer system. 
C.  Water drained from pools, spas and hot tubs shall not be discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms. 
D.  Where provided, the vacuum cleaner fitting(s) shall be located in an accessible position at lease six inches below minimum operating water level or as an integral part of the skimmer(s). 
E.  Discharge of pool waste water must be accomplished in such a way that a nuisance or damage to other property is avoided.  
5-10-11 - RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES 
A.  Private residential swimming pool and public spa and hot tub re-circulation systems shall consist of pumps, piping or conduits, overflows, skimmers, filters, equipment for disinfecting pool water and other necessary equipment shall be provided for complete and continuous circulation of water through all parts of the pool, spa or hot tub. Private residential swimming pools shall have a minimum of one turnover in 12 hours. Public spas and hot tubs shall have a minimum of one turnover every 30 minutes. A meter which measures the flow of water in the circulating system shall be provided on all swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
B.  Pumps of three horsepower and smaller shall comply in all respects with the National Sanitation Foundation "Standards Relating to Centrifugal Pumps for Swimming Pools," or equivalent. 
C.  Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rate flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. 
D.  All filters shall comply in all respects with the appropriate National Sanitation Foundation Standards covering such filters, or equivalent. 
E.  Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool, spa and hot tub water. Chemical feeding equipment, when used, shall comply with the appropriate National Sanitation Foundation Standards, or equivalent. Any disinfection method other than a flow through type chemical feeder shall be subject to the approval of the Health Authority or Building Official. Any disinfectant method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the Health Authority or Building Official. Any disinfectant method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the Health Authority or Building Official. The disinfectant applied from a flow through type or adjustable output rate chemical feeder shall be introduced into the re-circulation system ahead of the filters where sand media is employed, and into the filter effluent line where other types of media are used. 
F.  Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as disinfection method for pool water.  
5-10-12 - HEALTH HAZARD OR NUISANCE PROHIBITED 
No pools, spas or hot tubs shall be used, kept, maintained or operated if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall constitute or be the occasion of any nuisance of any kind, or shall be dangerous to life or limb, or detrimental to health in any way.  
5-10-13 - SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
A.  A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential swimming pools are in use. 
B.  Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with one light, strong pole with blunt ends and not less than ten feet long. 
C.  Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with a one-quarter inch throwing rope as long as one and one-half times the maximum width of the pool or fifty feet, whichever is less, to which has been firmly attached a ring buoy with an outside diameter of approximately fifteen inches or some other similar flotation device.  
5-10-14 - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
A.  No private residential pool shall be made use of between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
B.  A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential swimming pool surfaces whenever the swimming pool water re-circulation system has been shut off for more than 24 hours. 
C.  All private residential swimming pools and public swimming pools, hydrotherapy spas and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during periods the pools, spas or hot tubs are in use. 
D.  Pool, spa and hot tub water shall be disinfected by chlorine in a form of sodium or calcium hypochlorite. The chlorine residual shall be maintained between .5ppm and 2.0ppm as free available chlorine. Chlorinated cyanurates, when used, shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  1.0 to 4.0 ppm free available chlorine residual. 
2.  Cyanuric acid concentration 25 ppm to 1,000 ppm. 
Any other approved disinfectants shall be used at concentrations determined by the health authority in accordance with national, state and regional standards and regulations. 
E.  The water shall show a neutral or alkaline condition. The pH of the pool shall be maintained in a range of between 7.0 and 7.8. 
F.  A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all pools, spas and hot tubs and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of disinfection and pH levels of the water. 
G.  Sanitation of Premises: All pool, spa and hot tub facilities, including buildings and grounds, shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and maintained free from garbage, trash and other refuse. 
H.  Chemicals other than disinfectants used for controlling water quality shall be subject to the approval of the Health Authority or Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-10-15 - INSPECTIONS 
The Health Authority and/or Building Official, after displaying proper identification, shall be permitted to inspect any private or public pool, or public spa(s) or public hot tub(s) for the purpose of determining compliance with this Article.  
5-10-16 - CLOSURES 
If the Health Authority and/or Building Official shall find, after inspection, that the operation of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub does not meet the hygienic, sanitary and safety requirements of this Article, he shall direct that it will be closed until such requirements are met.  
5-10-17 - REGULATIONS 
The Health Authority or Building Official may promulgate regulations for the construction, alteration, operation and maintenance of private residential swimming pools and public swimming pools, hydrotherapy spas and hot tubs to carry out the provisions and purposes of this Chapter. The regulations may provide from time to time for the use of materials, devices, structures and appurtenant equipment substantially equivalent to that required herein, so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection provided herein.  
CHAPTER 11 - WEED CONTROL 
SECTION 
 
5-11-1 - SPECIFIC WEEDS, AS NUISANCE 
All weeds including but not in limitation thereof, the following are hereby declared to be a nuisance: 
A.  Noxious weeds - Ragweed, and all its varieties; Canada thistle and all its varieties; musk thistle, perennial sow thistle, sorghum alum and all its varieties; johnson grass and wild hemp (marijuana); 
B.  Other weeds - Beggar tick, bindweed and all its varieties; buckhorn plantain, burdock, cocklebur, curled docked, dandelion, gray and stiff leafed goldenrod, hoary cress, Indian mallow, jimson weed, knapweed, lambsquarter, leafy spurge, milkweed, mustard and all its varieties; nightshade, pigweed and all its varieties; poison ivy, shepherd's purse, smartweed and all its varieties; sow thistle and all its varieties; tumble weed, vervain and all its varieties; wild carrot, and wild or prickly lettuce; 
C.  Grasses over 8". 
(Ord. No. 2009-72, 10-05-2009)  
5-11-2 - UNLAWFUL TO PERMIT WEEDS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the growth of weeds on any plot of ground which the person owns, leases, occupies or controls or on any portion of City street, sidewalk, parkway or alley immediately adjoining said plot of ground.  
5-11-3 - DESTRUCTION OF WEEDS 
All weeds or grass shall be pulled or cut by the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of a plot of ground or the portion of City street, sidewalk, parkway or alley immediately adjoining said plot of ground, at any time when any weeds or grass on such property are in excess of eight inches in height. The failure to cut or to pull or to destroy such weeds or grass shall constitute a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 2009-72, 10-5-2009)  
5-11-4 - REMOVAL OF WEEDS BY CITY 
In the event the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of said parcel of land neglects or refuses to cut or remove such weeds or grass which are in excess of eight inches in height, the City may cut or remove the weeds or grass or authorize some person to cut or remove the same on behalf of the City and the violator shall pay the costs and expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2009-72, 10-5-2009)  
5-11-5 - RECOVERING COSTS 
If weeds or grass referred to in this Chapter are cut by the City or by someone directed to cut them on behalf of the City, the cost of cutting the weeds or grass and interest thereon at the rate specified for interest on judgments in 735 ILCS 5/2-1303 shall constitute a debt in favor of the City against the owner of said parcel of land. In the event such owner fails, neglects or refuses to pay the City the amount of this debt, a notice of lien may be filed in the office of Recorder of Deeds in Cook County or in the office of Registrar of Titles in Cook County, if the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens System. The cost and interest may also be recoverable in a civil action against the owner or his successor, brought in court of competent jurisdiction by the City, which shall possess all rights of a private creditor.  
CHAPTER 12 - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY CONTROL 
SECTION 
 
5-12-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigation, trapping, or by any other means. 
Infestation. The presence, within or around a building or structure of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
Litter. Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. Litter includes but is not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, wood, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal, animal or human excreta, any nauseous or offensive material or liquid of any kind, any object which creates a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or a fire hazard or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been discarded, abandoned, disposed, or otherwise stored improperly. 
Standard refuse container. An automated container, provided by the waste disposal contractor, of not more than 95 gallons, 65 gallons or 35 gallons must be used. For purposes of this definition, pick-up day shall be deemed to be that time during which garbage receptacles are permitted on City parkways under the terms and provisions of Section 5-12-7 of this Article. Dumpsters shall be deemed a standard refuse container on property used for multiple family purposes or commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 2008-86, 12-1-2008)  
5-12-2 - LITTERING 
It shall be unlawful to throw, dump, deposit, drop, leave, or in any way place litter upon any public or private property, or upon or into any fountain, pond, stream, lake, river or any other body of water in the City unless: 
A.  The property has been designated by the State or any of its agencies, political subdivisions, units of local government or school districts, for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board. 
B.  The litter is deposited or placed in public receptacles, standard refuse containers, or other approved receptacles as herein provided for collection except that no person shall use public receptacles for their regular refuse, storage and service. 
C.  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or a fire hazard. 
D.  The person is acting under the direction of or with the approval of the proper public officials.  
5-12-3 - LITTER IN RECEPTACLES 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles, standard refuse containers, or other approved receptacles as herein provided shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any private or public property.  
5-12-4 - ELIMINATION OF RODENT HARBORAGES 
All premises, improved or unimproved, and all open lots, areas, streets, sidewalks and alleys shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and materials that might serve as harborage for rodents; and all lumber, boxes, barrels and loose iron, scrap metal, auto bodies, as well as other materials that may be permitted to rest thereon and that may be used as harborage by rodents shall be placed on supports and elevated from the ground with a clear intervening space of 12 inches between said material and the ground.  
5-12-5 - ACCUMULATION OF LITTER AND OFFENSIVE WASTE 
No person shall allow litter to accumulate on any real property of which the person owns, leases, occupies or controls, or on any portion of City street, sidewalk, parkway or alley immediately adjoining said real property.  
5-12-6 - REFUSE CONTAINERS, CONDITION 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to have on property owned or controlled by such person any refuse container authorized herein in an uncovered condition when outside of the building or structure except for the container authorized for recyclable materials. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to use any refuse container otherwise authorized herein which is unusable or damaged.  
5-12-7 - LOCATION OF REFUSE CONTAINERS 
The standard refuse container shall be placed in the following manner: 
A.  Except as otherwise authorized herein for collections, all refuse containers shall be located on private property concealed as nearly as practical from public view. 
B.  Where alley collections are permitted abutting the alley lot line on the premises serviced so as to be immediately accessible to refuse collection vehicles, it shall be the duty of the owner, his manager or agent, lessor, lessee or occupant to provide a suitable space abutting the alley line for such container. 
C.  For street or curb collections at the curb or street line (but not on the street) at such times as authorized under Section 5-12-8 herein. 
D.  Refuse not collected shall be removed to private property not later than 12:00 midnight on the evening of the collection day unless collection is scheduled for the following day. 
E.  No container used for the storage, collection, and removal of garbage or other refuse, and no litter shall be placed so as to be unsightly, odorous, or so as to constitute a nuisance to adjacent property or the occupants thereof.  
5-12-8 - REFUSE REMOVAL 
A.  Garbage and other refuse shall be collected by the City in accordance with the schedules and regulations announced and made by the Director of Public Works. The City will provide a once per week normal household refuse collection and disposal service. The pickup will be at the curbside or alley as appropriate. Bulky household items such as sofas, furniture, carpeting, beds, box springs, mattresses, fixtures, televisions, and stereos will be picked up weekly. Excluded from regular pickup will be construction materials including earth, sod, concrete, lumber, stoves, ovens, microwave ovens, washing machines, dryers, air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers, dehumidifiers, water softeners, water heaters, trash compactors, and dishwashers. This material shall be disposed of by the resident. 
B.  The owner or occupant of a store, restaurant or other commercial premises, shall provide refuse collection and disposal service for the premises. Refuse must be collected from such premises and disposed of by a contractor licensed by the City, at least once each week between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. The City Council may determine to make payment to or on behalf of the owner or occupant of such premises for such portion of the cost of disposal services as it may deem appropriate. 
C.  All garbage and refuse shall be properly disposed of and kept in a suitable receptacle in such manner as not to become a public nuisance. The Director or Public Works and the Health Officer may make such rules and regulations as they may deem appropriate for the proper collection and disposal of garbage and other refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2004-37, 5-3-2004)  
5-12-9 - REFUSE CONTAINERS ON CITY PARKWAYS 
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to allow or to permit any refuse container or other receptacle to remain upon the City streets or parkways after the collection of refuse by the refuse vehicle for a period of longer than 24 hours. It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to deposit litter, or any can, container or other receptacle containing same upon the City streets or parkways prior to 3:00 p.m. the day before collection of garbage and refuse by refuse vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-73, 10-05-2009)  
5-12-10 - DENSE SMOKE AND FUMES 
It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any dense smoke, dust, soot, cinders, vapor, gas or noxious fumes to be emitted to the air which creates a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or fire hazard.  
5-12-11 - OFFENSIVE ODOR 
It shall be unlawful to conduct any business or use any premises as to create such an offensive odor as it may taint the air and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to the public.  
5-12-12 - WATER POLLUTION 
It shall be unlawful to pollute any well, cistern, spring, underground water stream, lake, canal, water source, drinking hydrant or body of water.  
5-12-13 - STAGNANT WATER 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow the existence of any stagnant pool of water on property which is under his or its control.  
5-12-14 - PESTS 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying, possessing or having charge of any premise, building or structure, to permit the same to become infested with animal pests including but not limited to insects, rodents, birds or other wildlife or used as a harborage for pests. It shall be the duty of any owner, his agent, manager, occupant or lessee, upon any knowledge or notice, to at once proceed and continue to exterminate such pests by any appropriate means as may be necessary or suggested by the Health Authority. It shall also be the duty of any owner, his agent, manager, occupant or lessee of any building or structure within the City to pest-proof such building or structure by closing all unnecessary openings which could provide a means of entry with materials impervious to the pests. The Health Authority may declare the maintenance of such pest harborage a nuisance and summarily abate the same.  
5-12-15 - MULTI-USE UTENSILS 
It shall be unlawful to allow common drinking cups, roller towels, combs, brushes or eating utensils in public or semi-public places which are not properly sanitized after each use.  
5-12-16 - ACTS DETRIMENTAL TO HEALTH OR SAFETY 
It shall be unlawful to permit any other conditions, acts, practices, conduct, business, occupations, callings, trades, uses of property that result in annoyance or discomfort to the public or that is detrimental to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the City.  
5-12-17 - CLEANUP BY CITY 
Upon failure to collect or refusal of any owner or property so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to public health, safety or welfare within five days after mailing of a written notice, the City Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposal of such litter or to order its disposal by the City and the violator shall pay the costs and expenses incurred.  
5-12-18 - COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND YARD WASTE 
A.  The waste disposal contractor shall furnish to each single family, two-family, and townhouse residence a container for the deposit and collection of recyclable materials. Such container shall be specially marked and shall be used only for its designated purpose. The container shall be the property of the waste disposal contractor and a fee shall be charged for its replacement in the event of loss or damage or for additional containers. Containers for apartment and condominium buildings shall be furnished by a licensed waste hauler pursuant to contract with the City. 
B.  Recyclable materials to be deposited in designated recycling containers shall be as determined from time-to-time by the City and a licensed waste hauler pursuant to contract. Residents shall be notified of those materials which are recyclable. Non-recyclable materials shall not be deposited in any recycling container. 
C.  Any material deposited in the designated recycling container shall be deemed to be the property of the collection agency and the City of Park Ridge, the value of which may be recovered to offset the cost of recycling. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the refuse collection agency designated by the City to remove any material from the recycling container. 
D.  A monthly fee for the recycling service is hereby assessed for each dwelling unit, which shall be billed and paid with the regular bill for City water service and shall be subject to the delinquency fee provided therefor. 
E.  Yard waste including grass clippings, twigs, leaves and other similar materials shall not be comingled with regular household refuse but shall be placed only in specially designated biodegradable 30 gallon paper bags or in 90 gallon carts provided by the collection agency at cost, used exclusively for such yard waste and clearly marked "Yard Waste." 
(Ord. No. 2008-86, 12-1-2008)  
CHAPTER 13 - TANNING FACILITIES 
SECTION 
 
5-13-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Sunlamp product. Means any electronic product designed to incorporate one or more ultraviolet lamps and intended for irradiation of any part of the living human body, by ultraviolet radiation to induce skin tanning. 
Tanning facility or tanning facilities. A store, establishment, or place of business or portion thereof which uses sunlamp products to induce skin tanning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-13-2 - TANNING EQUIPMENT 
A.  For each sunlamp product and ultraviolet lamp, the ratio of the ultraviolet irradiance within the wavelength of greater than 200 nanometers through 260 nanometers to the irradiance within the wavelength range of greater that 260 nanometers through 400 nanometers shall not exceed 0.003 at any distance or direction from the product or lamp. 
B.  Each sunlamp product shall incorporate a timing device with multiple timer settings adequate for the manufacturer's recommended exposure intervals to produce the expected results. 
C.  The timing device shall not provide a timing interval in excess of the product's recommended maximum exposure time, or ten minutes. This requirement does not preclude the ability of the user to reset the time. The timer may not automatically reset and cause radiation emission to resume for a period greater than the unused portion of the timer cycle when emission from the sunlamp product has been terminated. 
D.  Each sunlamp product shall incorporate a control on the product to enable the user to manually terminate radiation without pulling the electrical plug or coming in contact with the ultraviolet lamp. 
E.  Each sunlamp product shall be accompanied by the number of sets of protective eyewear that is equal to the maximum number of persons intended to be exposed simultaneously to product radiation. The eyewear shall be provided by the sunlamp product manufacturer or tanning facility operator and shall meet or exceed the sunlamp product recommendations. 
F.  Each ultraviolet lamp contained within the sunlamp product shall be shielded so as not to come into contact with the user. A screen or transparent cover shall be used for this purpose. 
G.  Each sunlamp product in which the person is in a standing position shall provide a handrail for the user to hold onto during operation of the tanning facility. Each tanning facility shall have, clearly marked, the appropriate position the user is to assume prior to operation. 
H.  Each sunlamp product shall prominently display the following label: "DANGER - Ultraviolet radiation. Follow instructions. As with natural sunlight, overexposure can cause eye injury and sunburn, repeated exposure may cause premature aging of the skin and skin cancer. Medications or cosmetics applied to the skin may increase your sensitivity to ultraviolet light. Consult physician before using lamp if taking any medication or if you believe yourself especially sensitive to sunlight". 
I.  Each tanning facility shall be so equipped to dissipate heat in order that the interior temperature does not exceed 100 degrees Fahrenheit or 34 degrees centigrade.  
5-13-3 - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Each tanning facility shall have on hand at all times an employee adequately trained in the correct operation of the facility and the tanning equipment so as to be able to inform and assist the public in its proper use. 
B.  Each person desiring to use the facility shall fill out a form provided by the operator specifying any and all medications that the person is presently taking. Said form shall be kept as a permanent record of the individual's attendance and progress. 
C.  Each user shall be instructed in the proper use of the tanning equipment including protective eyewear, proper position and how to manually terminate the radiation. 
D.  Floors shall be clean and dry in each tanning facility prior to each individual's use. 
E.  Signs shall be posted warning the users of the potential effects of radiation on persons taking medications and the possible relationship of radiation to skin cancer. 
F.  Tanning equipment and furniture or portions thereof which come in contact with the user shall be sanitized after each use. The chemical sanitizing agent shall provide the equivalent bactericidal effect of a solution containing 100 ppm of available chlorine.  
5-13-4 - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 
The building, structure or portion thereof where a tanning facility is located shall be maintained in conformance to Article 22 entitled, "Property Maintenance Code". 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
5-13-5 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
Inspections of tanning facilities may be performed as often as necessary for enforcement of this Article.  
5-13-6 - ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any tanning facility at any time when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article.  
5-13-7 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a tanning facility is made, the findings shall be recorded on the Inspection Report Form provided by the Health Authority. The Inspection Report Form shall summarize the requirements of this Article. A copy of the Inspection Report Form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.  
5-13-8 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed Inspection Report Form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period specified or as soon as possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection.  
5-13-9 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS 
Whenever a tanning facility is constructed, altered or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a tanning facility, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials of work areas, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. All newly constructed, altered or remodeled tanning facilities shall conform in their construction to the requirements of this Article.  
5-13-10 - PRE-OPENING INSPECTION 
The Health Authority shall inspect a tanning facility prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the requirements of this Article.  
CHAPTER 14 - CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL LICENSE 
SECTION 
 
5-14-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
No person shall establish, open, conduct, operate, or maintain a children's hospital without first obtaining a license from the Health Authority.  
5-14-2 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Children's Hospital means a hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children or any facility within a hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children. 
B.  Hospital means a health-care facility as defined in Section 3(a) of the Illinois Hospital Licensing Act (210 ILCS 85/3).  
5-14-3 - REGULATIONS 
Any children's hospital licensed under this Chapter shall substantially comply with all applicable standards and regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health as provided in the Hospital Licensing Act and Title 89, Chapter 1, Section 148.120 of the Illinois Administrative Code, which are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as the applicable standards and regulations of the City of Park Ridge.  
5-14-4 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE 
Application for issuance or renewal of a City of Park Ridge children's hospital license shall be made to the Health Authority in the same manner as provided in the Illinois Hospital Licensing Act for issuance and renewal of a hospital license by the Illinois Department of Public Health, and shall specifically identify any facility within a hospital devoted exclusively to caring for children for which licensing is sought pursuant to this Chapter.  
5-14-5 - LICENSE FEE 
The fee for issuance or renewal of a children's hospital license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).  
5-14-6 - DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
Denial, suspension, or revocation of a hospital license by the Illinois Department of Public Health shall be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a children's hospital license by the Health Authority. The children's hospital shall immediately report to the Health Authority any notice by the Illinois Department of Public Health of substantial failure to comply with applicable standards, rules, or regulations.  
CHAPTER 15 - MASSAGE THERAPY[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2011-27, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 2013-46, 9-16-2013. 
 
5-15-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Forcible felony. Forcible Felony shall have the meaning as specified in the Criminal Code found in Chapter 720 Act 5 Section 2-8 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (720 ILCS 5/2-8). 
Health authority. The Environmental Health Officer of the City or his designated representative, and such assistants, as may be acting under his direction and authority. 
Massage therapy. The science, art or use of massage or body work techniques that include any method of applying pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external soft parts of the body, except the sexual or genital areas, with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
Massage therapist. A person who carries on, engages in or practices massage therapy and has taken courses in massage therapy, and has received license from the State of Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. It does not include a person engaged in a practice licensed by the State of Illinois such as a physical therapist, barber, cosmetologist, esthetician, naprapath, etc. who may also perform massage therapy as permitted as part of their licensed practice. 
Massage therapy establishment. Any building or portion of any building having a fixed place of business where any licensed person, firm, association or corporation engages in, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities of "Massage Therapy" as defined herein. It does not include a building or any portion of a building that is used by a person engaged in a practice licensed by the State of Illinois such as a physical therapist, barber, cosmetologist, esthetician, naprapath, etc. who may also perform massage therapy as permitted as part of their licensed practice. 
Owner/operator. The person responsible for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating, and/or practicing massage therapy at a massage therapy establishment and holds the lease, deed, or other legal instrument that names and grants said person possession or use of the building, establishment, or portion thereof for a massage therapy establishment. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Sex offense(s). Sex Offense(s) shall have the meaning as specified in the Criminal Code Article 11 found in Chapter 720 Act 5 Section 5/11 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (720 ILCS 5/11). 
Sexual or genital area. Includes the penis and testicles of a male, the vulva, vagina and breasts of a female, and the anus and perineum of any person.  
5-15-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MASSAGE THERAPISTS 
No person for any consideration whatsoever, shall engage in, carry on, or practice massage therapy who does not have a valid license issued by the State of Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation.  
5-15-3 - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE 
No person shall operate a "massage therapy establishment" as herein defined, in or upon any premises in the City, who does not have a license issued by the Health Authority. Only a person who complies with the provisions of this Article may be entitled to receive or retain such a License. Licenses are not transferable. A valid license shall be conspicuously posted in every massage therapy establishment.  
5-15-4 - TERM AND FEE FOR A MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE 
Any person applying for a license to operate a massage therapy establishment with the Health Authority shall complete a form, under oath, provided by the City and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the original application and shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each renewal of a massage therapy establishment license. The license shall be valid for a period of one year, which shall begin January 1 of the year and shall terminate on December 31 of the same year. No license shall be issued except at the full yearly fee regardless of the period of the year at which the license is issued. Possession of a massage therapy establishment license satisfies the requirement for a certificate of registration required under Section 12-2-2.  
5-15-5 - LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS 
Copies of the massage therapy establishment Business License application shall be forwarded to the Building Administrator and the Health Authority. Each such inspector shall, within 30 days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage therapy establishment and, upon inspection, each inspector shall file a written report with the Department of Community Preservation and Development concerning compliance with the applicable regulations. The application, once accepted, shall also be referred to the Police Department for investigation. The Police Department will perform the required criminal record check. Background investigations shall require the submission of fingerprints. The cost of the criminal record check and cost of fingerprint submissions shall be borne by the applicant. All provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a corporation, limited liability company or partnership. The application for a massage therapy establishment license shall contain and include the following: 
A.  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
B.  A properly prepared plan that includes all wall, ceiling and floor finishes and the plumbing, electrical, and ventilation facilities, furniture and equipment. 
C.  If the applicant has a State of Illinois professional license that permits the practice of massage therapy, submit a copy of the State of Illinois professional license that permits the practice of massage therapy as part of the licensed practice. 
D.  A copy of the State of Illinois license for each person who will practice massage therapy at this location. 
E.  The name and residence address of each applicant. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation or company and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation or company, and the address of the corporation or company itself, if different from the address of the massage therapy establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage therapy establishment. 
F.  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age and the applicant's height, weight, color of eyes, hair and sex. 
G.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
H.  The applicant shall submit a statement whether he or she has ever been convicted of, pleaded no contest to, served a period of court supervision or suffered forfeiture on a bond charge for committing any sex offense or forcible felony. 
I.  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the partnership, limited liability company or corporation shall submit a copy of the contract, articles of incorporation, or other legal instrument that establishes the partnership, limited liability company or corporation. 
J.  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, each of the partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers or agents of the applicant shall submit a statement whether he or she has ever been convicted of, pleaded no contest to, served a period of court supervision or suffered a forfeiture on a bond charge for committing any sex offense or forcible felony. 
K.  A statement whether the applicant has ever had a previous massage therapy license or massage therapy establishment license revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, each of the partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers or agents of the applicant shall submit a statement whether they have ever had a previous massage therapy license or massage therapy establishment license revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction. 
L.  The name, home address, two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address, driver's license number and all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted, of the applicant; or if the operator of a massage therapy establishment is a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the name, home address, two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address, driver's license number and all criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted, of each of the partners, officers, directors, shareholders, members, managers or agents of the applicant. 
M.  A recent head and shoulder photograph of the applicant of at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be taken by the police chief or his/her designee. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the police chief may require fingerprints of any and all officers, shareholders, directors, partners, members, managers or agents of the entity along with the fee for each. 
N.  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the business license. 
O.  A copy of the deed or lease for the premises where the massage therapy establishment is to be located. 
P.  The name and address of any other business owned or operated by the applicant and the name and description of any business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.  
5-15-6 - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE ISSUANCE 
The City of Park Ridge shall issue a license for a massage therapy establishment if it finds that all requirements for a massage therapy establishment described in this Chapter are met unless it finds: 
A.  The correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the City of Park Ridge have not been tendered to the City; or 
B.  The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the City's building, zoning, and health regulations; or 
C.  The applicant or employees, other than massage therapists, have been found guilty of any of the following offenses or found guilty of an offense outside the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of Illinois: 
(1)  An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony. 
(2)  An offense enumerated in any provision of Article 11, entitled "Sex Offenses", of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1 et. seq., as amended from time to time. 
(3)  A violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(4)  A violation of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(5)  A felony offense enumerated in Article 24, Deadly Weapons, of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq., as amended from time to time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons. 
The City of Park Ridge may issue a license to any person found guilty of (or whose employees, other than massage therapists, have been found guilty of) any of the crimes described in Subsections (1) through (5) of this Section only if it determines that such finding of guilt occurred at least ten years prior to the date of the application and the individual has had no subsequent felony findings of guilty of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor findings of guilty for a crime or crimes set forth in this Section. Further, for the purpose of this Section, any finding of guilty, including an order resulting in supervision, shall apply. 
D.  Any applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact or failed to disclose required information or a fact in the license application or in any other document required by the City. 
E.  Any applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the City or any other state, county or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
F.  Any applicant is not over 18 years of age or older. 
G.  Copies of the state licenses of persons, who will be providing massage services at the business establishment have not been provided. 
The City shall act to approve or deny an application for a license under this Chapter within a reasonable period of time and in no event later than 90 days from the date a completed application is received by the City.  
5-15-7 - STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Floors, walls and ceilings in areas that may be exposed to water or steam such as toilet rooms and showers shall be constructed of a smooth, non-absorbent and easily cleanable material. 
B.  Where male and female patrons will be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker or massage therapy rooms shall be provided. 
C.  Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be capable of providing a minimum of 30-foot candles of light in the rooms used for massage therapy. 
D.  The ventilation in massage therapy establishments shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
E.  Plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
F.  Massage therapy establishments shall provide at least one mop sink. 
G.  In addition to the plumbing fixture requirements contained in the Park Ridge Municipal Code, massage therapy establishments shall provide a lavatory that is located either in each room used for massage therapy or provide a lavatory that is immediately adjacent to or at least in close proximity to the massage therapy rooms. Each lavatory shall be provided with a supply of hand-cleansing soap and a supply of sanitary towels or a hand-drying device. 
H.  The minimum number of toilet fixtures as required by the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall be provided. Toilet fixtures shall be of a sanitary design and readily cleanable. Toilet tissue dispensers and toilet paper shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste materials and such receptacles in toilet rooms used by women shall be covered.  
5-15-8 - SANITARY AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Massage therapists' outer clothing shall be clean, nontransparent and shall cover all portions of the body from the shoulders to mid thigh. 
B.  Employees shall wash their hands immediately before and after serving a patron and immediately after using the toilet room. 
C.  All towels sheets or other cloth materials shall be properly laundered after each use. 
D.  Soiled linens shall be stored in a covered non-absorbent container or a washable laundry bag. 
E.  All powders, lotions, creams, oils and other preparations shall be kept in clean covered containers that are properly labeled and shall be dispensed in a sanitary manner. 
F.  Clean towels, sheets, and other cloth materials shall be stored in a sanitary manner. A separate and clean towel, sheet or other cloth material shall be used by each patron. 
G.  All implements, instruments, equipment, and furniture shall be thoroughly sanitized with a compound that has the same germicidal effect as 100 parts per million of available chlorine as a hypochlorite after having been used on or in contact with a patron and each sanitized implement, instrument, or piece of equipment shall be stored in a sanitary manner when not in use. 
H.  The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage therapist. 
I.  No animals or pets shall be kept in or allowed to enter a massage therapy establishment. This exclusion does not apply to support animals trained to assist disabled persons. 
J.  All floors, walls and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
K.  No operator shall permit or allow to engage in, carry on, or practice massage therapy in a licensed massage therapy establishment, any person who does not have a valid massage therapist license issued by the State of Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. 
L.  The operator of a licensed massage therapy establishment shall re-submit a new massage therapy establishment license application whenever any of the information on the approved massage therapy establishment license application is no longer valid. 
M.  No operator of a licensed massage therapy establishment shall permit or allow the practice of massage therapy at the licensed establishment whenever any of the information on the approved massage therapy establishment license application is no longer valid. 
N.  The building, structure or portion thereof where a massage therapy establishment is located shall be maintained in conformance to Article 22 entitled, "Property Maintenance Code".  
5-15-9 - UNLAWFUL ACTS 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage therapy establishment, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage therapy establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital area to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage therapy establishment, to expose the sexual or genital area of any other person. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage therapy establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering, the sexual or genital area of his or her body. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or genital area or any unlawful act, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14, 5/11-14.1, 5/11-14.3, and 5/11-14.4, which are incorporated as now or hereafter amended. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage therapy establishment, to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage therapy establishment, any agent, employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in Subsections (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this Section. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this Article to administer or permit massage within the City, except within the establishment licensed to carry on such business under this Article. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage therapy establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly marked as to purposes on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to eliminate any other regulation concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude authorized inspection of any premises, whenever such inspection is deemed appropriate by the police or health departments.  
5-15-10 - HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL 
A.  No person while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form, or while a carrier of such disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores, or an acute respiratory infection shall practice massage therapy, unless adequate measures are used to prevent transmission. 
B.  No massage therapist, unless adequately protected against transmission, shall conduct or practice massage therapy on any patron that exhibits any disease in a communicable form, or exhibits any skin inflammation, skin infection, skin fungus or skin eruption.  
5-15-11 - INSPECTION FREQUENCY 
The Health Authority shall inspect each massage therapy establishment at least once each year. 
Additional inspections shall be performed as necessary for the enforcement of this Article.  
5-15-12 - INSPECTION ACCESS 
The Health Authority, after showing proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any time any portion of a massage therapy establishment, except a massage therapy room that is occupied by a customer, client or patient, when the operator or an employee is present for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article.  
5-15-13 - REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES 
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage therapy establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time, including massage therapists, along with their current photographs and a copy of their licenses. Such register shall be available at the massage therapy establishment to representatives of City of Park Ridge during regular business hours.  
5-15-14 - REVOCATION OF A MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE 
A.  The Health Authority may, after providing an opportunity for a hearing, revoke a license for a massage therapy establishment for violations of any of the requirements of this Chapter or for making false statements on the original application or for committing any offense that would be cause for denial of a license or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of his or her duties. 
B.  Prior to revocation, the Health Authority shall notify, in writing, the operator, or owner, or person in charge, of the specific reasons for which the license is to be revoked and that the license shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority by the operator, owner or person in charge within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license becomes final. The Health Authority shall issue written findings of fact supporting the revocation.  
5-15-15 - REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS FOR INVESTIGATION RESULTING IN BUSINESS LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 
In the event that the City of Park Ridge conducts an investigation of a licensed massage therapy establishment, which results in the revocation or suspension of its Business License, the licensee shall reimburse the City for any and all of the City's costs for the investigation. Failure to pay such costs within ten days written notice from the City shall result in the continuance of any suspension until such time as those costs are paid and no massage therapy establishment Business License shall be issued or renewed for such a business at the same location until such costs have been paid to the City. The City shall have such additional or further remedies for collection of such costs as are available by law.  
5-15-16 - REVOCATION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE 
A massage therapist license issued by the state may be revoked or suspended in accordance with the Illinois Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. The Police Chief shall report any and all suspected violations to the Massage Licensing Board and the Department of Professional Regulation.  
5-15-17 - SERVICE OF NOTICES 
A notice provided for in this Article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the license, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Health Authority.  
5-15-18 - INSPECTION REPORTS 
Whenever an inspection of a massage therapy establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form provided by the Health Authority. The inspection report shall summarize the requirements of this Article. A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.  
5-15-19 - CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS 
The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within a period of time specified or as soon as possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection.  
5-15-20 - SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND PREOPENING INSPECTION 
Whenever a massage therapy establishment is proposed to be constructed, altered, or remodeled, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, altering, remodeling shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before construction, altering or remodeling is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, construction materials, mechanical plans and equipment specifications. No license will be issued, nor any remodeled area be put into use until an inspection is made of the massage therapy establishment to confirm compliance with the approved plans and specifications.  
5-15-21 - JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY 
The owner and manager of the massage therapy establishment shall be jointly and severally liable, along with the individual committing the violation, for any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 15, and Article 12, Chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, 4-18-2011)  
5-15-22 - LICENSE REVOCATION; MORATORIUM ON PREMISES 
Upon revocation of a massage therapy establishment license, that premises shall be ineligible to be licensed for the purpose of performing massages of any nature for 24 months from the date of the revocation.  
5-15-23 - RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISING 
No massage therapy establishment shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted, placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to prospective clients that any services are available other than those services permitted by this Chapter, or which would suggest that employees or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this Chapter.  
5-15-24 - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE—EXEMPTIONS 
The massage therapy establishment license shall not be required for hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or any facility at which a health care worker duly licensed by the State of Illinois provides, on an ongoing basis, professional health services to individuals, including, but not limited to, the offices of an occupational therapist licensed under the Illinois Occupational Therapy Practice Act, 225 ILCS 75/1, et. seq.; a physician therapist licensed under the Medical Practice Act, 225 ILCS 60/1, et. seq.; a chiropractor licensed under the Medical Practice Act, 225 60/1 et. seq.; and a naprapath listed under the Illinois Naprapathic Practice Act, 225 ILCS 63/1 et. seq. Such license shall also not be required of establishments where persons, who engage in massage, massage therapy or similar practices, are not required to obtain a massage therapist license under Illinois law.  
CHAPTER 16 - FINES[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-29, 03-15-2010. 
 
5-16-1 - PENALTY 
A.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any residential property owner/occupier violating any of the terms or provisions of this Article or failing to comply with an other of the Health Authority, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense but not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. For purposes of this paragraph A, residential property owner/occupier shall mean a person who occupies or dwells in a residential dwelling unit of which the same person is the legal or beneficial owner or the owner of residential property that is not offered to tenants for occupancy. 
B.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any contractor, commercial property owner, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this Article or failing to comply with an order of the Health Authority, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first offense, four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the second offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense but not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. For purposes of this paragraph B, commercial property owner shall include the landlord of a residential dwelling unit that is tenant occupied or offered to tenants for occupancy.  
CHAPTER 17 - SMOKING[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-19, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 2007-117, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-10, 2-25-2008. 
 
5-17-1 - ADOPTION OF SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT 
The City adopts Sections 1 through 35 and Section 70 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq., and any future revisions or amendments thereto. Furthermore, for the purpose of this Chapter the term "smokes" or "smoking" shall be interpreted to include the use and operation of an electronic smoking device. An electronic smoking device is an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other regulated substances. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, hookah pen, vape pen or any other product name or descriptor. An electronic smoking device excludes any product approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a nontobacco product used for medicinal purposes and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
5-17-2 - VIOLATIONS 
A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates Sections 15, 20, 25 or 70 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be fined pursuant to this Section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation 
A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under Sections 15, 25 or 70 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, which prohibit smoking in public places, places of employment, governmental vehicles, and student dormitories and within fifteen feet of any entrance, exit, windows that open and ventilation intakes to a public place, place of employment or enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00.) 
A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates Section 15, 25 or 70 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be fined (i) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, (ii) not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and (iii) not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after the first violation. 
A person who violates Section 20 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, which requires the posting of "no-smoking" signs and removal of ashtrays from areas where smoking is prohibited, shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).  
5-17-3 - INJUNCTIONS 
The City may institute, in circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this Chapter which take place within the City's corporate boundaries.  
5-17-4 - DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED 
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by the Smoke Free Illinois Act or this Chapter.  
5-17-5 - SEVERABILITY 
If any provision, clause or paragraph of this Chapter or the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such validity shall not affect the other provisions of this Chapter.  
ARTICLE 6 - CITY PLANNING AND GROWTH 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - OFFICIAL PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Official Comprehensive Plan of the City of Park Ridge, adopted April 20, 1981 as Ordinance 81-20, recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, as document number 25994847, as amended, is published separately from this Municipal Code. 
 
CHAPTER 2 - NEW SUBDIVISIONS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-08, 2-3-2003. 
 
6-2-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A.  Title. These Regulations shall be known, referred to and recited as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Park Ridge." 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of these Regulations is to control and regulate the division and development of land within the City of Park Ridge in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. To that end, it is the intent of this Article to accomplish the following: 
1.  Assure that development sites are suitable for building purposes and human habitation; 
2.  Provide for the harmonious development of the City of Park Ridge; 
3.  Assure appropriate adherence to the Comprehensive Plan; 
4.  Provide for the orderly and appropriate development of land; 
5.  Provide adequate open space and recreational sites; 
6.  Provide a safe and clean environment for the residents of Park Ridge; 
7.  Provide facilities for the orderly movement of traffic on streets and highways; 
8.  Provide for the construction of adequate and safe transportation, water, sanitary sewerage, storm drainage and other public facilities; 
9.  Provide for the orderly arrangement of streets, public facilities and public services; 
10.  Provide for adequate street lighting and signage; 
11.  Afford proper access for public safety and public service equipment; 
12.  Protect, to the maximum degree possible, historic sites, scenic points, desirable natural areas, lakes, watercourses and other environmentally sensitive features worthy of preservation; 
13.  Provide for the equitable distribution of the costs and benefits of public works and facilities by requiring that the initial cost of constructing public improvements and facilities in new developments be borne by the developer and not by the Park Ridge taxpayer; and 
14.  Coordinate the operations of City departments and other governmental agencies involved with land development, in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Definitions. In the interpretation of these Regulations, the following definitions shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
1.  General Rules. For the purpose of these Regulations, the following general rules shall apply: 
a.  The present tense includes the future and the present; 
b.  The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; 
c.  The word "building" includes the word "structure;" 
d.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel;" 
e.  The word "Commission" shall always mean the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Park Ridge; 
f.  The word "Department" shall always mean the Department of Community Preservation and Development of the City of Park Ridge; 
g.  The word "Director" shall always mean the Director of Community Preservation and Development of the City of Park Ridge; 
h.  The words "City Council" shall always mean the Mayor and City Council of the City of Park Ridge; 
i.  The word "City" shall always mean the City of Park Ridge, Illinois; and 
j.  The word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive, and terms or words unless otherwise defined, shall be consistent with common usage. 
2.  Terms Defined. 
Alley. Any right-of-way that affords secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a street. 
Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or a person who has obtained the owner's consent to file a subdivision application on behalf of the owner. 
Bench Mark. A monument for which an accurate elevation has been established and shown on the subdivision plat or as defined by the United States Geological Survey. 
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, other permanent open areas, or other acceptable lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge. 
Building. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Building Setback Line. A line on a plat of subdivision generally drawn parallel to the front lot line, or corner side lot line in the case of a corner lot, which establishes the minimum open space to be provided between any point along the front or side of a building or structure, and the front or corner side lot line. A zoning setback line may be defined differently. 
Bond. Any form of security, including a cash escrow deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City. 
City Engineer. The duly designated City Engineer of the City of Park Ridge, Illinois. 
City Forester. The duly designated City Forester of the City of Park Ridge, Illinois. 
Community Preservation and Development Director. The duly designated Community Preservation and Development Director of the City of Park Ridge, Illinois, or his or her designee; or, in the absence of the Director, the designee of the City Manager. This is also the individual authorized to review and approve Administrative Subdivisions. 
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Park Ridge, as adopted and amended, from time to time, by the City Council. 
Construction Plan. Maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat that shows the specific location and design of all public improvements to be installed or constructed within the subdivision. 
Dedication. The setting aside of land by the applicant for a general public use, in accordance with the regulations of the City. 
Easement. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip or area of land by the general public, a public utility, a corporation or a person for specified purposes. 
Finance Director. The duly designated Finance Director of the City of Park Ridge, Illinois. 
Land Partition. Any division of a parcel of land other than pursuant to these Subdivision Regulations. 
Lot. A distinct parcel or piece of land with a distinct legal description. 
Lot, Corner. A lot which has the full length of at least two adjacent sides abutting upon streets, with the interior angle of the intersection of such two sides less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner of the lot in question. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the curve's point of beginning between the side lot lines, or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line, intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. In such cases, the corner of the lot in question is that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents above described. 
Lot of Record. A single lot which is part of a subdivision or resubdivision, which has been recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois, and which is not dependent for identification upon a description by metes and bounds. 
Official Map. A map established by the Council showing streets, highways and parks. The Official Map shall include the Transportation Plan element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Owner. Any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity having legal or beneficial title to the land sought to be subdivided under these Regulations. 
Open Space. Land within a tract devoted to landscaping, lawns, recreational areas, plazas, terraces and other similar uses. 
Parcel. A tract or a plot of land. 
Pedestrian Way. A paved walkway permitting pedestrian usage. 
Plat. A map, chart or drawing that is appropriate for recording and indicates the subdivision or resubdivision of land. 
Plat, Final. The final map, chart or drawing presented to the Commission or Director for approval; and, upon approval, submitted to the appropriate Cook County office for recording and registration, which legally describes the subdivision of land, and contains a detailed plan of the property, showing all dimensions, angles and bearings, together with all such information, statements and certificates as required by this Article. Unless otherwise stated, reference to a plat will mean a Final Plat. 
Plat, Preliminary. A map indicating the subdivision of land prepared in accordance with City regulations as a basis for consideration prior to the preparation of the Final Plat. 
Public Improvements. All improvements for which the City may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance or operation, or which may affect an improvement for which City responsibility is established. This shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage and water supply facilities, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parkways, trees, street lights, street signs and other accessory works and appurtenances. 
Public Utilities. Publicly owned facilities including, but not necessarily limited to, water transmission lines, sanitary sewers and storm sewers, and such privately owned facilities as electric, telephone, cable TV and natural gas transmission lines. 
Registered Engineer. An engineer properly licensed and registered in the State of Illinois. 
Registered Land Surveyor. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the State of Illinois. 
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, pedestrian way, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for any other public use or structure. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Specifications. The design specifications of the City of Park Ridge which have been adopted by the City Council or have been approved by the appropriate City department or agency. 
Street. The entire width between property lines of a public right-of-way or private roadway intended for vehicular traffic. This shall include arterial streets, collector streets, local streets and cul de sacs, but shall exclude alleys. 
Street Classification. 
a.  Arterial Street. A street that traverses the City and provides for through traffic movement in the region while permitting direct access to abutting property. 
b.  Collector Street. A street that provides for traffic movement among Arterial Streets and Local Streets and has direct access to abutting property. 
c.  Local Street. A street that provides for local traffic movement and for direct access to abutting property. 
d.  Cul de Sac. A street having only one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicle turnaround. 
Structure. Anything that is human-made and built, constructed, installed, erected or placed on, in or under the ground, or attached to something on, in or under the ground. 
Subdivision. The division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into two or more lots; or the consolidation of two or more lots, parcels or tracts of land. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision and lot consolidation. When appropriate in context, the term "subdivision" relates to the process of consolidating or resubdividing the land or territory being subdivided. 
Subdivision, Administrative. A subdivision that may be approved by the Director and does not require a public meeting before the Commission or approval by the City Council. 
Subdivision, Minor. A subdivision in a residential zoning district that divides one or more lots or parts of lots into three or fewer residential lots, upon Final Plat review by the Commission and approval by the City Council. 
Tract. A defined area of land. 
Zoning Ordinance. The officially adopted and amended Zoning Ordinance of the City of Park Ridge, including the official Zoning Map and its amendments. 
D.  Scope of Regulations. 
1.  Jurisdiction. These Regulations are enacted by the Corporate Authorities of the City of Park Ridge pursuant to the full power and authority granted them under the constitution of the State of Illinois and all applicable laws of said State. Said Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge, and those areas beyond said corporate limits over which the City has extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided in Section 1.E, below. 
2.  Applicability. As of the effective date of these Subdivision Regulations, no person, firm or corporation shall divide, further divide or otherwise alter the boundaries of any lot or parcel of land within the City of Park Ridge except in compliance with the provisions of these Regulations. To further clarify the applicability of these Regulations, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Vacant Land and Demolition. In all cases involving vacant or unimproved parcels of land, or where the demolition of an existing building or structure on an improved parcel of land is proposed, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such vacant or unimproved parcel, nor shall a demolition permit be issued for any such improved lot, nor shall any such vacant or unimproved parcel be sold unless a plat of subdivision has been approved by the Commission and submitted to the appropriate County Official for recording and registration pursuant to the provisions of these Regulations. It is the specific intent of this provision to require the retroactive subdivision in accordance with these Regulations of all vacant and unimproved parcels of land, and in all cases involving demolition, where such land has never been subdivided, or where lots and parcels have been created prior to the effective date of these Regulations by any means other than pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations for the City of Park Ridge. 
b.  Improved Land. Nothing in these Regulations shall require the subdivision of improved lots or parcels where such improved lots or parcels have been created prior to the effective date of these Regulations by any means with the exception of cases involving demolition as provided for in Section 1.D.2.a, above. 
3.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to meet the stated purpose and intent of these Regulations. Where the provisions of these Regulations impose greater restrictions that those of any statute, other regulations, or ordinance, the provisions of these Regulations shall prevail. Where the provisions of any Federal, State or City statute, ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than those of these Regulations, the provisions of such Federal, State or City statute, regulation, or ordinance shall prevail. 
E.  Extraterritorial Provisions. These Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions, as herein defined, situated in the unincorporated portions of Cook County which are located entirely or in part within one and one half miles of the nearest corporate limits of the City to the extent that such territory is specifically addressed in the Comprehensive Plan. In the event of an overlap between the one and one half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of Park Ridge and that of a neighboring municipality, these Regulations shall then apply to subdivisions located entirely within an area situated between the nearest corporate limits of the City and one half the distance between said nearest corporate limits and the nearest corporate limits of the neighboring municipality. 
F.  Administration. The Director shall administer these Regulations. All applications, fees, maps and documents pertaining to subdivision approval shall be submitted to the Department for processing and, where appropriate, referred to the Commission. The Director is hereby authorized to formulate written administrative rules that govern the procedure for processing subdivision applications. 
G.  Administrative Subdivisions. An Administrative Subdivision shall be permitted in the following instances: 
a.  An adjustment of a lot line between two adjoining lots; and 
b.  The consolidation of two or more lots, parcels or tracts of land, either in whole or in part, into a single lot of record, when all of the properties are under the same ownership. 
With respect to the above, an Administrative Subdivision is permissible only if: (i) no non-conformities are created with respect to these regulations; (ii) the entire length of the subdivision fronts on an existing street; and (iii) there are no exceptions or variations required except as to parkway trees, sidewalks or existing substandard streets and rights-of-way. 
H.  Minor Subdivisions. A Final Plat creating not more than three lots of record shall be approved by the Commission and the City Council without a Preliminary Plat review. Preliminary Plat review may be required upon the recommendation of the Director. 
I.  Subdivisions of Record. Any plat of subdivision, approved by the Commission or the Director and submitted to the Cook County Recorder of Deeds for recording and registration prior to effective date of the ordinance approving these Regulations, shall be accepted as valid and no further approval by the Commission shall be required. 
J.  Non-Complying Parcels and Subdivisions. No building permit shall be issued by the City, its Building Administrator or other City officers or inspectors for the purpose of improving any parcel of land unless such parcel consists of one or more lots in an approved and recorded or registered subdivision. Furthermore, no building permit shall be issued by the City, its Building Administrator or other City officers or inspectors for the purpose of improving any parcel of land in a land partition, as defined herein, unless and until said parcel becomes and is one or more lots in an approved and recorded or registered subdivision as herein defined. 
K.  Variations and Exceptions. 
1.  Administrative Subdivisions. The Director shall have the authority to approve variations or exceptions with respect to parkway trees, sidewalks, and existing substandard streets and rights-of-way in Administrative Subdivisions. In all other instances, variations and exceptions shall be administered as set forth in 2 below. 
2.  All Other Subdivisions. The Commission may recommend and, pursuant to Section 2.I, herein, the City Council may grant variations to the standards and requirements of these Regulations, in harmony with their general purpose and intent, in cases where there are particular difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of said standards and requirements. In considering requests for variations, the Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose such conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the public interest or the character of the neighborhood. The City Council may require a guarantee or bond to assure compliance. 
In accordance with Section 11.11.B.5 of the Zoning Ordinance, the Commission may also recommend modifications to the standards and requirements herein in the case of a Planned Development undertaken pursuant to said Ordinance where, in the opinion of the Commission, such modifications are necessary and desirable to achieve the objectives of the proposed Planned Development. ;hn0 (Ord. No. 2003-08, 2-3-2003)  
6-2-2 - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held between the applicant and the Department to provide the applicant with an opportunity to resolve problems with respect to a subdivision early in the proceedings, and to make necessary modifications and revisions prior to incurring the substantial expense of preparing a Preliminary and Final Plat. 
The pre-application conference does not require formal application, fee or filing of a plat. A preliminary plan containing the following information is all that is required for Department review: 
1.  Proposed layout of streets, lots and other elements basic to the proposed use in relationship to site conditions; and 
2.  Proposed methods for sewage collection, storm drainage, water supply and other utilities. 
The preliminary plan may be a pencil drawing superimposed upon a print of a topographic survey of the area proposed to be subdivided, or may be in any other graphic medium and form containing the above information. The Department shall provide comments and recommendations on such information as is provided. 
B.  Preliminary Plat Review Process. 
The Preliminary Plat review process is intended to provide a formal basis for Commission consideration of a subdivision prior to preparation of a Final Plat. 
The Preliminary Plat, Subdivision Application and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the provisions of these Regulations, except where a variation is specifically requested by the applicant in writing. 
C.  Preliminary Plat Data Requirements. The Preliminary Plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Drafting Standards. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the drafting standard contained in the approved administrative rules formulated by the Commission pursuant to Section 1.F, Administration, herein. 
2.  Existing Information. 
a.  Vicinity Map drawn in accordance to the drafting standards contained in the administrative rules showing the approximate relationship of the tract to be subdivided to its general surroundings and showing the following details: 
(1)  The Zoning District in which the proposed subdivision is located; 
(2)  Existing or platted streets within 1,000 feet of the subdivision; and 
(3)  Municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the tract. 
b.  Identifying Information, including the following: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate any other recorded subdivision; 
(2)  Legal description of the subdivision; 
(3)  Name and address of the applicant(s) and owner(s), if other than the applicant(s); 
(4)  Certificate of the Registered Land Surveyor or Registered Engineer preparing the Preliminary Plat, including signature, address and seal; and 
(5)  Date the Preliminary Plat was drafted, with a north point and scale. 
c.  Existing Conditions, including the following: 
(1)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line; 
(2)  Contours with intervals of not more than five feet nor less than one foot (Elevations shall be based on U.S. Geological Survey data or equivalent. Provide the source of the contour information on the Plat.); 
(3)  Location, width and names of all existing or prior platted streets; and the location and width of all other public rights-of-way, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, and municipal corporation lines within or adjoining the tract; 
(4)  Environmental conditions on the tract being subdivided including, but not necessarily limited to, watercourses, marshes, floodplains, rock outcrop areas, wooded areas and other environmentally sensitive areas and significant features; 
(5)  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract, including the location, size and invert elevation of all existing sanitary sewerage facilities and storm drains; the location and size of all water mains; and the location of all fire hydrants, overhead and underground utility lines, and street lights. 
If water mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains are not on or adjoining the tract, indicate the direction, distance to and the size of the nearest water mains and sewers, showing the invert elevation of sewers to the extent known by the applicant; 
(6)  Conditions on adjoining land within 100 feet of the tract, including the elevations and approximate direction and gradient of ground slope; any embankments or retaining walls; the character, location and ownership of any private sewerage systems; any railroads, utility lines, towers or other nearby non-residential land uses or adverse influences; the boundary lines and owners of any adjoining unsubdivided land and the boundaries and names of any adjoining recorded subdivisions; and 
(7)  Proposed public improvements, including highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract to the extent known by the applicant. 
3.  Proposed Layout 
a.  Street Plan containing the following information: 
(1)  Location of all proposed streets within the subdivision; 
(2)  Widths of all proposed street rights-of-way, proposed paving widths and typical cross sections; 
(3)  Proposed street names; 
(4)  Plan and profile of all proposed streets; grade shall be set at edge of pavement; and 
(5)  Location of all required sidewalks and pedestrian ways. 
b.  Layout and dimension of proposed lots, including lot lines, lot numbers and block letters. 
c.  Sites, if any, for any uses other than single family and two family dwellings, including a description of any such uses and the location of required off street parking facilities. 
d.  All building setback lines, as defined herein, in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations and the Zoning Ordinance. 
e.  The location and dimensions of any land within the proposed subdivision to be dedicated or reserved for school sites, parks, open space or other public uses pursuant to the provisions of these Regulations. 
f.  The construction plan, as defined herein, indicating the location, plan, profile and estimated cost of all required public improvements, as herein defined, to be constructed or provided in conjunction with the subdivision. Estimated costs of public improvements shall be broken down by quantities and unit prices. 
g.  All rights-of-way and easements to be created for drainage and utilities purposes. 
D.  Consideration of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall approve, approve with modifications or reject the Preliminary Plat within 90 days from the date the application for subdivision is received and accepted by the Department. Every decision by the Commission, with respect to the Preliminary Plat, shall be included in the Commission's minutes, along with the vote thereon. 
Approval of the Preliminary Plat is tentative, involving the general acceptability of the layout submitted, and shall in no way constitute approval of the Final Plat. Preliminary Plat approval shall be effective for a period of one year, and such additional periods, as may be specifically approved in writing by the Commission. 
E.  Final Plat Review Process. The Final Plat review process is intended to provide a formal basis for Commission consideration and action on a subdivision following Preliminary Plat approval of the subdivision or consideration and action by the Director on a subdivision prior to recording the Final Plat, as required by these Regulations. With the exception of administrative and minor subdivisions, as defined herein, where a Preliminary Plat is not required, the Final Plat shall conform to the approved Preliminary Plat, and shall reflect any modifications and changes prescribed by the Commission at the time of Preliminary Plat approval. 
Where the applicant wishes to develop a subdivision in stages, the Final Plat may constitute only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat that the applicant proposes to record and develop at a given time, provided that such portion conforms with all the requirements and standards of these Regulations. 
F.  Final Plat Data Requirements and Certifications. The Final Plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information and shall also meet all requirements of the State Plats Act (Chapter 109, Section 1 et. sec., Ill. Rev. Stats.). In case of any conflicts with the Act, the following provisions shall control: 
1.  Drafting Standards. The Final Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the drafting standards contained in the approved administrative rules formulated by the Director pursuant to Section 1.F, Administration, herein. 
2.  Existing Information. 
a.  Identifying Information, including the following: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision; 
(2)  Legal description of the subdivision, including location by section, township and range; 
(3)  Name and address of the applicant(s) and owner(s), if other than the applicant; 
(4)  Name and address of the Registered Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor preparing the Final Plat; 
(5)  Date the Final Plat was drafted, with the north point and scale; and 
(6)  Vicinity Map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the relationship of the tract to be subdivided to all adjoining property, and to all streets and municipal boundaries existing within 1,000 feet of any part of the tract. 
b.  Existing conditions, including the following: 
(1)  Complete boundary survey of the property to be subdivided, showing all courses, distances, the area and "tie ins" to all adjacent street intersections; 
(2)  The location, name and right-of-way width of each existing street; and the location and width of all other public and private rights-of-way; 
(3)  The location and angles of departure of all adjoining property lines and street right-of-way lines; 
(4)  The location and names of record owners of adjoining unsubdivided land, including tax parcel number and other appropriate deed references; 
(5)  The location and names of adjoining recorded subdivisions, including lot and block numbers and, where available, date of approval and subdivision case number; and 
(6)  The location, size and ownership of all existing utility easements, both within the subdivision and within 100 feet of the subdivision's boundaries. 
3.  Proposed Layout. 
a.  Lot layout with lots numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order; 
b.  The area in square feet and the exact dimensions of each lot, parcel, site or other unit shown on the Final Plat; 
c.  The names, exact right-of-way widths and pavement widths of all proposed streets; 
d.  Sufficient data to determine the location, bearing and length of every street, lot and boundary line; 
e.  Required building setback lines defining front yard setbacks and, where applicable, corner side yard setbacks for each lot with respect to the abutting street(s); 
f.  Location and dimensions of all parcels proposed to be dedicated or reserved for open space, as defined herein, or for other public uses, with the purposes indicated thereon. Accurate legal descriptions shall be written for each parcel so dedicated or reserved; 
g.  The location, width and purpose of all easements or rights-of-way, including description of boundaries by bearings and dimensions; 
h.  The location and description of all markers, monuments, or other evidence found or established to determine the boundaries of the subdivision; and 
i.  Private restrictions and covenants, if any, proposed for inclusion in the property deeds. 
4.  Final Plat Certifications. The following certifications and related information shall appear on the Final Plat: 
a.  Certification of Ownership and Dedication signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided consenting to the preparation and recording of the Final Plat, the establishment of minimum building setback lines and the dedication of public uses, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, utility and storm drainage easements and rights-of-way, open space, and such other areas as approved for dedication for public use by the Commission; 
b.  A separate recorded statement from the property owner(s) indicating the school district within which the subdivision is located; 
c.  Certification of Accuracy signed and sealed by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor responsible for the land survey and the preparation of the Final Plat. This Certification shall also indicate whether the subdivision, or any portion of it, is located within a flood hazard area; 
d.  Certification signed by the City Engineer approving the installation of streets and other public improvements, as defined herein, in accordance with all City specifications where these improvements have been completed, dedicated and accepted by the City prior to Final Plat approval; 
e.  Certification signed by the Finance Director acknowledging that a bond, in the amount determined by the City Engineer and in the form determined by the City Council, has been posted with the City of Park Ridge guaranteeing completion of all streets and public improvements, in accordance with City specifications, where these improvements have not been completed, dedicated and accepted by the City prior to Final Plat approval; 
f.  Certification signed by the Cook County Clerk acknowledging that all current taxes on the property included in the subdivision have been paid; 
g.  Certification signed by the Chairman of the Commission certifying that the subdivision shown on the Final Plat is in full compliance with these Subdivision Regulations and approving the Final Plat for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds; 
h.  Certification signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk approving the Final Plat for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds; 
i.  Certification signed by the Director that the process of subdivision approval is in full compliance with these Subdivision Regulations and approving the Final Plat for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds; and 
j.  Easement Provision Statements signed by all private utility companies, such as electric, telephone, cable and natural gas, where necessary to serve the subdivision. 
G.  Consideration of the Final Plat. The Commission or the Director shall act either to approve or disapprove the Final Plat within 60 days from the date the Plat is received and accepted by the Department. The applicant may waive the 60-day limitation and consent in writing to an extension of such period. 
1.  Certification of Approval. Approval of the Final Plat shall be noted by the signing of the Certificate of Approval by the Chairman of the Commission on said Plat, which shall then be recorded by the applicant with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. 
2.  Final Plat Disapproval. Should the Commission disapprove the Final Plat, its decision with respect to the Plat shall be set forth in the Commission's minutes, along with the vote and the reasons for disapproval. 
3.  Effect of Final Plat Approval. Every Final Plat approved by the Commission shall by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to the Comprehensive Plan and the Official Map. 
The Commission shall have the authority to place limitations and restrictions upon an approved subdivision designed to promote the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. These limitations and restrictions shall be stated upon the Final Plat prior to its approval and recording, and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the Comprehensive Plan or Zoning Ordinance. 
Approval of the Final Plat shall not constitute acceptance by the City of any of the public improvements shown upon the Final Plat. Acceptance of the improvements shall be accomplished only in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
H.  Administrative Subdivision Plat Procedures. For subdivisions, which fully meet the definition of an administrative subdivision, the applicant for such a subdivision need not submit a Preliminary Plat, and shall only be required to abide by provisions for the review and consideration of a Final Plat, as set forth in Sections 2.E and 2.F above. Only the following Final Plat Certifications in Section 2.F.4 are required, where applicable: 2.F.4.a, c, d, e, f, i and j. 
I.  Minor Subdivision Plat Procedures. For subdivisions, which fully meet the definition of a minor subdivision, the applicant for such a subdivision need not submit a Preliminary Plat, and shall only be required to abide by provisions for the review and consideration of a Final Plat, as set forth in Sections 2.E, 2.F and 2.G above. Only the following Final Plat Certifications in Section 2.F.4 are required, where applicable: 2.F.4.a, c, d, e, f, g, h and j. 
J.  City Council Action. With the exception of administrative and minor subdivisions, the City Council shall take no action on a Preliminary or Final Plat unless the plat has first been recommended for approval by the Commission. 
K.  Recording of the Final Plat. Upon approval of the Final Plat by the Director or the Commission and the City Council, and upon completion of obtaining all applicable signatures on the plat, the applicant shall immediately submit to the Department a reproducible copy of the Final Plat and then record the signed original with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds within 30 days of the date of approval by the Director or the Commission and City Council, unless the applicant requests a postponement in writing, in which case the Final Plat shall be recorded with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds no later than 90 days from the date of Commission approval. Failure on the part of the applicant to comply with the above recording requirements within the time limits set forth shall render the Commission's action in approving the Final Plat null and void. 
Upon recording the Final Plat, the applicant shall immediately return to the Department an exact copy of the Final Plat, affixed with a recording number and date, and receipt of recording. The Department, upon receipt of the exact copy of the recorded Final Plat, shall compare the copy with the file copy retained at the time the Final Plat was approved. If there are any additions, deletions or alterations to the exact copy of the recorded Final Plat, when compared to the file copy, except for the markings incidental to the recording process, the approval of the subdivision and the Final Plat shall be null and void. 
Under no circumstances shall a building permit be issued by any City official for the construction of a structure upon a lot contained within a subdivision, unless the Final Plat for the subdivision has been approved by the Director or the Commission, in accordance with these Regulations; the Final Plat has been recorded with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds; and an exact copy of the Final Plat, affixed with a recording number and date, and the receipt of recording, have been submitted to the Department verifying that the Final Plat has been recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, 2-3-2003)  
6-2-3 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
A.  Scope of Design Standards. Every subdivision shall conform with the design standards and principles contained in this Section. No person, firm or corporation shall subdivide land, except in compliance with these requirements. In applying these design standards, the following general principles shall govern: 
1.  Every subdivision shall conform to the policies and principles generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Plan including, but not necessarily limited to, the Transportation Plan Map. Furthermore, no subdivision shall be approved, which is not in full compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations. 
2.  The standards and requirements outlined in these Regulations shall be considered the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of the City. 
3.  All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets, public lands or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked areas shall not be created. 
4.  No subdivision shall be approved, unless adequate access exists over approved streets to the tract being subdivided, or unless such access will be provided by the applicant. Furthermore, no subdivision shall be approved if the tract to be subdivided is considered by the Commission to be unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper drainage, geological structure, topography or any other feature harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of present and future residents of Park Ridge. 
B.  General Subdivision Layout and Design. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all proposed streets within a subdivision shall be considered with respect to their relationship to existing and planned (platted) streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety and appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
2.  The overall street plan for any subdivision shall provide vehicular access to the subdivision by a public or private street(s) connected to the City's existing street system. 
3.  Street jogs are prohibited with centerline offsets of less than 100 feet. 
4.  Half streets are hereby prohibited. In the case of an existing half street, whenever the property constituting the undedicated portion of said half street is contiguous to a tract to be subdivided and owned by the applicant of the subdivision, the undedicated half of the street shall be indicated on the plat of subdivision for dedication to the public. 
5.  Where not indicated to the contrary in the Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement of all streets within a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the logical continuation or appropriate projection of existing or planned (platted) streets adjoining the tract to be subdivided; or 
b.  Where topography or other conditions make continuation or projection of existing streets unnecessary or impracticable, such arrangement of streets shall conform to a general area plan approved by the Commission. 
6.  New local streets in residential neighborhoods shall be laid out in such a way so as to discourage through traffic. 
7.  Where a subdivision abuts an existing or proposed arterial street or other streets carrying heavy traffic, or where said subdivision contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Commission may require local access or frontage streets, reversed frontage with screen planting contained in a non access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment, including wider pavement widths, as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential or other properties and separation of local and through traffic. 
8.  Where a subdivision borders or contains a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way, the Commission may require a frontage street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way, and at such a distance, as required for appropriate use of intervening land, if any, and with due regard for the requirements of future approach grades and grade separations. 
9.  A subdivision plat, involving new or existing streets crossing railroad tracks, shall provide adequate right-of-way and slope easements for the construction of an underpass or overpass. 
10.  No street intersection shall include more than four street approaches. 
11.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect another at less than 60 degrees provided, however, that other arrangements for the smooth merging of traffic shall be permitted where the total effect on the intersection is to reduce traffic hazards and to provide for smooth traffic flow at the intersection as a whole. 
12.  Property lines at the intersection of two local streets or of a local street with a cul de sac or an alley shall be curved with a minimum radius of 25 feet. Property lines at all collector and arterial street intersections shall be curved with a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
13.  A tangent with a minimum length of 100 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on all arterial and collector streets. 
14.  When connecting street lines deflect from each other, they shall be connected by a curve with a sufficient radius to insure a sight distance adequate for visibility and safety. The size of the radius shall be determined by the City Engineer after consideration of the character of the street and the types and speed of traffic anticipated. 
15.  If a portion of a tract is not subdivided, suitable access shall be provided for street openings to allow for eventual subdivision of the entire tract. 
16.  Dead end streets are prohibited, except as stubs to adjoining tracts. Where stub streets are constructed abutting unsubdivided acreage, temporary easements for turnarounds shall be provided at the boundary lines of the subdivision, and appropriate arrangements shall be made for those portions of the turnarounds outside of street rights-of-way to revert to abutting owners, at such time as the street is extended. 
17.  Private streets are prohibited in all subdivisions unless specifically authorized by the Commission. Where private streets are authorized, the applicant shall be required to construct the streets in full compliance with specifications and the design standards contained in these Regulations. 
C.  Street and Alley Design Standards. 
1.  Street Classification. All streets within or abutting a subdivision shall be classified either as an arterial, collector, local or cul de sac street. Streets appearing on the Transportation Plan Map of the Comprehensive Plan shall be classified in complete accordance with the Map. Where streets are not referred to in the Comprehensive Plan, the appropriate classification shall be as determined by the Commission after consideration is given to the proposed density and/or land use of the property adjacent to the streets or within the tract to be subdivided. 
2.  Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths for Proposed Streets and Alleys. The following minimum standards shall apply to all proposed streets and alleys within or abutting a subdivision. All streets and alleys shall be fully paved and, in no case, shall the right-of-way or pavement widths of any proposed street or alley within or abutting a subdivision be less than the following: 
Classification 	Minimum 
Right-of-Way 
Width(feet) 	Minimum Pavement 
Width (feet) 
Excluding Curb/Gutter 
a. Arterial 	80 	44 (plus turn lanes, as required) 
b. Collector 	80 	36 
c. Local 	66 	32 
d. Cul de sac 	100 	80 
e. Alley 	20 	16 
 
3.  Grade Standards for Proposed Streets, Alleys and Parking Lots. No proposed street, alley or parking lot within or abutting a subdivision shall exceed the following grades: 
Classification 	Maximum Grade (percent) 
a. Arterial 	6.0 
b. Collector 	8.0 
c. Local 	8.0 
d. Cul-de-sac 	8.0 
e. Alley 	10.0 
f. Parking Lot 	6.0 
 
4.  Drainage Standards for Proposed Streets and Alleys. For adequate drainage, the minimum grade for a proposed street or alley within or abutting a subdivision shall not be less than one half of one percent, or as approved by the City Engineer, in accordance with acceptable engineering standards. 
A normal crown shall be provided on all streets and alleys, not super-elevated, of one-quarter inch per foot straight slope extending in a cross section from the edge of pavement to the centerline, symmetrical to the center. 
5.  Design Standards for Existing Streets. Whenever a subdivision contains lots which front on an existing arterial, collector, local or cul de sac street, the applicant shall be required to conform to the same design standards required for proposed streets as set forth in Section 3.C.1 through 3.C.3 above, except that the Commission may grant, subject to City Council approval, a variation to this requirement, in accordance with Section 1.I, Variations, where the reconstruction of the existing streets would be inconsistent with the character and development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood; or where, in the opinion of the Commission, such reconstruction would cause severe and unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
6.  Dedication. Rights-of-way intended for streets, pedestrian ways, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, trees or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency, shall be dedicated by fee ownership to public use and shown as such by the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the Final Plat, on which the right-of-way is established. 
7.  Arterial Streets. Arterial streets are subject to the necessary control of entrances, exits and curbs. 
D.  Street Names. No street name shall be used which duplicates, or is likely to be confused with the name of an existing or planned (platted) street. Proposed streets, which are in alignment with or are projections of existing or planned (platted) streets, shall bear the same name as those streets. 
E.  Alleys. 
1.  Residential Areas. As a general rule, alleys shall not be permitted in subdivisions located in residentially zoned districts. However, where alleys are needed, due to unusual and extreme conditions of topography, traffic flow or access, the Commission may require the construction of alleys. 
2.  Business Areas. Where the Commission determines that the public interest will be served by requiring alleys in subdivisions located in commercially zoned districts for the purpose of facilitating off street parking or loading, alleys shall be required in accordance with the design standards in these Regulations. 
3.  Dead End Alleys. In no event shall dead end alleys be permitted. 
4.  Alley Access. No alley shall serve as the principal means of access for any lot within a subdivision. All such lots shall front upon a street. 
F.  Cul de Sacs. No cul de sac streets shall be longer than 600 feet from the nearest intersecting street and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a curb radius of at least 60 feet. Between the street and the circle there shall be a 25-foot reverse radius. 
G.  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks, not less than five feet wide, shall be required abutting the property lines adjacent to all streets to provide for adequate and safe pedestrian circulation and access to schools, parks, shopping, employment, transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian ways shall not be less than five feet in width and shall be located within a public right-of-way of not less than ten feet in width. 
H.  Parkways. Along each side of a street within or adjacent to a subdivision, a landscaped parkway shall be provided containing a minimum width of ten feet measured between the curb and sidewalk. 
I.  Block Standards. 
1.  Lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use anticipated; 
b.  Zoning requirements where applicable to lot sizes and dimensions; 
c.  The need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street and pedestrian traffic; and 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
2.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,400 feet nor be less than 300 feet, except where alternate designs are approved by the Commission. 
3.  Blocks shall normally be designed with sufficient width to provide two tiers of lots. However, the Commission may approve a more flexible block width design where, due to the existence of heavy traffic, railroad tracks, streams, drainage courses, multifamily housing, commercial areas, schools, churches or other intense land uses, a two-tier block design is not appropriate. 
4.  For blocks longer than 600 feet, the Commission may require pedestrian ways if deemed essential to provide reasonable and safe pedestrian circulation and access. 
J.  Lot Standards. 
1.  Lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated. 
2.  All lot dimensions shall be in full conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is located. 
3.  Where not stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance, lot dimensions for subdivisions located in business districts shall be adequate to accommodate off street parking and service facilities required by the type of use and development anticipated. 
4.  Double frontage and reversed frontage residential lots shall, in general, be avoided except where essential to provide residential separation from arterial streets or to overcome other disadvantages of orientation or topography. 
5.  Corner lots shall be considered as having frontage on both streets. All corner lots shall be sufficiently wide to allow for the erection of buildings and structures that observe the minimum front yard setback and corner side yard from both streets. 
6.  Where utility or other easements are involved, lot lines shall be so arranged with respect to the easements, so as to permit efficient installation of the utilities without unnecessary irregularities in alignment. 
7.  Each lot shall abut on a private or dedicated public street. 
8.  All side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the front lot line and the abutting street line. 
K.  Building Setback Lines. Building setback lines shall appear on each lot shown on a plat of subdivision. The building setback line, indicating the minimum front yard setback for a lot shall be drawn in accordance with the front yard setback stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
In the case of corner lots, the setback line indicating the minimum corner side yard setback shall be drawn in accordance with the setback stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance for the front yard setback of the lot. 
L.  Easements. An easement shall be provided for public utilities, as defined herein, adjacent to the rear lot line within each lot of a subdivision. The minimum right-of-way width of the easement shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, 2-3-2003)  
6-2-4 - REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
A.  Purpose and Scope. 
1.  The purpose of this Section is to delineate the public improvement and related installations that shall be required of the applicant, as condition of Final Plat approval. 
2.  All construction shall be completed in accordance with specifications, in a manner acceptable to the Commission and other applicable City departments and officials. 
3.  Whenever existing public improvements located within or abutting a subdivision are determined by the City Engineer to be deteriorated or not in conformity to specifications, the public improvements shall be reconstructed or replaced by the applicant in such a manner so as to fully conform with the specifications. 
4.  All required public improvements in these Regulations shall be installed and constructed by the developer who shall pay all costs involved in installation, construction, inspections and testing, including the costs for resident engineering services. 
5.  Approval of the Final Plat by the Commission or the Director does not constitute permission to construct required public improvements. Appropriate permits must first be obtained from the City before construction may commence. 
B.  Streets and Alleys. Streets and alleys shall be graded, surfaced and paved in accordance with applicable specifications and in full compliance with the design standards in Section 3 of these Regulations. Curbs and gutters shall be built in accordance with the specifications along all streets. 
In accordance with Section 3.C.5 of these Regulations, a subdivision containing a lot(s) which fronts on an existing street, shall be required to dedicate appropriate right-of-way (if needed), and reconstruct and improve the existing street in full compliance with the specifications and design standards, unless the Commission grants a variation to this requirement in accordance with Section 1.I, above, subject to City Council approval. 
C.  Sidewalks and Curb Cuts. Sidewalks, curb cuts and driveway aprons shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and design standards in Section 3 of these Regulations. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be required by the Commission, where deemed essential to provide interior circulation and access to schools, parks, and other community facilities. 
Where the City Engineer finds that sidewalks, other than those located at the edges of streets, would provide safe, logical and convenient routing of pedestrian traffic, the sidewalks, constructed in a manner appropriate to their purpose, may be required by the Commission. 
D.  Street Name Signs and Street Lights. Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with appropriate specifications at all street intersections. At intersections, there shall be at least two such street signs. 
Street lights, where required by the Commission, shall be installed in all subdivisions in accordance with appropriate specifications. The applicant shall pay all costs involved in installation and all maintenance and operation costs incurred until said street lights are formally accepted by the City, in accordance with the procedures set forth in these Regulations. 
E.  Parkway Trees. Parkway trees shall be planted in the parkways, along both sides of all streets within or adjacent to a subdivision. Tree planting and parkway landscaping shall be performed in accordance with appropriate specifications. The species, quantity, size and location of parkway trees shall be approved by the Commission or the Director, upon the recommendation of the City Forester. 
F.  Sewers. Each lot within a subdivision shall be provided with a connection to a sewer system to be constructed, where necessary, by the applicant. The required sewer system shall be connected to the City's existing sewer system at a point approved by the City Engineer. Every sanitary sewer system within a subdivision shall be designed, constructed, inspected and tested in accordance with appropriate specifications, and the applicant shall be responsible for paying to the City all related fees, charges and assessments as set forth in the specifications. 
G.  Storm Drainage Facilities 
1.  In all subdivisions, the applicant shall provide storm drains, culverts, drainage-ways or other improvements, as may be required to collect and dispose of all water originating on or flowing across the property to be subdivided, without inundating or damaging neighboring streets, lots or properties. All storm drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with appropriate specifications. 
2.  Wherever the City Engineer determines natural surface drainage to be inadequate, the applicant shall construct a storm drainage system, with catch basins appropriately spaced along the streets, and within the rear yard of each lot in the subdivision. 
3.  The applicant, in designing a storm drainage system for a subdivision, shall consider the present and future expected runoff from the surrounding watershed area, and shall submit to the City Engineer a certification by a Registered Engineer stating that all proposed storm drainage facilities are adequately designed to safely handle surface drainage from the surrounding watershed area. If required by the City Engineer, larger storm sewers, than those needed to serve the immediate subdivision, shall be installed. 
H.  Water Supply. Each lot within a subdivision shall be provided with a connection to a water supply system to be constructed, where necessary, by the applicant. Such a system shall be designed so as to adequately handle the water supply needs for the type of development proposed, and related to the existing and potential surrounding development areas so as to form a logical part of a coordinated public water system minimizing potential water supply problems for the general area. The water supply system may also require appropriately located fire hydrants, if the City Engineer finds the existing fire protection system to be insufficient within the immediate area. Additional fire hydrants shall be connected to the City's existing water main system at a point(s) approved by the City Engineer. Every water supply system within a subdivision, including required fire hydrants, shall be designed, constructed, inspected and tested in accordance with Specifications, and the applicant shall be responsible for paying to the City all related fees, charges and assessments as set forth in said Specifications. 
I.  Parks, Open Space and Other Dedications. Every applicant for a residential subdivision may be required, at the discretion of the Commission, to dedicate land within said subdivision for a public purpose such as public facilities, parks, open space or school sites whenever, in the opinion of the Commission, there is a demonstrated public need for such a dedication brought about by reason of said subdivision. 
Any land dedicated for a public purpose shall be indicated on the Final Plat, and the governmental jurisdiction to which such land is dedicated shall indicate its acceptance. The Commission shall see to it that any land to be dedicated is suitable in terms of its size, dimensions, accessibility, topography, and general character with respect to its intended purposes, and is in accordance with the land use and community facilities objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
J.  Permanent Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at such intermediate points as may be required by the City Engineer and by the State Plat Act (Chapter 109, Section 1 et. seq., Ill. Rev. Stats.). The monuments shall be of permanent character and installed in such a manner that they may be readily found by a registered land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, 2-3-2003)  
6-2-5 - REQUIRED AGREEMENTS 
A.  Assurances and Guarantees. Before the Commission approves a Final Plat for any subdivision, the Commission shall determine if one of the two following requirements has been fully satisfied by the applicant: 
1.  That all required public improvements have been completed, inspected and accepted by the City Council, in accordance with the provisions set forth for such acceptance; or 
2.  Where required public improvements have not been completed, acceptable assurances shall be made to the City Council guaranteeing completion of all the public improvements, in full compliance with appropriate specifications and the design standards in these Regulations. 
B.  Security Bonds. A bond shall be posted by the applicant with the Finance Director in a form acceptable to the City, in an amount specified by the City Engineer, and that provides acceptable guarantees to the City Council that all public improvements shall be constructed in full accordance with appropriate specifications and the design standards set forth in these Regulations. The applicant shall further assure satisfactory performance of the public improvements until they are accepted by the City in accordance with Section 5.C. of these Regulations. 
Specifically, the applicant shall be required to post a bond and agree to the following, where applicable: 
1.  To construct and install, or cause to be constructed and installed at the applicant's expense, all streets, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, fire hydrants, drainage facilities, street signs, monuments, water and sewer facilities, street lights and other public improvements in strict accordance with the Final Plat, as approved by the Commission, and in strict accordance with the design standards in these Regulations and appropriate specifications; 
2.  To maintain, at the applicant's cost, all streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, drainage facilities, street signs, monuments, water and sewer facilities, and other public improvements, until they are accepted by the City, in accordance with Section 5.C.; and 
3.  To obtain, at the applicant's expense, the easements and releases required when any street, storm drainage facility or other public improvement abuts or traverses land of persons other than the person(s) holding legal title to the lands included in the subdivision. 
The Commission shall not approve a Final Plat for a subdivision unless the Finance Director certifies on the Plat that a bond has been posted in accordance with the provisions above guaranteeing the installation and construction of all required public improvements where they have not been completed prior to Final Plat approval. 
Furthermore, the Commission shall not approve a Final Plat for a subdivision unless the applicant has provided the Commission with acceptable proof that the regulations governing parks, open space and other dedications have been fully satisfied, and that the applicant has dedicated the required land, if required to do so by the Commission. 
C.  Acceptance of Public Improvements and Dedications. The construction and installation of required public improvements, in accordance with the terms of these Regulations, shall in no way be construed as acceptance by the City or an acceptance of an offer of dedication. All dedications, with the exception of land dedications, shall be considered only as offers of dedication until formally accepted by the City Council, in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  All offers of dedication to the City of any public improvements, as defined herein, shall only be considered accepted after all of the following procedures have been completed: 
a.  A dedication or easement, with respect to the land on or in which the public improvements are located, has been indicated on the Final Plat; 
b.  Written correspondence has been received by the City Council from the applicant formally requesting the City's acceptance of the public improvements; 
c.  The City Engineer has certified that the public improvements have been satisfactorily constructed, in full compliance with appropriate specifications, and have performed in an acceptable manner for a period of one year; and 
d.  The City Council has accepted the public improvements by a formal resolution. 
2.  A rejection by the City on an offer of dedication of public improvements shall not preclude reapplication or re offer to dedicate either immediately or at any later date. 
D.  Release of Bonds. Any bond or other securities established in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations shall be released by the City Council when the City Engineer certifies that all requirements have been fully satisfied and when all required public improvements are accepted by the City Council, in accordance with Section 5.C. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, 2-3-2003)  
6-2-6 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
A.  Violations. 
1.  Illegal Sale. As of the effective date of these Regulations, any person who shall sell, offer for sale or lease any lot or parcel of land within the City or within those areas of unincorporated Cook County over which the City has extraterritorial jurisdiction, whether such sale or leasing shall be by lot and block number or by metes and bounds, and before all of the requirements of these Regulations have been fully complied with, and before the lot or parcel, or the subdivision containing such lot or parcel, has been approved by the Commission in accordance with these Regulations, and before the lot or parcel has been properly recorded as a lot of record within a legal subdivision with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, such person shall be in violation of these Regulations, and the City or its appropriate officers or any interested persons shall be authorized to prosecute such person and institute proceedings to have the conveyance of the aforementioned illegal lot or parcel declared to be a nullity and stricken from the records of the Recorder of Deeds or the Cook County Registrar of Titles, as the case may be. 
2.  Illegal Recording. As of the effective date of these Regulations, no subdivision, or parcel or lot therein, within the City, or within its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be entitled to record the Final Plat with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds or the Cook County Registrar of Titles, until it has been approved in accordance with these Regulations. In the event that an unapproved subdivision, or parcel or lot therein, is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the City or its appropriate officers or any interested person shall be authorized to institute proceedings to have the plat, or the parcel or lot therein, stricken from the records of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds or Cook County Registrar of Titles, as the case may be. 
B.  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, 2-3-2003)  
CHAPTER 3 - FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 
SECTION 
 
6-3-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
Act. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois," 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. 
Applicant. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application. 
Appropriate Use. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in Section 6-3-6(B). 
Base Flood. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 6-3-4 of this Chapter. 
Building. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
Channel. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man made drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
Channel Modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening). 
City. City of Park Ridge, Illinois 
Compensatory Storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off site floodwater elevations and flows. 
Conditional Approval of a Designated Floodway Map Change. Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this Part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an Appropriate Use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as built plans. 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved. 
Control Structure. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation. 
Dam. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included. 
Designated Floodway. The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR and generally depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in velocities. 
(a)  The floodways are designated for Des Plaines River, Prairie Creek and Farmer's Creek on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. 
(b)  The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City that may be annexed into the City are designated for Des Plaines River, Prairie Creek and Farmer's Creek on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. 
(c)  To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation. 
Development. Any man made change to real estate, including: 
(a)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building. 
(b)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
(c)  Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects. 
(d)  Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site. 
(e)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(f)  Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other non agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste; 
(g)  Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal; 
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as re roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. 
Director. The Director of Public Works of the City of Park Ridge or his designee. 
Elevation Certificates. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated. 
Erosion. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action. 
Exempt Organizations. Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of government. 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990. 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 79 effective as of September 29, 1989. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments. 
Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Frequency. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway. 
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. 
Floodplain. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
(a)  The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA's of the City are generally identified as such for the Des Plaines River, Prairie Creek and Farmer's Creek on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA") on map number 17031C panels 236, 237, 238 and 376 and dated August 19, 2008. 
(b)  The SFHA's of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City are generally identified as such on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Cook County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on panels 236, 237, 238 and 376 and dated August 19, 2008. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodproofing Certificate. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA. 
Freeboard. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. 
Historic Structure. Any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. 
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Calculations. Engineering analysis which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events. 
IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. 
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or FIRM. 
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM. 
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured homes" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mitigation. Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding. 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990. 
NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929. 
Natural. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation. 
Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics. 
Public Flood Control Project. A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies. 
Public Bodies of Waters. All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto. 
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer. A vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Registered Land Surveyor. A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act. (225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.) 
Registered Professional Engineer. An engineer registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.) 
Repair, Remodeling or Maintenance. Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure. 
Repetitive loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred. 
Retention/Detention Facility. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Riverine SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. 
Runoff. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits. 
Sedimentation. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses. 
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A0, A1 30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E. 
Structure. The results of a man made change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use. 
Substantial Damage. A building is considered substantially damaged when it sustains damage from any cause (fire, flood, earthquake, etc.), whereby the cost of fully restoring the structure would equal or exceed 50 percent of the pre-damage market value of the structure, regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term also includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss." 
Substantial Improvement. 
(a)  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. This term also includes structures which have incurred "repetitive loss." 
(b)  For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered o occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure regardless of the actual work performed. 
(c)  The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Transition Section. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. 
(Ord. No. 2008-38, 6-16-2008)  
6-3-2 - HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER 
A.  The Director shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in Section 6-3-3. 
B.  To fulfill those duties, the Director first should use the criteria listed in Section 6-3-4, Base Flood Elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. 
C.  Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Director must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified. 
1.  If the site is within a flood fringe, the Director shall require that the minimum requirements of Section 6-3-5 be met. 
2.  If the site is within a floodway, the Director shall require that the minimum requirements of Section 6-3-6 be met. 
3.  If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Director shall require that the minimum requirements of Section 6-3-7 be met. 
D.  In addition, the general requirements of Section 6-3-8 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of Section 6-3-5, 6-3-6, and 6-3-7. 
E.  The Director shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of Section 6-3-9. 
F.  If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Director shall review the requirements of Section 6-3-10 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Director shall complete all notification requirements. 
G.  In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this Chapter, the Director may take any and all actions as outlined in Section 6-3-12.  
6-3-3 - DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL 
The Director shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this Chapter which shall include the following: 
A.  Determining the Floodplain Designation. 
1.  Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
2.  If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile. 
3.  Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining Sections of this Chapter. 
B.  Professional Engineer Review. 
1.  If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of the City for review to ensure that the development meets Sections 6-3-6 or 6-3-7. 
2.  In the case of an Appropriate Use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of Section 6-3-6. 
C.  Dam Safety Requirements. 
1.  Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter indicating no permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam as defined in Section 6-3-1. 
2.  Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. 
D.  Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
E.  Plan Review and Permit Issuance. 
1.  Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the City meet the requirements of this Chapter, and; 
2.  Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of this Chapter. 
F.  Inspection Review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; 
G.  Elevation and Floodproofing Certificates. Maintain permit files including: 
1.  An Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or non residential building subject to Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter, and/or; 
2.  The elevation to which a non residential building has been floodproofed, using a Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings subject to Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter 
H.  Records for Public Inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this Chapter. 
I.  State Permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to Sections 6-3-6 and 6-3-7 of this Chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the City. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the City and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR: 
1.  Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes; 
2.  IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in Section 6-3-1 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the City and County, except for those projects meeting the requirements of Section 6-3-6B7. 
3.  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per Section 6-3-6B4(e); 
4.  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to Section 6-3-6B4(d); 
5.  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in Section 6-3-6B4(a, b, h); 
6.  Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams; 
7.  Any changes in the Base Flood Elevation or floodway locations; and, 
8.  Base Flood Elevation determinations where none now exist. 
J.  Cooperation with Other Agencies. 
1.  Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this Chapter; 
2.  Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map; 
3.  Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
4.  Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this Chapter. 
K.  Promulgate Regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any Ordinance changes.  
6-3-4 - BASE FLOOD ELEVATION 
A.  This Chapter's protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for the City. 
1.  If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository that has been approved by IDNR/OWR and FEMA. 
2.  When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. 
B.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Des Plaines River, Prairie Creek and Farmer's Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the County prepared by FEMA (or the Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
C.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook County prepared by FEMA (or Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
D.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the County. 
E.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the County shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository. 
1.  When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC II, WSP 2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. 
2.  The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC I, TR 20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. 
3.  Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing. 
4.  For a non riverine SFHA, the Base Flood Elevation shall be the historic Flood of Record plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one square mile. 
F.  For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile) which has been identified by the Director pursuant to Section 6-3-3A3, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved in Section 6-3-4E. 
(Ord. No. 2008-38, 6-16-2008)  
6-3-5 - OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS 
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this Chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this Section, along with the requirements of Section 6-3-8. 
A.  Development Permit. 
1.  No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the Director. 
2.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Director. 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L., 1929 adj. datum or N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation of filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. 
(b)  For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter. 
3.  Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(a)  Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a permit as required by this Chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  The Director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. 
4.  Soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance. 
5.  The Director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Director shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. 
B.  Preventing Increased Damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. 
1.  If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. 
2.  Compensatory Storage. 
(a)  Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(b)  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. 
(c)  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. 
(d)  All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. 
(e)  All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2008-38, 6-16-2008)  
6-3-6 - OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS 
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway for Des Plaines River, Prairie Creek and Farmer's Creek shall be as delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County or regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR and referenced in Section 6-3-1. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of Section 6-3-8. 
A.  Development Permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the Director and IDNR/OWR. 
1.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Director. The application shall include the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of applicant; 
(b)  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
(c)  Name of stream or body of water affected; 
(d)  Description of proposed activity; 
(e)  Statement of purpose of proposed activity; 
(f)  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
(g)  Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant; 
(h)  Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent; 
(i)  If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form; 
(j)  If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and 
(k)  If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein. 
(l)  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
i.  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
ii.  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D. or North American Vertical Datum, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale; 
iii.  Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); 
iv.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance. 
v.  A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location. 
(m)  Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development. 
(n)  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of Section 6-3-6B. 
(o)  If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA. 
(p)  The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter. 
(q)  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
i.  A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work; 
ii.  A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods (see 6-3-6B4(i)(i)) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
iii.  An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in 6-3-6B4(i)(i). of this Section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and 
iv.  An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected. 
2.  The Director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. 
(a)  The Director shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. 
(b)  A Registered Professional Engineer, under the employ or contract of the City shall review and approve applications reviewed under this Section. 
B.  Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses. 
1.  The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are Appropriate Uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those Appropriate Uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved Appropriate Uses are as follows: 
(a)  Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife. 
(b)  Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses; 
(c)  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls; 
(d)  Underground and overhead utilities; 
(e)  Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage 
(f)  Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non habitable accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage; 
(g)  Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto; 
(h)  Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either: 
i.  The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot; or 
ii.  The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking lot, formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events. 
(i)  Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive non erosive slope toward a watercourse. 
(j)  Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of water tight window wells, elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure. 
(k)  The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation. 
(l)  Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the building improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation. 
2.  Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an Appropriate Use. 
3.  Within the designated floodway as identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the construction of an Appropriate Use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter: 
(a)  Preservation of Flood Conveyance, so as Not to Increase Flood Stages Upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: 
i.  Designated floodway conveyance. "K" = (1.486/n)(AR 2/3 ) where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw Hill Book Company, New York) 
ii.  The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non vegetative land cover. 
iii.  Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
(1)  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length. 
(2)  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length. 
(3)  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used. 
(4)  Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties. 
(5)  All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. 
(b)  Preservation of Floodway Storage so as Not to Increase Downstream Flooding. 
i.  Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. 
ii.  Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost. 
iii.  Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. 
iv.  The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
v.  If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. 
vi.  There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure. 
(c)  Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as Not to Increase Stream Erosion or Flood Heights. 
i.  For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
ii.  In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip rap or other design measures. 
(d)  Construction of New Bridges or Culvert Crossings and Roadway Approaches. 
i.  The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
ii.  If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver. 
(1)  The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in Section 6-3-4 of this Chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures. 
(2)  Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per Section 6-3-6B4(b). 
(3)  Velocity increases must be mitigated per Section 6-3-6B4(c). 
(4)  If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received. 
(5)  The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by Section 6-3-6B. 
(6)  All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per Section 6-3-6B4(h). 
(e)  Reconstruction or Modification of Existing Bridges, Culverts, and Approach Roads. 
i.  The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage. 
ii.  If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. 
iii.  The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued. 
(f)  On Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water. 
i.  Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
ii.  A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. 
iii.  All dams and impoundment structures as defined in Section 6-3-1 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: 
(1)  The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention; 
(2)  The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning; 
(3)  The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a pre sedimentation basin. 
(4)  A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; 
(5)  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 6-3-6. 
(g)  Flood Proofing of Existing Habitable, Residential and Commercial Structures. 
i.  If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building. 
ii.  Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. 
(h)  Excavation in the Floodway. 
i.  When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other Appropriate Uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. 
ii.  The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
(1)  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length; 
(2)  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length; and 
(3)  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of streamlength shall be used. 
(4)  Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections. 
(i)  If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that: 
i.  There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat; 
ii.  Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values; 
iii.  The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria: 
(1)  The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical. 
(2)  Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent erosion. 
(3)  One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation. 
(4)  Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel. 
(5)  Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
(6)  All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover. 
(7)  If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate. 
(8)  A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water quality. 
(9)  New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel. 
(10)  There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project. 
(11)  Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and 
iv.  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 6-3-6. 
(j)  Seeding and Stabilization Plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant. 
(k)  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Measures. For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria: 
i.  The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of improvements. 
ii.  Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days. 
iii.  Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins. 
iv.  A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be preserved and/or re established, where possible, along existing channels (See 6-3-6B4(p)). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately. 
v.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995). 
(l)  Public Flood Control Projects. For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
(m)  General Criteria for Analysis of Flood Elevations. 
i.  The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in Section 6-3-4, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. 
ii.  If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet: 
(1)  The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and, 
(2)  Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. 
iii.  If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built. 
(n)  Conditional Letter of Map Revision. 
i.  If the Appropriate Use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. 
ii.  The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. 
iii.  In the case of non government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. 
iv.  No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. 
v.  After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR. 
(o)  Professional Engineer's Supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
(p)  For all activities in the floodway involving construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met: 
i.  A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel. 
ii.  Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an Appropriate Use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction. 
(q)  After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an Appropriate Use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans. 
4.  Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway. 
(a)  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to Section 6-3-6B4(d). 
(b)  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to Section 6-3-6B4(e). 
(c)  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to Section 6-3-6B4(a, b, h). 
(d)  The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in Section 6-3-1) and all other state, federal, or local units of government projects, including projects of the municipality or county. 
(e)  An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening. 
(f)  Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles. 
(g)  Projects in public bodies of water. 
5.  Other Permits. 
(a)  In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. 
(b)  No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the City. 
6.  Permits for Dams 
(a)  Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in Section 6-3-1 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. 
(b)  If the Director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. 
(c)  If the Director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 
7.  Activities That Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's Review. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation requirements. 
(a)  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
i.  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or 
ii.  Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway, or 
iii.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing streambed, and 
iv.  Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris. 
v.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
vi.  A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act 415 ILCS 5 (1992 State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed. 
vii.  All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met. 
(b)  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that: 
i.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and 
ii.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, 
iii.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
(c)  Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade. 
(d)  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
i.  Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length. 
ii.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
iii.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake. 
iv.  Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
(e)  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
i.  The approach roads will be half a foot or less above natural grade. 
ii.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
iii.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non erosive material, such as rip rap or gravel. 
iv.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
v.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
(Ord. 2008-38, 6-16-2008)  
6-3-7 - OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED 
In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
A.  Development Permit. 
1.  No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the Director. 
2.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Director 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 6-3-8 of this Chapter. 
(b)  The application for a development permit shall also include the following information: 
i.  A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use; 
ii.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
iii.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
iv.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
(1)  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow 
(2)  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale; 
(3)  Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and 
(4)  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance. 
(c)  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of Section 6-3-7B. 
(d)  Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. 
3.  Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository, the Director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(a)  Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to Section 6-3-4D. 
(b)  Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  The Director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. 
4.  The Director shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Director shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. 
B.  Preventing Increased Damages. 
1.  No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. 
2.  Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  The developer shall have a Registered Professional Engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of Section 6-3-6B4(a) through (l) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of Section 6-3-4D of this Chapter. 
i.  As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. 
ii.  Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of Section 800.0 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section 6-3-1 of this Chapter. 
(b)  A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR. 
(c)  No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the City per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part, Part 3708 for designated floodways. 
(d)  Permits for Dams 
i.  Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in Section 6-3-1 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. 
ii.  If the director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. 
iii.  If the Director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 
3.  The following activities may be permitted without a Registered Professional Engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter: 
(a)  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
i.  Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or 
ii.  Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway, or 
iii.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing streambed, and 
iv.  Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris. 
v.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. 
vi.  A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act 415 ILCS 5 (1992 State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed. 
vii.  All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met. 
(b)  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that: 
i.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and 
ii.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and 
iii.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
(c)  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
i.  Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length. 
ii.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
iii.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%. 
iv.  Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
(d)  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
i.  The approach roads will be a half foot or less above natural grade. 
ii.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
iii.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non erosive material, such as rip rap or gravel. 
iv.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
v.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
(e)  The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures; 
(f)  The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade; 
(g)  The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters; 
(h)  The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds); 
(i)  The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of flood waters; 
(j)  Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where: 
i.  The affected length of stream is less than 1,000 feet. 
ii.  The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or 
iii.  The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
4.  The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
5.  Compensatory Storage. 
(a)  Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(b)  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and a half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. 
(c)  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. 
(d)  All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.  
6-3-8 - PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS[3] 
In addition to the requirements found in Sections 6-3-5, 6-3-6, and 6-3-7 for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1 A30, A99, VO, V1 30, VE, V, M, or E), the following requirements shall be met. 
A.  Public Health Standards 
1.  No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE). 
2.  New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight. 
B.  Carrying Capacity and Notification. 
1.  For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. 
2.  In addition, the City shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. 
C.  Protecting Buildings. 
1.  All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year floodplain but within the 500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations: 
(a)  Construction or placement of a new building. 
(b)  Substantial improvement to an existing building as defined in 6-3-1, including an increase to the first floor area by more than 20%. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990. 
(c)  Substantial damage to an existing building as defined in 6-3-1. 
(d)  Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in 6-3-1. 
(e)  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and 
(f)  Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
2.  This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods. 
(a)  A residential or non residential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
(b)  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation. 
(c)  Fill Requirements. 
i.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. 
i.  The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. 
iii.  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. 
iv.  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
3.  A residential or non residential building may be elevated in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the Base Flood Elevation. 
(b)  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. 
(c)  All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. 
i.  The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation. 
ii.  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation. 
(d)  The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement. When the building wall encloses open space that is below the base flood elevation, gravity storm and sanitary sewers are required for the sanitary connections and sumps for the storm sewer connections. 
(e)  Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements: 
i.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. 
ii.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of Subsection 6-3-8C.3(e) above unless: 
i.  They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and, 
ii.  They are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
4.  Only a non residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that: 
(a)  A registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. 
(b)  The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. 
(c)  Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). 
5.  Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The building is not used for human habitation. 
(b)  All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the Appropriate Use criteria of Section 6-3-6. In addition, all other requirements of Section 6-3-5, 6-3-6 and 6-3-7 must be met. 
(c)  The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation. 
(d)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
(e)  The building shall be valued at less than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) and be less than 500 square feet in floor size. 
(f)  The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses. 
(g)  The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of Section 6-3-8C.3(a) 
6.  Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive Appropriate Use standards included in Section 6-3-6. Non conforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in accordance with Section 6-3-6B. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-38, 6-16-2008) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2008-38, 06-16-2008. 
 
6-3-9 - OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and development. 
A.  New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with Sections 6-3-5, 6-3-6, 6-3-7 and 6-3-8 of this Chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2). 
B.  Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. 
1.  Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per Section 6-3-2D and the floodway delineation per the definition in Section 6-3-1. 
2.  The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the State Water Survey. 
C.  Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
D.  The City Council shall not approve any Planned Unit Development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
6-3-10 - VARIANCES 
A.  No variances shall be granted to any development located in a designated floodway as defined in Section 6-3-1. 
1.  Whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Director for a variance. 
2.  The Director shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council. 
B.  No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that: 
1.  The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; 
2.  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; 
3.  The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
4.  There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance; 
5.  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; 
6.  The provisions of Sections 6-3-5B and 6-3-7B of this Chapter shall still be met; 
7.  The activity is not in a designated floodway; 
8.  The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; 
9.  The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and 
10.  All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been obtained. 
C.  The Director shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of Section 6-3-8 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
1.  Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; 
2.  Increase the risks to life and property; and 
3.  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability. 
D.  Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in 6-3-1 "Historic Structures," may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of Section 6-3-10, subject to the conditions that: 
1.  The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and, 
2.  The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-38, 6-16-2008)  
6-3-11 - DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY 
A.  The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. 
B.  Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. 
C.  This Chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. 
D.  This Chapter does not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.  
6-3-12 - PENALTY 
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this Chapter. Upon due investigation, the Director may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exist. The Director shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
A.  If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation: 
1.  The City may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this Chapter or make such other order as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with the Ordinance. 
2.  Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
3.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
4.  The City may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
B.  The Director shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended. 
1.  The Director is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit 
2.  No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Director. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: (1) the grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or revocation; and (2) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
C.  Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.  
6-3-13 - ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS 
A.  This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
B.  Where this Chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
C.  This Chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the City passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.  
6-3-14 - SEPARABILITY 
The provisions and sections of this Chapter shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.  
CHAPTER 4 - IMPLEMENTATION OF DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS DISTRICT 
SECTION 
 
6-4-1 - FUNCTIONS OF REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
The Business District Development and Redevelopment Commission shall be responsible for the investigation of methods of implementing plans for development and redevelopment of business districts whenever the City Council refers to it an area which the said Council has determined is in need of assistance by the City in order to implement its development or redevelopment in the manner determined by the City Council. Pursuant to such a reference, the Redevelopment Commission shall conduct meetings, exercise its powers or make recommendations to the City Council regarding the exercise of the powers as hereinafter set forth. No power shall be exercised or recommendation made to the City Council until after the Redevelopment Commission has conducted a public hearing on its proposals. Notice of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general distribution within the City not less than 15 days prior to the date of said hearing. Notice shall also be mailed to the owners of property directly affected by the proposals. For purposes of this Section, notice to the person listed on the tax rolls as the recipient of the real estate tax bill applicable to the parcel shall be deemed notice to the owner. Subsequent to such hearing, the Redevelopment Commission shall vote on the proposals, exercise its powers or make its recommendations along with a brief statement of the reasons for its recommendations in writing to the City Council. 
The hearing provided for in this Section shall not affect the necessity of a hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals in the event that such a hearing is required by law.  
6-4-2 - POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL 
In order to implement the development or redevelopment of a business area, the City Council shall have the following powers pursuant to recommendation by the Redevelopment Commission: 
A.  To designate an area of the City as a business district: 
B.  To exercise the use of eminent domain for the acquisition of real and personal property acquired pursuant to the provisions of a development or redevelopment plan; 
C.  To acquire, manage, convey or otherwise dispose of real and personal property acquired pursuant to the provisions of a development or redevelopment plan; 
D.  To borrow funds as it may be deemed necessary for the purpose of business district development and redevelopment, and in this connection issue such obligation or revenue bonds as it shall be deemed necessary, subject to applicable statutory limitations; 
E.  To sell, lease, trade or improve such real property as may be acquired in connection with business district development and redevelopment plans; 
F.  To establish by ordinance or resolution procedures for the planning, execution and implementation of business district plans.  
6-4-3 - POWERS OF REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
The Redevelopment Commission shall have the powers: 
A.  To approve all development and redevelopment proposals for a business district and to adopt a redevelopment plan for a business district; 
B.  To apply for and accept capital grants and loans from the United States and the State of Illinois or any instrumentality of the United States or the State, for the development and redevelopment in the district; 
C.  To enter into contracts with any public or private agency or person; 
D.  To employ all such persons as may be necessary for the planning, administration and implementation of business district plans but not expend funds for such purpose unless budgeted by the City Council. 
E.  To expend such public funds as may be necessary for the planning, execution and implementation of the business district plans within the amounts budgeted by the City Council for such purpose.  
ARTICLE 7 - FIRE REGULATIONS 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2005-06, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 2015-43, 7-6-2015. 
 
7-1-1 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND THE LIFE SAFETY CODE, NFPA 101 
The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code and its appendices, published by the International Code Council, Inc., and the 2015 edition of the Life Safety Code NFPA 101 and its appendices, published by the National Fire Protection Association, are adopted for the purpose of establishing fire prevention regulations for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, as though fully set forth in this Article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and amendments prescribed in this Article. When any provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance or code, or when the provisions of the International Fire Code and its appendices conflict with those of the Life Safety Code NFPA 101 and its appendices, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion of public safety shall prevail. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the International Fire Code or the Life Safety Code NFPA 101 and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail.  
7-1-2 - MODIFICATION BY AMENDMENT OF VARIOUS ARTICLES AND SECTIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND THE LIFE SAFETY CODE 101 
The International Fire Code and its appendices and The Life Safety Code 101 as adopted by this Article, are amended and/or supplemented to read as follows: 
A.  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Park Ridge and the Park Ridge Fire Department hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
B.  Appendices. The appendices B through G of the International Fire Code are adopted as part of this code. 
C.  Permits. The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for building permits and amendments to permits within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons for the rejection. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work or operation conforms to the requirements of this Code and all applicable laws and ordinances, the Building Official shall issue the permit as soon as practicable. All costs incurred for the review process shall be paid by the applicant. Construction documents approved by the Building Official are approved with the intent that such construction documents comply in all respects with this Code. Any omissions or errors on the construction documents do not relieve the applicant of having to comply with all applicable requirements of this Code. In addition, applicant shall have construction documents when deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official converted to a digital image in an auto cad format (.dwg) on a CD-RW medium. All costs incurred for these drawings shall be paid by the applicant. 
Operational permits, as defined by the International Fire Code, are not required. However, the Fire Code Official may prohibit or regulate any activity for which the International Fire Code requires an operational permit. 
D.  Board of Appeals. The appeal process in Article 15 of the Municipal Code shall be used to settle disputes pursuant to this Code. 
E.  Address Numbers. The Fire Code Official may require identification to be placed on exterior doors where the purpose of the door is not clearly evident. 
F.  Key Boxes—Where Required. Key boxes shall also be provided on all buildings with a fire alarm system or an automatic sprinkler system. The key box shall contain the following keys: 
1.  Entry; 
2.  All mechanical rooms; 
3.  All storage rooms; 
4.  Any key necessary to gain access to the fire alarm control panel Building owners shall be responsible for all costs associated with maintenance of the key box. 
Exceptions: 
1.  No building owner may refuse to obtain a key box unless the building owner must sign a waiver absolving the City from any liability associated with gaining access to the building. 
2.  Use Group R - 3. 
G.  Trusses. All buildings (except residential) that contain wood truss construction shall have a truss construction emblem affixed to the front of the structure. The truss construction emblem shall have a bright reflective color or may be made of reflective material. The following letters shall be printed on the emblem in a conspicuous size and color: 
"F" to signify a floor with wood truss construction; 
"R" to signify a roof with wood truss construction; 
"F/R" to signify a floor and roof with wood truss construction. 
The emblem shall be a nine by twelve inch rectangle with a yellow Isosceles triangle, permanently affixed to the left of the main entrance door or front of the building at a height of eight feet above the ground and shall be installed and maintained by the building owner. 
H.  Yard Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the building or property in no greater than 300-foot increments as directed by the Fire Code Official. 
I.  Fire Protection System Permits. Before any fire alarm, detection or fire suppression system is installed, enlarged or extended, a permit shall be obtained from the Building Code Official. The Code Official, prior to the issuance of the building permit, shall review construction documents. All costs incurred from the review process shall be paid by the applicant. 
J.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group A-1. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group A-1 occupancies. 
K.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group A-2. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group A-2 occupancies. 
L.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group A-3. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group A-3 occupancies. 
M.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group A-4. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group A-4 occupancies. 
N.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group—B. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group B occupancies. 
O.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group E. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group E occupancies. 
P.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group F. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group F occupancies. 
Q.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group M. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group M occupancies. 
R.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Where Required—Group S. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group S occupancies. 
S.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems Where Required—Group U. When deemed appropriate by the fire code official, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for Group U occupancies. 
T.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Monitoring and Alarms. Approved audio/visual devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system so as to be seen and heard throughout the building. An outside audio/visual device shall be installed over the fire department connection. 
Exception: Use groups R-3 and R-4. 
U.  Automatic Sprinkler System—Floor Control Valves: Approved supervised indicating control valves with water flow switches shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in a multistory building. 
V.  Automatic Sprinkler System—Safety Factor: Provide a minimum of 10% or 5 psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be 5-psi minimum below the seasonal water flow test supply. 
W.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Construction Documents: Provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate by each hydraulically calculated area on each drawing. 
X.  Adoption of NFPA Standards: The following section is added to this Code: The following NFPA standards and any future revisions to it are adopted as part of this Code. The appendices of these standards are considered part of the standard and are mandatory and not discretionary. Unless otherwise provided by the Fire Code Official, the latest versions of these standards shall be used: 
NFPA 14, Standpipes and Hose Systems 
NFPA 20, Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps 
NFPA 25, Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 
NFPA 96, Installation of Equipment for Removal of Smoke and Grease-Laden Vapors for Commercial Cooking Equipment 
Y.  Automatic Sprinkler System—XL Thinwall pipe: The use of XL Thinwall pipe is not permitted. 
Z.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Riser Rooms/Fire Pump Rooms: Sprinkler riser rooms and fire pump rooms shall be separated from other areas of the building by two-hour rated assemblies. These separate rooms shall have both an exterior and interior access. 
Exception: The Fire Code Official may waive these requirements if the applicant is able to provide certification from an approved source that another measure of safety at least equal to these requirements has been provided. 
AA.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems Check Valves: When a building is provided with more than one sprinkler riser, each riser shall be equipped with a check valve. 
AB.  Automatic Sprinkler—Systems Sprinkler Types: All business, assembly, and residential occupancies shall be equipped with residential and/or quick response sprinklers 
Exception: Areas where the Fire Code Official has determined that another type of sprinkler head would perform in a manner at least equal to those otherwise required. 
AC.  Standpipe Systems—Testing: In addition to the requirements set forth in NFPA 25, all dry standpipes must be hydrostatically tested annually at a minimum of 130 psi for two hours. 
AD.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Addressable Fire Control Panels: All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type. A remote indicator panel and associated controls shall be provided in an approved location. The visual zone indication shall lock in until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible-alarm silencing switch. 
Exception: Zoned panels are permitted if approved by the Fire Code Official. When a zoned panel is permitted, each floor shall be zoned separately and a zone shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. The length of any zone shall not exceed 200 feet in any direction. A zoning indicator panel and associated controls shall be provided in an approved location as determined by the Fire Code Official. The visual zone indication shall lock in until the system is reset and shall not be cancelled by the operation of an audible alarm-silencing switch. A separate zone by floor shall be provided for the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided: 
1.  Smoke detectors 
2.  Sprinkler water-flow devices 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes and 
4.  Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppressions systems. 
AE.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—System Improvements: In the event that a fire alarm panel requires replacement or if there is an addition to the current fire alarm system, the entire system shall be upgraded to meet current codes and standards. 
AF.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group A: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group A occupancies. 
AG.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group B: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group B occupancies. 
AH.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group E: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group E occupancies. 
AI.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group F: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group F occupancies. 
AJ.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group H: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group H occupancies. An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed for highly toxic gases, organic peroxides and oxidizers in accordance with other sections of this code. 
AK.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group M: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group M occupancies other than covered mall buildings complying with Section 402 of the International Building Code. 
AL.  Fire Alarm and Detections Systems—Where Required—Group R: A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group R occupancies other than Group R-3. 
AM.  Automatic Fire Detection: An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all Use Groups not provided with an automatic sprinkler system and in accordance with NFPA 72. Devices, combination of devices, appliances, and equipment shall comply with section 907.1.2. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where during normal operation products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to activate a smoke detector. 
AN.  Fire Department Connections: The fire department connection shall be located a maximum of 100 feet from a hydrant. Fire department connections shall be arranged in such a manner that the attachment to any one sprinkler connection shall serve all sprinkler systems and the attachment to any one standpipe connection will serve all standpipes within the building. 
AO.  Fire Pumps—Test Headers: An exterior test header shall be provided on all fire pump installations. An OS & Y control valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers. 
AP.  Floor Level Exit Signs: In all new construction and all remodeling projects requiring the installation of illuminated exit signs, wherever an illuminated exit sign is required, a low-level exit sign shall be installed 12 inches above the floor. The low-level exit signs shall be located on the striker side of the door or in a location determined by the fire code official. Low-level exit signs will not be required in areas considered impractical by the fire code official. 
AQ.  Reserved. 
AR.  Defective Containers and Tanks: The site shall be restored as required by all local codes and/or the City Building Department. Where the code official determines that the removal of the tank and piping is not necessary, the tank and piping shall be abandoned in place by the following method: 
1.  All flammable or combustible liquids from the tank and all connecting lines shall be removed. 
2.  The suction, inlet, gauge and vent lines shall be disconnected. 
3.  The tank shall be completely filled with an inert solid material, and the remaining underground piping shall be capped. 
4.  A record of tank size, location, date of abandonment and method utilized for placing the abandoned tank in a safe condition shall be kept by the City of Park Ridge Fire Department. 
5.  The Fire Department Fire Prevention Bureau shall be notified a minimum of two business days prior to any tank removal. 
AS.  Residential Sprinkler Code: The following section is adopted separately from the International Fire Code: 
1.  All new one and two family residential construction (IFC Use Group R-3) shall be equipped with residential sprinklers in accordance with NFPA 13 D. 
2.  In addition to the requirements in that standard, the following local rules will apply: 
a.  All piping shall be hydrostatically tested at 200 psi for two hours and be witnessed by the Fire Code Official or his or her designee. 
b.  Two business days advance notice shall be given before scheduling this test. 
c.  A six-inch alarm bell will be attached to the HVAC system ducting and will activate on water flow. 
d.  An acceptable horn/strobe device will be affixed to the exterior of the building in a location approved by the Fire Code Official. 
e.  Documentation of backflow-certification must be affixed to the sprinkler riser. 
f.  All piping passing through cold areas of the building shall be protected against freezing in a manner approved by the Code Official. Such protection may include: 
i.  Placing protective enclosures around the piping and insulating around the tops and sides of the pipe 
ii.  Providing insulation no less than R-38 over the sprinkler piping 
iii.  Running heating ducts in proximity of the sprinkler piping. All freeze protection measures shall be approved by the fire code official before the building is dry-walled. 
g.  Whenever possible, residential sprinkler systems shall be designed without the use of a residential sprinkler pump. The use of a residential sprinkler pump must be approved by the fire code official prior to installation. 
h.  Sprinklers shall be installed in attached garages. Sprinklers shall be located to protect the living spaces of the house from a fire originating in the garage. Dry horizontal sidewall sprinklers may be used to meet this requirement. 
AT.  Condominium Conversions: In any residential rental property undergoing a condominium conversion, if any electrical and/or any wall or ceiling opening occurs, or access is available on either side of the wall or ceiling, "updating" shall occur. "Updating" means that any required system must be either installed or modified to meet the current code regulations. In buildings with six units or more, updating shall require the installation of a fire sprinkler system and the installation of smoke detectors on each level of the unit, in each bedroom and in any area outside each bedroom. The smoke detectors shall be AC powered with battery back-up. The smoke detectors shall be wired together to activate simultaneously in case of a fire. In buildings with less than six units, updating shall require the installation of smoke detectors only. 
AU.  Fire Alarms—Direct Connect. All fire alarms required to be installed pursuant to the Fire Code must be directly connected to the City of Park Ridge in a manner approved by the City. 
AV.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—One and Two Family Residential Homes: Automatic Sprinkler Systems are required for all additions to one and two family residential homes if the square footage of the addition increases the Living Space, as defined herein, of the existing home by more than 50%. If the existing home has an automatic sprinkler system installed, then an automatic sprinkler system is required for the addition, regardless of the size of the addition. Automatic Sprinkler Systems are required for the entire structure, including the addition and the existing home, if the square footage of the addition increases the Living Space, as defined herein, of the existing home by more than 100%. 
AW.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems—Definition of Living Space: "Living Space" means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, as measured from the exterior wall surface or from the center line of walls joining two rooms or buildings, and shall include all usable space and all interior corridors, stairs, elevators, passageways, and enclosed porches which are finished for year-round use. Basements, cellars, attics, unheated porches, breezeways and garages are excluded from the calculation of Living Space. 
(Ord. No. 2005-120, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 2007-73, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 2015-43, 7-6-2015; Ord. No. 2019-44 , § 1A, 7-15-2019)  
CHAPTER 2 - BASIC FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2005-06, 1-3-2005. 
 
7-2-1 - AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES 
The Fire Official or duly authorized representative, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life an/or property, is empowered to direct any and all operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of his or her duty. The Fire Official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire Department. The Fire Official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Official.  
7-2-2 - INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any Fire Department operation.  
7-2-3 - COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Official or interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual.  
7-2-4 - VEHICLES CROSSING FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED 
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any fire hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street, alley-way, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the Fire Official in command of the operation.  
7-2-5 - DEFINITION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES 
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois.  
7-2-6 - VEHICLES FOLLOWING APPARATUS 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or other emergency, or to drive any vehicle within the immediate area where fire apparatus is in operation.  
7-2-7 - UNLAWFUL BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT 
A person shall not, without proper authorization from a Fire Official, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the vehicle's siren, horn, bell or other sound producing device, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.  
7-2-8 - DAMAGE, INJURY, FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure Fire Department personnel while performing departmental duties.  
7-2-9 - BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS 
It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, tamper with, deface obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or Fire Department connection. No shrubs, trees or other obstructing materials shall be permitted within a five-foot radius of any fire hydrant or connection.  
7-2-10 - HYDRANT USE PROHIBITED 
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the Fire Official and/or the City Water Department.  
7-2-11 - EXTERIOR FIRES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or permit to be burned, outdoors, any materials not contained in (1) an outdoor cooking grill in good working order and used in accordance with manufacturer's instructions; or (2) any manufactured incinerator, appliance, or firebox that is in good working order and used in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. An approved outdoor incinerator, appliance or firebox shall include any such device that is UL, FM or ULC listed. Only materials intended for use in such a device may be burned in the device. This may include seasoned hardwood, synthetic fireplace logs, propane or natural gas, kerosene or charcoal. The burning of yard waste or construction debris is prohibited in all instances. All safety devices provided by the manufacturer shall be used. This shall include, but shall not be limited to, screens, spark arrestors and covers. Outdoor cooking grills may be used on balconies and patios in multifamily residential occupancies. This shall not limit the authority of individual property owners or mangers to enact rules concerning these devices that are more restrictive than this Code. 
Exceptions: Whenever the Fire Code Official shall find that a public purpose exists for an exterior fire, and a permit has been obtained from the proper authorities of the State of Illinois and the County of Cook, the Fire Code Official is hereby authorized to allow an exterior fire.  
7-2-12 - MAINTENANCE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT 
No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of this code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the Fire Official.  
7-2-13 - SALE OF DEFECTIVE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS 
No person shall sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the Fire Official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when the units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.  
7-2-14 - POSSESSION, SALE, DISCHARGE, AND SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS 
It is unlawful for any person to possess, manufacture, store, offer or expose for sale, sell or discharge any fireworks, except for a competent display operator who is licensed by the State of Illinois and bonded and who has received prior approval from the Park Ridge Fire Department. The use of fireworks or other pyrotechnics will not be permitted inside any building. Anyone found to be in violation of this section shall relinquish all illegal fireworks to the police department who shall then destroy them. Fireworks include any combustible or explosive composition prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion or deflagration or detonation.  
7-2-15 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
Any of the provisions of this Article 7, or any violations or failure to comply with any order made thereunder, or any violation of any statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that prohibited conditions are maintained. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.  
ARTICLE 8 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 
SECTION 
 
8-1-1 - ESTABLISHMENT 
There is hereby created the Park Ridge Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Act. (20 ILCS 3305/2) 
This Emergency Management Agency shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.  
8-1-2 - COORDINATOR 
The Coordinator of the City Emergency Management Agency shall be the Fire Chief. The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the Emergency Management Agency.  
8-1-3 - FUNCTIONS 
The City Emergency Management Agency shall perform such Emergency Management Agency functions within the City as shall be prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management Agency Plan, and programs promulgated by the Governor; and in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits, as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid Agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into, as provided by the State Emergency Act.  
8-1-4 - SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM 
All or any members of the City organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State Emergency Management Agency, as provided for by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator of the City Emergency Management Agency. 
Any member of a mobile support team who is a City employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities, incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable compensations provided by law.  
8-1-5 - AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS 
The Coordinator of the City Emergency Management Agency may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the City Council.  
8-1-6 - EMERGENCY ACTION 
If the Governor proclaims that an emergency exists, in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States; or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the City Emergency Management Agency to cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency, and with the Governor, in the exercise of his emergency powers, as provided for by law.  
8-1-7 - COMPENSATION 
Members of the Emergency Management Agency who are paid employees or officers of the City, if called for training by the State Director of Emergency Management Agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to their position held. Members who are not City employees or officers shall receive for their training time such compensation as may be established by the City Council.  
8-1-8 - PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES 
The City Council may, on recommendation of the City Coordinator of Emergency Management Agency, authorize any purchases or contracts necessary to place the City in a position to combat effectively any disaster, resulting from the explosion of any nuclear device or other bomb/missile, or from a man-made or a natural disaster; to protect the public health and safety, to secure property, and provide emergency assistance to victims. 
In the event of a disaster, the City Coordinator of Emergency Management Agency, is authorized on behalf of the City, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material, as may be necessary for such purposes without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts or obligations, as authorized by the State Emergency Management Agency Act.  
ARTICLE 9 - PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. 2013-37, 7-1-2013. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - NEW CONSTRUCTION[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014. 
 
9-1-1 - PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND PERMIT 
All plans and specifications for new street pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalk, parkways, water and sewer not regulated under the provisions of Article 11 or Article 6-2 (New Subdivisions) constructed in the public right-of-way shall be submitted to the Building Official for his review, recommendations and approval prior to the issuance of a permit for such construction. 
All plans and specifications for flood control or sewer maintenance pursuant to Section 9-2-25 shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his review, recommendations and approval prior to the issuance of a permit for such construction. 
It shall be unlawful to construct any new public improvement within the public right-of-way without having first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be in writing on the forms specified by the Building Official and shall be filed with the Building Official. The required review approved by the City Engineer shall be included in all permit applications before issuance. 
The fee to be paid for such permit shall be .25% of the cost of said improvements, except for permits issued for work pursuant to Section 9-2-25. The fee for work pursuant to Section 9-2-25 shall be set forth in Section 20-7-2. 
All public improvements summarily described above shall be constructed in accordance with the current specifications of the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, and the provisions of Article 6-2 of this Code entitled "New Subdivisions." 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014)  
9-1-2 - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS EXEMPT 
Public improvements as described in Section 9-1-1 when conducted by the City or through the Board of Local Improvements shall not be subject to the strict provisions of this Article.  
9-1-3 - OPEN 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014)  
9-1-4 - MANAGEMENT AND INSPECTION 
All owners/developers who undertake new construction improvements to the public right-of-way are required to retain registered professional engineering representatives to design, manage and inspect such improvements as a representative for said owner/developer.  
CHAPTER 2 - CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-79, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2018-32, 8-20-2018. 
 
9-2-1 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 
a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the rights-of-way and the City as a whole. 
b)  Intent. In enacting this Chapter, the City intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities and utility facilities, including without limitation: 
1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the City's utilities and of other facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of facilities; 
5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
7)  Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the City's residential neighborhoods; 
8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
c)  Facilities Subject to This Chapter. This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the wireless provider or utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. Facilities constructed pursuant to Section 9-2-26 are only subject to the provisions of that Section. 
d)  Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The City, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the City enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this Chapter. 
e)  Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. 
1)  Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof; provided however that the City may impose on such provider such competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this Chapter (a) as are necessary to preserve, protect or to advance the public safety and welfare or to manage rights-of-way, and (b) do not conflict with the requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise, license or similar agreement with the City. 
2)  Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof; provided however that the City may impose on such provider such competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory requirements, terms and conditions set forth in this Chapter (a) as are necessary to preserve, protect or to advance the public safety and welfare or to manage rights-of-way, and (b) do not conflict with the requirements, terms and conditions, set forth in such franchise, license or similar agreement with the City. 
f)  Conflicts with Other Chapters. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
g)  Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations. 
h)  Sound Engineering Judgment. The City shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this Chapter and may exercise the power described in Section 9-2-22 to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-2 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI. American National Standards Institute. 
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Applicant. A person applying for a permit under this Chapter. 
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Backfill. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore or Boring. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable Operator. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable Service. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable System. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier Pipe. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
City. The City of Park Ridge. 
Clear Zone. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Code. The Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. 
Collocate or Collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Communications Service. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
Communications Service Provider. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
Conductor. Wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit. A casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction or Construct. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Cover. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing Facility. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Director of Public Works. The City Director of Public Works or his or her designee. 
Disrupt the Right-of-Way. For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement. Provision of a protective casing. 
Engineer. The City Engineer or his or her designee. 
Equipment. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
Extra Heavy Pipe. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this Chapter, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Chapter. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the City. 
Freestanding Facility. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
Hazardous Materials. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
Highway Code. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Highway. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Historic District or Historic Landmark. A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
Holder. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation. 
ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Jacking. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
Jetting. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint Use. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities. 
J.U.L.I.E.. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program. 
Major Intersection. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways. 
Monopole. A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a utility pole. 
Municipally-Owned Infrastructure. Infrastructure in the public right-of-way within the boundaries of the City, including, but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the City. 
Occupancy. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Parallel Facility. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
Pavement Cut. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 9-2-4 and 9-2-5 of this Chapter. 
Practicable. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Petroleum Products Pipelines. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Prompt. That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
Public Entity. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
Restoration. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way. Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the City. "Right-of-way" or "Rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include City buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
Sale of Telecommunications at Retail. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security Fund. That amount of security required pursuant to Section 9-2-10. 
Shoulder. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Small Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Sound Engineering Judgment. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. Telecommunications shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications Provider. Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications Retailer. Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
Trench. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is not a small wireless facility as defined in this Chapter. 
Utility Pole. An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. 
Vent. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video Service. That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v). 
Water Lines. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet Boring. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
Wireless Facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility" does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
Wireless Infrastructure Provider. Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the City. 
Wireless Provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service provider. 
Wireless Services. Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless Services Provider. A person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless Support Structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-3 - ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the City shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the registrant's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on its behalf in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section 9-2-8 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A telecommunications carrier, provider or retailer that is required under this Section to register shall be deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement of 12-11-7. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-4 - PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES 
a)  Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any City right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this Chapter), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance, the replacement of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the City at least ten days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. The City may require a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or that require lane closures. 
b)  Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The application for a small wireless facility, along with supporting information and notices, must be submitted to the Director of Public Works. 
c)  Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1)  The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless provider or utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
5)  Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file with the City: 
i)  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
ii)  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this Section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
7)  Evidence of insurance as required in Section 9-2-8 of this Chapter; 
8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 9-2-10 of this Chapter; 
9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Chapter (See Section 9-2-22); and 
10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the City. 
d)  Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Facilities. In addition to the requirements of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific facility that is the subject of the permit application: 
1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, Construction class, and operating Pressures; 
3)  In the case of Water Lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, have been satisfied; or 
5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
e)  Applications for small wireless facilities must also include the following: 
1)  Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application; 
2)  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings; 
3)  A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or municipally-owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the small wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm to any residential structure; 
4)  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
5)  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application; 
6)  Certification that the collocation complies with Section 9-22-17 below; and 
7)  Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application. 
f)  Applicant's Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the City within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
g)  Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as required by 20-7-2 to defray the reasonable cost to the City of reviewing the application. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
h)  Application Fees for Small Wireless Facilities. All applications for the collocation of a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). All applications for the collocation of more than one small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in said application. An application for the installation of a small wireless facility that will require a new utility pole must be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
i)  Consolidated Applications for Small Wireless Facilities. Applications for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided they involve the same type of small wireless facility and the same type of structure. The City may, at its discretion, remove small wireless facility collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for purposes of deeming the application incomplete or denied. 
(Ord. 2006-49, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-5 - ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS. 
a)  City Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of Public Works on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, or regulations that concern public safety, the Director of Public Works shall notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code provisions upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional application fees. 
When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the City will approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
b)  Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers. 
1)  Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence work governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the City not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
2)  In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this Chapter. 
3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit is required for work pursuant to Section 9-2-4 of this Chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section. 
c)  Additional City Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided the holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
d)  Application Deadlines for Small Wireless Facilities. Applications are deemed complete if the City does not notify the applicant otherwise within 30 days of receipt of the application. 
If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an existing utility pole, the City will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within 90 days. If the City fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the application to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of a new utility pole, the City will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within 120 days. If the City fails to notify the applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-6 - EFFECT OF PERMIT 
a)  Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
b)  Duration. No permit issued to a utility shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed within 180 days after the issuance of the permit. If collocation is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small wireless facilities are valid for five years from the time of issuance. 
c)  Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the City with such City representatives in attendance as the City deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
d)  Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the City does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the City and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
e)  The City shall charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless facilities on municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-of-way equal to either two hundred dollars ($200.00) per utility pole, or the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the City utility pole, whichever is greater. If the City elects to charge the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-7 - REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS 
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with Section 9-2-2 of this Chapter. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefore. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-8 - INSURANCE 
a)  Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed below: 
1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
i)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
ii)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; 
iii)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability; and 
iv)  Wireless providers must include the City as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy; 
2)  Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks; and 
3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits. 
If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then it shall require its contractors and subcontractors to comply with this Section and must include this requirement in its contracts with all contractors and subcontractors. 
b)  Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
c)  Copies Required. The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this Section to the City within ten days following receipt of a written request therefore from the City. 
d)  Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section. 
e)  Self-Insurance. A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A wireless provider or utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of Subsections b), c) and d) of this Section. A wireless provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under Subsection a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
f)  Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Wireless Provider's or Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
g)  Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-9 - INDEMNIFICATION 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider's or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-10 - SECURITY 
a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for: 
1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter; 
2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this Chapter; and 
3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable law. 
b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum: 
1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the City and the permittee; 
2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the City of any amounts covered by it; and 
3)  Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase. 
d)  Withdrawals. The City, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
3)  Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or 
4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the City determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund. 
e)  Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in Subsection c) of this Section. 
f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required in Subsection c) of this Section. 
g)  Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
h)  Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.  
9-2-11 - PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION 
a)  City Right to Revoke Permit. The City may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons: 
1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
2)  Non-compliance with this Chapter; 
3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
b)  Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The City shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 9-2-11. 
c)  Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the City, the permittee shall have the following options: 
1)  Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the City within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal to the City within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this Subsection. 
d)  Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within Subsection a) of this Section. 
e)  Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of Subsection c) of this Section, the City or its designee may, at the option of the City: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City for all costs of removal.  
9-2-12 - CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS 
a)  Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the City no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
b)  Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's right-of-way. 
c)  Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.  
9-2-13 - GENERAL CONSTUCTION STANDARDS 
a)  Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
3)  Highway Design Manual; 
4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
7)  Flagger's Handbook; and 
8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations. 
b)  Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.  
9-2-14 - PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL 
a)  Public Safety. The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facilities located in the City right-of-way may not interfere with the frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with industry standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference at its own costs. The City may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facility based on such interference if the interference is not corrected. 
The City may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety. This reservation of space may preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the City determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
b)  Minimum Requirements. The City's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
c)  Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The wireless provider or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the facility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
d)  Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
e)  Notice When Access is Blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 9-2-21 of this Chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
f)  Compliance. The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-15 - LOCATION OF FACILITIES 
a)  General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
1)  No Interference with City Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the City's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the City's utility facilities. 
2)  Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
3)  No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
4)  No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
5)  Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
6)  The City is not required to install or maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or maintain utility poles in any location if it makes a non-discriminatory decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type. For City utility poles with collocated small wireless facilities in place when the City makes a decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles, the City will, at its discretion, either maintain the utility pole or install and maintain an alternative utility pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
b)  Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways. 
1)  Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
i)  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
ii)  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
iii)  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
iv)  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
v)  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
2)  Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
i)  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
ii)  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
iii)  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
c)  Facilities Crossing Highways. 
1)  No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
2)  Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
3)  90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
4)  Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
i)  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
ii)  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
iii)  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
5)  Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
i)  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
ii)  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
6)  Markers. The City may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989). 
d)  Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The City may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
e)  Freestanding Facilities. 
1)  Small Wireless Facilities. 
i)  The City may not require the placement of a small wireless facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the application necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed relocated collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative location will not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The City may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards described below. 
ii)  If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the scale of the new freestanding facility. 
2)  Other Facilities. 
i)  The City may restrict the location and size of any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or modified so that the height of the free standing facility is higher by more than ten feet or more than 10%, whichever is greater, than any other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed facility, measured along the center line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other freestanding facilities located within 300 feet of the proposed facility, the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be 45 feet. 
ii)  The City may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
iii)  If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles, utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the scale of the new freestanding facility. 
f)  Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if: 
1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and municipally-owned infrastructure shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or monopoles is strongly discouraged. 
g)  Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures. 
1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
i)  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
ii)  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
iii)  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
iv)  The proposed method of attachment; 
v)  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
vi)  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
vii)  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
viii)  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
h)  Appearance Standards. 
1)  The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
2)  A utility facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
i)  Height Restrictions for Small Wireless Facilities. Small wireless facilities are limited to a maximum height of ten feet above the utility pole or wireless structure on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small wireless facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of: (i) ten feet higher than the tallest existing utility pole within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure that is in the same right-of-way; or (ii) 45 feet above ground level. The City shall designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure shall control the height limitation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-16 - DESIGN AND APPEARANCE STANDARDS 
a)  Residential Design Standards. 
Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless facilities. 
Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each facility located in a district zoned for residential uses: 
1)  Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth techniques to reduce potential visual impacts. 
2)  All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth of camouflage designs are presented in Figure 1 below. 
3)  Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment associated with the facility must not emit sound. 
4)  Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No exposed cable is allowed. 
5)  No flashing lights or unnecessary, non-essential stickers are allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same color as the pole to which they are attached. 
6)  In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements and standards. 
7)  All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings. 
8)  Colors and materials shall be chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility. 
9)  Antennas attached to existing poles or municipally-owned infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure. 
10)  Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend with surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a period of one-year from planting. 
11)  All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement landscape is determined to be infeasible the City may accept mitigation funds to use elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the restoration work or reseeding for a period of one-year. 
12)  No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless expressly allowed by the City in a written approval, recommended under FCC regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations center. All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures. 
Figure 1. Sample Stealth Designs for Small Cell Utility Poles: 
 
 
b)  Design Standards in Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones. 
Purpose: to protect and promote the City's unique character in a manner consistent with State and federal laws and regulations. 
Applicability: These design standards shall apply to (a) each area, district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the City's Comprehensive Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the community; and (b) each redevelopment area designed under the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act: 
1)  Siting of facilities in special aesthetic/economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance of established zone. 
2)  Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications. 
3)  Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time compatible with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree). 
4)  Facilities must be designed so that the facilities silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be virtually indistinguishable from their background. 
5)  Examples of stealth of camouflage designs are presented in Figure 1. 
c)  Design Standards in Historic Districts. 
Purpose: to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the City by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, properties, structures, sites and objects having a special historical interest or value to the City and its citizens. 
Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district or on any historic landmark: 
1)  Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State historic Preservation Office are also to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. 
2)  Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures in their applications. 
3)  Applicant must implement said City-approved design concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to achieve compliance with historic preservation review. 
4)  Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant submits an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant must meet with the City to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the installation. 
5)  When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy the distinguishing character of the property or its environment. 
6)  Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking, limited paint removal and reapplication of paint. 
d)  General Design Standards. 
Applicability: These design standards apply to all facilities: 
1)  All facilities not governed by the preceding design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The facility, including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or municipally-owned infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or covered with an appropriate cover. 
2)  The City may discourage the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
3)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners. 
4)  A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats any existing concealment elements of the utility pole or municipally-owned infrastructure to which it is attached. 
5)  Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018)  
9-2-17 - CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS 
a)  Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods. 
1)  Boring or Jacking. 
i)  Pits and Shoring. Bore or Jacking under Rights-of-Way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for Boring or Jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of Boring or Jacking operations and Backfilled within 48 hours after Boring or Jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the Boring or Jacking operation. 
ii)  Wet Bore or Jetting. Wet Boring or Jetting shall not be permitted under the Roadway. 
iii)  Borings with Diameters Greater Than Six Inches. Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm). 
iv)  Borings with Diameters Six Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either Jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
v)  Tree Preservation. Any Facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root system. 
2)  Trenching. Trenching for Facility installation, repair, or maintenance on Rights-of-Way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
i)  Length. The length of open Trench shall be kept to the Practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe line testing. Only one half of any intersection may have an open Trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works. 
ii)  Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open Trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where Practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the Roadway and the Trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the Roadway. Where Right-of-Way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the Roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location. 
iii)  No trenching shall be permitted in any Parkway. 
3)  Backfilling. 
i)  Any pit, Trench, or Excavation created during the installation of Facilities shall be Backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for Backfill, suitable granular Backfill shall be used. 
ii)  For a period of three years from the date Construction of a Facility is completed, a Utility shall be responsible to remove and Restore any Backfilled area that has settled due to the Construction of the Facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the Utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and Backfill material to the top of the installed Facility, place and properly compact new Backfill material, and Restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
4)  Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is permitted under Section 9-2-22, the following requirements shall apply: 
i)  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works. 
ii)  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City. 
iii)  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
vi)  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
5)  Encasement. 
i)  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the City. 
ii)  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
iii)  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
iv)  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
v)  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided; 
vi)  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
6)  Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
TYPE OF FACILITY 	MINIMUM COVER 
Electric Lines 
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines 	30 Inches (0.8 m) 
18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by City) 
Gas or Petroleum Products 	30 Inches (0.8 m) 
Water Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
 
b)  Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities. 
1)  Electric Power or Communication Lines. 
i)  Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
ii)  Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
iii)  Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
iv)  Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after placement. 
2)  Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
i)  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
ii)  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
iii)  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
iv)  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
3)  Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192-Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
4)  Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
5)  Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois." 
6)  Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
c)  Materials. 
1)  General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
2)  Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the City. 
3)  Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the City shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
d)  Operational Restrictions. 
1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
2)  These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction are those set forth in Section 14-9-3 of this Code. 
e)  Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2018-32 , adopted 8-20-2018, renumbered Sections 9-2-16—9-2-25 as 9-2-17—9-2-26 after adopting a new Section 9-2-16.  
9-2-18 - VEGETATION CONTROL 
a)  Electric Utilities—Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations and all current OSHA and ANSI A300 Integrated Vegetation Management standards. 
b)  Other Utilities—Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this Chapter. 
1)  Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
2)  Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
c)  Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The City may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
d)  Chemical Use. 
1)  Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the City for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 2009-107, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-19 - REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF FACILITIES 
a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the City, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon, the rights-of-way. Wireless providers are required to provide the City with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless facilities. Such notice must include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
b)  Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the City, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this Chapter; or 
4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
c)  Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within rights-of-way, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
d)  Abandonment of Facilities. 
1)  Small Wireless Facilities. As used in this section, a small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless facility shall notify the City within 90 days of it being abandoned and the owner of that small wireless facility must remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after sending such written notice to the City. The City may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for City utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
2)  Other Utility Facilities. As used in this section, a facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the City, the utility shall notify the City within 90 days. The owner of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within 90 days after sending such written notice to the City. The City may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for City utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-20 - CLEANUP AND REPAIR 
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this Section may be extended by the Director of Public Works for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-21 - MAINTANENCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTANENCE 
a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense. 
b)  Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately. 
3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
c)  Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-22 - VARIANCES 
a)  Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this Chapter must do so in writing to the Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
b)  Authority to Grant Variances. The Director of Public Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
c)  Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Director of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
d)  Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
e)  Right to Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this Chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-23 - PENALTIES 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during, or on which, a violation occurs or continues. There may be times when the City will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-24 - ENFORCEMENT 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-25 - SEVERABILITY 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. No. 2007-79, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
9-2-26 - CONSTRUCTION OF FLOOD CONTROL AND SEWER MAINTENANCE DEVICES IN PARKWAY 
a)  Property owners may install drainage pop-ups and other facilities used to aid in sewer maintenance, flood control or improving stormwater drainage in the public parkway, subject to the requirements of this Section 9-2-26. 
b)  Property owners must obtain a permit pursuant to Article 15 prior to constructing or installing any facilities pursuant to this Section 9-2-26. 
c)  All such facilities must be no larger than eight inches in diameter. 
d)  All such facilities and any related equipment must be installed at grade. No facilities may be placed in a location that will require relocation or displacement of any of the City's utility facilities or that will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the City's utility facilities. 
e)  All property owners must indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from and against all claims arising out of the construction and/or installation of the facility. All property owners must sign a Right-of-Way Agreement, in a form to be provided by the City, which shall be recorded with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, as part of the permit application submitted for the work. 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2018-32 , § II, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for 9-2-17.  
CHAPTER 3 - OBSTRUCTIONS AND DEPOSITS[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-14-2014. 
 
9-3-1 - MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY 
All streets, alleys and public ways in the City shall be maintained under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. He shall have general charge of all work done on such places, shall superintend the street cleaning and repairing and the protection of the street sewers against damage and blockage.  
9-3-2 - DUMPING, OBSTRUCTIONS AND STORAGE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any ashes, sweepings or waste matter of any kind on any public right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any granular building material, or sand, gravel or soil of any kind on any public right-of-way in such a manner as would cause the same or part to be washed into the street sewerage system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, dump, deposit or stock building materials of any kind on any public right-of-way or near any street intersection causing the obstruction of sight visibility.  
9-3-3 - TAMPERING 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, tamper with, or remove any warning signs, barricades or warning lights placed upon the streets and alleys by the authority of the City, or placed upon the streets or alleys in compliance with this Chapter or other ordinances of the City.  
9-3-4 - ENCROACHMENTS 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches on any public right-of-way, except as permitted by Section 9-2-25. 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014)  
9-3-5 - GAMES PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to play any games on any street.  
9-3-6 - PENALTY 
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).  
CHAPTER 4 - TREES AND SHRUBS 
SECTION 
 
9-4-1 - CONTROL 
The Municipal authorities are hereby provided full and complete control over all trees, grass, shrubs and flowers which are outside the property line of privately owned real property and real property not owned by the City.  
9-4-2 - PLANTING, MAINTENANCE OR REMOVAL 
It shall be unlawful to plant, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any trees, shrubs or flowers in any parkway outside of the sidewalk line on any street or public way or on any City property in the City without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the City Forester.  
9-4-3 - OBSTRUCTION OR ENCROACHMENT 
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees and/or shrubs on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging any public thoroughfares, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular travel. The owner or occupant shall cause the same to be removed within ten days of notification from the City Forester, to such owner or occupant.  
9-4-4 - ABUSE, MUTILATION OR INJURY 
No person, without lawful authority, shall willfully injure, deface, disfigure, cut, carve, transplant, remove, destroy, attach any rope, wire, nail, advertising posters, election posters or other contrivance to any tree, shrub, grass or flower, allow any gaseous liquid, chemical or solid substance which is harmful to such trees, shrubs, grass and flowers to come in contact with them; or set fire to, or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat therefrom will injure any portion of any tree, shrub, grass or flower, located on any public place or thoroughfare.  
9-4-5 - REMOVAL OF HAZARDOUS AND/OR DEAD TREES AND LIMBS 
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall remove any hazardous, dead or dying trees or hazardous, dead or dying limbs dangerous to life, limb or property located upon the premises of such owner of property within ten days whenever required to do so by notice from the City Forester served upon the owner or occupant of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-107, 12-21-2009)  
9-4-6 - PROTECTION 
All trees along any street or on other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street construction, repair or improvement, shall be guarded so as to avoid all injury to the trunk, crown and unnecessary injury to the root system of the tree. Building materials, soil or other debris shall not be placed on City property in the root zone area of the City-owned trees, as determined by the City Forester. Persons, firms, corporations, and utility companies, when installing underground systems on City property, shall protect the root zone areas of City-owned trees by auguring the root zone area as follows: 
(Tree diameter [DBH] measured at 4.5' above the ground) 
0 - 2" D.B.H. Auger 1 foot from face of tree in all directions. 
3 - 4" D.B.H. Auger 2 feet from face of tree in all directions. 
5 - 9" D.B.H. Auger 5 feet from face of tree in all directions. 
10 - 14" D.B.H. Auger 10 feet from face of tree in all directions. 
15 - 19" D.B.H. Auger 12 feet from face of tree in all directions. 
19" and over D.B.H. Auger 15 feet from face of tree in all directions. 
New driveway and widening construction (not replacements) shall be placed at least 10 feet from the trunk of City owned trees, or at the discretion of the City Forester.  
9-4-7 - INTERFERENCE 
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with a City official engaged in the execution or enforcement of this Chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the Municipality.  
9-4-8 - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 
A.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter, other than Sections 9-4-4 and 9-4-11, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
B.  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of Section 9-4-4 or 9-4-11 shall be required to pay the cost of removal and replacement of damaged parkway trees and shall be fined a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per diameter inch, as defined by Section 15-18-9, of the tree removed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-107, 12-21-2009)  
9-4-9 - TREE PLANTING REQUIRED AT NEW CONSTRUCTION 
Any application for any building permit for any residential construction in excess of 1,000 square feet, and any new business or institutional construction, and any additional construction at any business or institutional structure increasing the bulk thereof shall, in addition to any other fee, be subject to a fee for planting of parkway trees. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the City Forester in accordance with the following: 
A.  The fee shall be the City's actual cost of acquiring and planting not less than one tree for each 30 linear feet of parkway at the subject property unless the City Forester shall determine in accordance with generally accepted forestry standards that the subject property cannot accommodate such trees; provided, however, that in the case of residential construction which consists of an addition to an existing residential building the fee shall be equal to that charged for three-inch diameter trees under the City's "Share-the-Cost" reforestation program. 
B.  The trees shall be of a species determined by the City Forester to be appropriate for the particular location and shall be of a diameter not less than three inches measured six inches above the ground.  
9-4-10 - CONSERVATOR OF THE PEACE 
The City Forester and Forester are hereby designated conservators of the peace.  
9-4-11 - PRUNING BY UTILITIES 
A.  Whenever any utility company having overhead facilities in public rights-of-way or in utility easements on private property in the City shall receive a permit to conduct scheduled, non-emergency pruning of trees in such rights-of-way or easement, the company shall carry out that pruning in accordance with standards set forth by the International Society of Arboriculture in its publication "Tree-Pruning Guidelines 1995" and the current ANSI A300 Integrated Vegetation Management Standard which is hereby adopted and incorporated into this Code. 
B.  Permitted pruning may be conducted at any time of the year, except as follows: 
•  All species of elms shall not be pruned from March 1 through October 31. 
•  All species of red oak shall not be pruned from April 1 through November 1. 
C.  Before a permit will be issued, an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture and representing the utility company, shall meet with the City Forester, together inspect each tree to be pruned, and agree on the manner of pruning each tree. 
D.  Prior to conducting any scheduled, non-emergency pruning, a utility company shall notify owners of property adjoining the area to be pruned not less than seven days prior to commencing work. Notification shall be by door hanger or other writing, placed securely at the main entrance of the property. 
(Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. No. 2009-107, 12-21-2009)  
CHAPTER 5 - STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS 
SECTION 
 
9-5-1 - BASE LINES FOR NUMBERING 
All lots or buildings located on the north and south streets, or on streets running in a northerly or southerly direction, shall be numbered from Touhy Avenue as a base line, beginning with number 1 North, at the north line of Touhy Avenue, and increasing towards the north, and beginning with number 1 South, at the south line of Touhy Avenue, and increasing towards the south. 
All lots or buildings located on the east and west streets, or on streets running in an easterly or westerly direction, shall be numbered from Canfield Road and a continuation or extension of the line of Canfield Road to the north and south as a base line, beginning with number 1 West, at said base line as extended, and increasing towards the west, and beginning with number 1 East, at said base line as extended, and increasing toward the east.  
9-5-2 - DIRECTION PREFIX TO STREET NAMES 
All north and south streets running in a northerly or southerly direction or having been numbered on the north and south building-numbering basis, shall bear the prefix "N" or "S", with reference to said location with Touhy Avenue. 
All east and west streets or streets running in an easterly or westerly direction, or having been numbered on the east and west building-number basis, shall bear the prefix "E" or "W", according to their location with reference to said Canfield Road, as extended, base line.  
9-5-3 - ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS 
The Director of Community Preservation and Development or a designated representative and any such assistants, or other employees as may be acting under his direction and authority shall assign or cause to be assigned to each lot or part of lot, residence, apartment or place of business, its legal number and shall, upon request, inform the owner or possessor of such premises as to the number so assigned. 
(Ord 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
9-5-4 - ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS 
The even numbers on north and south streets or streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be on the west side of the streets. The even numbers on east and west streets or streets running in an easterly or westerly direction shall be on the north side of the streets.  
9-5-5 - NUMBERING REQUIRED 
Every owner, agent or person in possession of a building shall number the same in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance to the building to which they are attached. If the main entrance is not visible from the street, the numbers must be on the walkway side at least six feet (6') above the ground within two feet of the edge of the building. Buildings on corner lots shall display the numbers facing the street which express the address. If there is no walkway side, then the numbers must appear on the driveway side. The numbers should not be obscured by bushes or other decorative materials. Each of the figures of every such number or numbers shall be not less than three inches in height, in Arabic numerals of contrasting color with the background so as to be easily and distinctly read from the street.  
CHAPTER 6 - COMMERCIAL USE OF PUBLIC WAYS[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-28, 3-15-2010. 
 
9-6-1 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to sell, offer for sale, display or store goods, merchandise, publications, products or service of any kind on any public right-of-way, street, sidewalk or parkway unless a special event permit authorizing such commercial activity on such public way has been issued as provided in this Chapter.  
9-6-2 - CONDITIONS OF PERMIT 
A special event permit may be issued for temporary use of a public way in a business zoning district for commercial activity subject to the following conditions: 
A.  A special event permit for commercial activity in the public way may be issued only to a commercial establishment registered with the City as provided in Article 12, Chapter 2, of the Municipal Code. Such a special event permit shall only authorize a commercial establishment to use: 
1.  The public way contiguous to its own business premises; or 
2.  The public way that is not contiguous to its own premises if: 
a.  The commercial establishment has another bona fide Park Ridge business location; 
b.  Such use is in conjunction with a community wide or business district wide "sidewalk sale" event; and 
c.  The commercial establishment has written permission from the owner of the business that is contiguous to public way space to be used. 
B.  A separate special event permit is required for each day such activity will occur. No commercial establishment may receive more than six special event permits in any calendar year. 
C.  A permit shall not authorize and it shall be unlawful: 
1.  to affix, secure or attach any goods, merchandise, display, advertising or equipment to any street, sidewalk, or parkway or to any pole, traffic control device or other permanent structure or equipment in the public way; 
2.  to block the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along or across the public way or ingress and egress from any premises adjoining the public way; not less than five feet of a sidewalk shall be completely unobstructed; 
3.  to create any hazardous condition. 
D.  An applicant for a permit shall, on behalf of itself and, in the case of a group application as provided in Section 9-6-3, on behalf of each participating commercial establishment, provide a certificate of insurance verifying that the applicant has in effect at the time of the application an indemnity agreement in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) indemnifying and holding the City of Park Ridge harmless against any and all liability and expenses whatsoever, for bodily injury or death, including without limitation injury or death to agents, employees, servants or volunteers of the applicant(s) that may be causally related to any act of ordinary negligence, intentional, willful or wanton misconduct claim, loss or injury arising out of the commercial use of the public way. The certificate of insurance is subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
E.  No special event permit shall be issued for the permanent or continuous use or occupancy of a public way for any commercial activity. 
F.  No special event permit shall be issued for any commercial activity on a public way in any residential zoning district. 
(Ord 2005-55, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 2006-75, 9-5-2006)  
9-6-3 - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
An application for a special event permit shall be made to the City Manager on forms provided by the City. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid for each application. A single application may be submitted by a group of commercial establishments or by an organization representing several commercial establishments provided that such application shall identify individually each commercial establishment participating in the special event. The applicant shall provide such additional information as the City Manager may require. If the applicant meets the conditions set forth in this Chapter, the City Manager shall issue the permit.  
9-6-4 - PARK DISTRICT EXEMPTION 
This Chapter shall not apply to any temporary commercial activity on a sidewalk or parkway immediately contiguous to a public park, when conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the Park Ridge Recreation and Park District authorizing such activity within the contiguous park; provided, however, that no such park permit shall be effective to authorize permanent or continuous use or occupancy of such sidewalk or parkway for any commercial activity.  
9-6-5 - REMOVAL 
Any device, equipment, merchandise or display (a) placed on any street, sidewalk or parkway; or (b) attached to any pole, traffic control device or other permanent structure or equipment in a public way; or (c) obstructing any public way; or (d) creating any hazardous condition, may be immediately removed by the City. If the owner fails to reclaim such item within 30 days of removal, such item may be disposed of by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2010-28, 03-15-2010)  
9-6-6 - PENALTY 
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 7 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS REGULATIONS[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
History— Ord. 2013-37, 7-1-2013. 
 
9-7-1 - SPILLS PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful, whether intentional or unintentional, for any person, firm or corporation to release, emit, spill or leak any Hazardous Material(s) in the City.  
9-7-2 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this chapter, these words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
City. Any department or division of the City of Park Ridge. 
Expenses to the city. All costs and expenses of the City incurred in the clean up or abatement of Hazardous Material(s) or the extinguishing of a fire involving Hazardous Material(s). This shall include the following: (1) actual labor costs of City personnel involved in the clean up or abatement of the discharge(s) or fire including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefit and administrative overhead; (2) any medical expenses; immediate or long term, of personnel exposed to the Hazardous Material(s); (3) cost of equipment operation; (4) municipal damage or loss as determined by the City; (5) cost of materials; (6) repair; (7) cost of any labor and material(s) expended through the retention of other parties to assist in clean up, abatement and/or repair of the property in the area of the incident; and (8) all other expenses reasonably incidental to the Hazardous Material(s) Incident. For the purpose of this Chapter 7, "repair" shall mean, without exception, the return of the property to the condition that existed immediately prior to the incident. 
Hazardous material(s). Hazardous Material(s) shall include, but not be limited to, explosives, compressed gases, flammable and combustible liquids, flammable and water reactive solids, oxidizers and peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, corrosives or otherwise regulated materials or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
Hazardous material(s) incident. The leakage, release, seepage or emission of any Hazardous Material(s) which, due to its quantity, form concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the fire chief or his or her authorized representative, based upon a reasonable degree of scientific certainty, to pose a risk to the life, health or safety of persons, property or the environment.  
9-7-3 - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RESPONSE; COST OF REIMBURSEMENT; FAULT 
The person or companies in immediate control or possession of the Hazardous Material(s) at a Hazardous Material(s) Incident shall be responsible for reimbursement to the City for all Expenses to the City. There shall be joint and several liability for reimbursement among the person(s) or entities in immediate control of the Hazardous Material(s), the shipper, the manufacturer, the distributor, the transporter of the Hazardous Material(s) and/or third parties having caused or contributed to the cause of the release of the Hazardous Material(s). The fault of the entity in immediate control or possession shall not be an issue in the attachment of this liability.  
9-7-4 - DISTRIBUTION OF REIMBURSED COSTS; REPLACEMENT OF MATERIAL(S) AND/OR OTHER EXPENSES 
The reimbursement funds may be, but not by way of limitation, used as follows: to replenish the supplies used by the City at the scene of the Hazardous Material(s) Incident. Such supplies may include, but shall not be limited to, protective clothing, absorbents, neutralizing chemicals, detection monitoring equipment, firefighting foams and chemicals, overtime personnel expenses, laboratory analysis, medical treatment, immediate and long term, of exposed or injured personnel, or equipment or supplies damaged or destroyed by exposure to the Hazardous Material(s) at the incident.  
9-7-5 - NOT A LIMITATION OF REMEDIES 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to relieve any party from any other obligation or responsibilities that it might otherwise have to any other agency or party.  
9-7-6 - PENALTY 
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be fined in an amount of not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus all costs and expenses involved in litigation for each offense. This fine shall be in addition to the reimbursement of Expenses to the City.  
ARTICLE 10 - TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 
 
10-1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and phrases whenever they occur in this Article shall be construed as herein defined: 
Applicant . Any person or persons, or in the case of a corporation, any stockholder, director or officer. 
Certificate of operation . A certificate issued by the City through its appropriate officers authorizing the operation and control of a livery vehicle or fleet of livery vehicles in the City in the manner as provided in this Article. 
Chauffeur Any person driving a livery vehicle. 
Chauffeur's license . The license issued by the City through its appropriate officers authorizing the person therein named to drive any licensed livery vehicle within the City. 
Limousine . Any passenger vehicle transporting passengers for hire at a charge or fee for each passenger per trip or for each vehicle per trip as a result of individual contract on a trip or hourly basis fixed by agreement in advance. 
Limousine license . A license issued by the City through its appropriate officers authorizing the operation on the streets of the City of a limousine. Said license shall apply only to the vehicle described in the application for said license. 
Livery vehicle . Any passenger vehicle, including taxicabs and limousines, except buses, used for the transportation of passengers for hire. 
Operator . Any person authorized to operate a livery vehicle pursuant to agreement with the holder of a Certificate of Operation. 
Taxicab . Any public passenger vehicle used for transporting persons for hire, equipped with a taximeter and accepting or discharging all such persons as may offer themselves for transportation. 
Taxicab license The license issued by the City through its appropriate officers authorizing the operation on the streets of the City of that certain vehicle. Said license shall apply only to the vehicle described in the application for said license. 
Taximeters . Any mechanical device which records and indicates a charge or fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers.  
CHAPTER 2 - CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011. 
 
10-2-1 - CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a livery vehicle in the City without first having obtained a Certificate of Operation therefor. No Certificate of Operation shall be issued unless and until the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall find and declare to the City Council that the public convenience and necessity for livery service requires the service to be rendered. A Certificate of Operation shall be issued by the City Clerk pursuant to the direction of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-2 - QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT FOR CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION 
No Certificate of Operation shall be issued to or held by any person who is not of legal age or who is not a person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony, nor shall such Certificate of Operation be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer or stockholder or director thereof would be ineligible for a certificate under the foregoing conditions. No Certificate of Operation shall be issued to or held by any person who is delinquent on the payment of any debts due and owing the City, including but not limited to any fee, fine, judgment, lien, locally administered tax, contract sum or service charge. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 2, 2-6-2017)  
10-2-3 - APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION 
Application for Certificate of Operation shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended place of business, the number of vehicles to be operated, and such other information as may be required. Applications will not be accepted from an operator who has been denied a Certificate of Operation within the last 12 months. 
Upon the filing with the City Clerk of an application for a Certificate of Operation, the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall cause notice of the filing of such application to be published in a newspaper of general distribution within the City. Said notice shall designate a public place for hearing to be held not less than five nor more than 15 days from the date of the publication. At said public hearing, the public as well as the holders of currently valid Certificates of Operation shall be entitled to appear and be heard on issuance of such certificate. At all such public hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear and convincing evidence that public need requires the issuance of the Certificate of Operation. In determining whether this burden has been met, the Committee may consider, among other things, (1) the fairness of the existing service's rate structure as compared to other communities or other livery services; (2) whether or not Park Ridge residents have expressed a desire for additional and/or competitive service; (3) the number and seriousness of complaints with regard to existing service; (4) comments received at the public hearing; (5) the current service's adherence to the applicable Park Ridge regulations. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011)  
10-2-4 - APPLICATION AND ANNUAL FEE 
Each application for Certificate of Operation shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to cover administrative costs and cost of legal notices. 
Each recipient of a Certificate of Operation must pay an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover administrative and related costs. Such annual fee will be due on the first day of January of each year. If the initial Certificate of Operation is issued after January 31, the initial annual fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011)  
10-2-5 - CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION 
In considering the issuance of the proposed Certificate of Operation, the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall consider the following: 
A.  Protests, complaints and testimony in favor of; 
B.  The character of the applicant; 
C.  The experience of the applicant; 
D.  The public need for operators; 
E.  The type of service proposed by the applicant; 
F.  Financial responsibility of the applicant; 
G.  Inventory of vehicles; 
H.  Current demand and anticipated future demand for service; 
I.  Number of vehicles in operation; 
J.  Whether the person is delinquent on the payment of any debts due and owing the City, including but not limited to any fee, fine, judgment, lien, locally administered tax, contract sum or service charge. 
K.  Other facts considered relevant by the Procedures and Regulations Committee. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 2, 2-6-2017)  
10-2-6 - COMMITTEE TO REPORT FINDINGS 
Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall promptly report in writing to the City Council setting forth its findings in said report, and recommending to the City Council that such Certificate of Operation be either refused or granted. In the event that the Committee recommends that the certificate be granted, it shall further recommend the maximum and the minimum number of vehicles to be operated and licensed by the operator, and may further recommend the inclusion in said Certificate of Operation of any agreement proposed by the applicant or the Committee. In the event that the City Council determines that the proposed Certificate of Operation be issued, it shall specify the minimum and/or maximum number of vehicles to be operated on a regular basis by the applicant under the Certificate of Operation. Any special agreements or stipulations shall likewise be included in the Certificate of Operation. Said operator shall, by acceptance of such certificate, agree to any special agreements or stipulations made, and operate the minimum number of vehicles stipulated and may operate additional vehicles, not to exceed the maximum authorized. When said certificate is issued by the Clerk pursuant to the direction of the City Council, said certificate shall specify any special agreement and the maximum and the minimum number of vehicles to be operated by said operator under said certificate. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-7 - TERM OF CERTIFICATE 
A Certificate of Operation authorized by the City Council shall remain in full force and effect for a period of four calendar years from the date of issuance unless sooner terminated in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-8 - CERTIFICATE NONTRANSFERABLE 
A Certificate of Operation shall be non-assignable and non-transferable unless the City Council approves and authorizes the transfer and the assignment of said Certificate of Operation upon such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-9 - REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE 
A Certificate of Operation may be revoked by action of the City Council; provided, however, that no such revocation shall be made without cause and without a hearing before the Procedures and Regulations Committee. At least five days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general distribution within the City. The Procedures and Regulations Committee may give such other notice to parties who may be interested as in its discretion is advisable. In the event that said Procedures and Regulations Committee finds that a good cause exists for the revocation of said Certificate of Operation, it shall so report its findings and recommendations to the City Council, and thereupon said Certificate of Operation may be revoked by action of the City Council. Cause for revocation of a Certificate of Operation shall be the violation by the operator of the Statutes of the State of Illinois, the United States or the ordinances of the City, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public transportation, the violation of the operator of any provisions of this Chapter, proof of fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the Certificate of Operation, failure to comply with the terms of the Certificate of Operation or any agreement therein contained, or delinquency on the payment of any debts due and owing the City, including but not limited to any fee, fine, judgment, lien, locally administered tax, contract sum or service charge. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 2, 2-6-2017)  
10-2-10 - ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT, BOOKS BY COMMITTEE 
For the purpose of enabling the Procedures and Regulations Committee or the City Council to inform itself as to the character and quality of service rendered the public and the just, reasonable and uniform rates of fare to be fixed from time to time by the City Council, and for determination of whether the operator is maintaining adequate reserves and insurance to meet personal injury, death and property damage claims, the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall have access to the plant, equipment, apparatus and other property, and the inventories, books, papers, accounts and records of all property and operations of the operator at all reasonable times. Every operator at all times shall keep in the City complete and accurate books and records of all property, operations, receipts and disbursements, in such form and detail as may be prescribed from time to time by the City Council. For each six-month period during the term of the Certificate of Operation, a true statement of all assets and liabilities, gross earnings, operating expenses and income of the operator within the City and in addition whenever called upon by the Procedures and Regulations Committee, shall be filed as well as such other information as may be required by said Committee. All statements required to be filed pursuant to this Article shall be sworn to by the operator or the duly authorized agent of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-11 - FILING OF ADDRESS; NOTICE 
Every operator shall file with the City Clerk an address in the City to which all notices required to be given to the operator under this Article may be addressed. All such notices shall be deemed good and sufficient for all purposes when deposited in the United States mail in a postpaid envelope addressed to the operator at the address on file with the City Clerk.  
10-2-12 - INSURANCE 
The holder of a Certificate of Operation shall maintain in full force and effect insurance as required in Section 10-5-8 of this Municipal Code.  
10-2-13 - VEHICLE LICENSE 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Certificate of Operation to enter into or maintain an agreement with any person who has not obtained a vehicle license for any and all vehicles to be operated.  
10-2-14 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Certificate of Operation to enter into or maintain an agreement with any person who has not obtained the necessary Chauffeur's License as provided under the laws of the City of Park Ridge.  
10-2-15 - STATE LICENSE 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Certificate of Operation to enter into or maintain an agreement with any person who has not obtained the necessary State vehicle license.  
10-2-16 - CONDITION OF VEHICLES 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Certificate of Operation to permit any vehicle to operate under said certificate unless and until each vehicle is equipped with proper brakes, tires, lights, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield wipers in good condition, and such other equipment as required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois. No vehicle shall be operated unless it has passed any and all City and State inspections as may be required. It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected every vehicle so often as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this Section.  
10-2-17 - APPLICATION TO CHANGE NUMBER OF LIVERY VEHICLES 
The holder of a Certificate of Operation may seek an increase or decrease in the number of livery vehicles provided by such certificate by filing an application with the City Clerk specifying the proposed changes. Hereupon, the City Council shall consider the matter at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, unless the meeting is less than 15 days after the applicant's request. Notices of the request and date of the public meeting shall be given to holders of all Certificates of Operation shall be heard on the proposed amendments of the Certificate of Operation. At all such meetings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the public need requires the amendment of the Certificate of Operation. 
(Ord. 2002-31, 9-3-2002)  
10-2-18 - CONSIDERING REQUESTED AMENDMENT 
In considering the proposed amendment, the City Council shall, among other matters, consider the following: 
A.  Protests, complaints and testimony in favor of; 
B.  Manner of service theretofore rendered: 
C.  The public need for more or fewer livery vehicles or for any other proposed amendment; 
D.  The financial statement of applicant in the operation theretofore conducted within the City; 
E.  The financial statement of other operators, if available; 
F.  The equipment of all operators; 
G.  The possible effect of the proposed amendment on any of the foregoing matters; 
H.  Whether the person is delinquent on the payment of any debts due and owing the City, including but not limited to any fee, fine, judgment, lien, locally administered tax, contract sum or service charge. 
I.  Other facts considered relevant by the Procedures and Regulations Committee. 
Upon the conclusion of the public meeting provided for in this Chapter, the City Council shall promptly report in writing to the City Council setting forth its findings and making recommendations as to the amendments of said Certificate of Operation. The City Council may thereupon, without further public meeting, adopt the recommendations of said City Council in whole or in part and thereupon the Certificate of Operation shall be amended in accordance with such action of the City Council. 
(Ord. of 1-1999; Ord. No. 2002-31, 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 2, 2-6-2017)  
10-2-19 - COMPLAINTS AND POSTING OF INFORMATION 
All complaints regarding taxicabs or taxicab drivers shall be made using the City approved complaint form and process. Each vehicle that has a livery vehicle license must post, in an area conspicuous to passenger, an emblem that includes the telephone number and email address where complaints may be made regarding that livery vehicle and/or its driver. 
(Ord. 2011-59, 11-7-2011)  
CHAPTER 3 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011. 
 
10-3-1 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public passenger vehicle for hire within the City unless the driver of the public passenger vehicle shall have first obtained and have in full force and effect a valid chauffeur's license issued under the provisions of this article.  
10-3-2 - UNLAWFUL TO EMPLOY UNLICENSED DRIVER 
No person owning, controlling, or operating any public passenger vehicle for hire within the City shall employ or permit any person other than a chauffeur licensed under provisions of this article to operate such vehicle upon the public ways in the corporate limits of the City. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of all license privileges granted to the public passenger vehicle owner pursuant to this article.  
10-3-3 - APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS 
A.  Every applicant for a public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
B.  The applicant must not have been found guilty of any felony or Class A Misdemeanor within the past five years. This five-year limitation shall not apply to heinous crimes against persons. 
C.  The applicant must be the holder of a valid State of Illinois driver's license. 
D.  The applicant must not have had is or her driver's license suspended or revoked in any state within the past three years.  
10-3-4 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE APPLICATION 
A.  Original Application 
1.  An application for a chauffeur's license shall be filed with the police department on the form provided and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
2.  Such application shall include the following information: 
a.  Applicant's full name, residence address, and date of birth. 
b.  Applicant's employment history and experience in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
c.  A driving abstract issued within 30 days of the application from the Illinois Secretary of State. 
d.  A criminal history report issued by the Illinois State Police within 30 days of the application. 
e.  A list of all findings of guilty, if any, for violation of federal or state laws, including traffic offenses. Findings of guilty include any offense for which the court may have ordered the disposition of supervision. 
B.  Renewal Application. With respect to the renewal of the chauffeur's license, the applicant shall file a sworn statement with respect to any changes in his or her qualification status on a form provided by the City.  
10-3-5 - INVESTIGATION 
Upon receipt of a completed application form, the Chief of Police shall review the application to assure that the applicant is qualified pursuant to the standards of this Article 10.  
10-3-6 - ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 
A.  If the Chief of Police is satisfied that the applicant complies with the requirements set forth in Section 10-3-3 of this Chapter, and is a fit person to be licensed, such application shall be approved and a license, containing a picture of the applicant, shall be issued. If not so satisfied, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant that the application has been denied. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the City Manager. 
B.  The chauffeur's license shall be displayed at all times in the public passenger vehicle in plain view of the passenger.  
10-3-7 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE TERM AND FEE 
A.  A chauffeur's license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 following such issuance. 
B.  An annual fee to cover administrative costs, including but not limited to the resolution of complaints, for a chauffeur's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).  
10-3-8 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE 
It shall be unlawful to transfer any public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license from one person to another. An attempted transfer of such license shall be void and shall be grounds for revocation.  
10-3-9 - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE AND APPEAL PROCEDURE 
The Chief of Police, at his discretion, may suspend, for a period not to exceed 30 days, or revoked a public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license, for any failure or refusal to comply with provisions of this article; or for commission of any felony or Class A misdemeanor. In addition, this action may be based upon a determination that the license was obtained fraudulently; for excessive rudeness or abuse of passengers; that the licensee has become physically, mentally or emotionally unfit to perform his duties as a public passenger vehicle operator; or that there has been any fraudulent use of the public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license by or with the consent of the licensee. Upon the suspension or revocation of any chauffeur's license, the chauffeur shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to the Procedures and Regulations Committee. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the Procedures and Regulations Committee shall consider evidence presented by the chauffeur and the Chief of Police and may affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police suspending or revoking the chauffeur's license.  
CHAPTER 4 - LIVERY VEHICLE LICENSES[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-31, 5-5-2003. 
 
10-4-1 - LICENSE TO OPERATE LIVERY VEHICLE 
It shall be unlawful to operate a livery vehicle in the City without first having secured an annual livery vehicle license for each vehicle. No Livery Vehicle License shall be issued to any person other than the holder of a currently valid Certificate of Operation or an operator being dispatched by the holder of a currently valid Certificate of Operation. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant and a description of the vehicle to be licensed, including taxicab number, if applicable, name of manufacturer and motor number.  
10-4-2 - LICENSING REQUIREMENTS 
Prior to the issuance of the annual Livery Vehicle License, the holder of the Certificate of Operation shall provide the following to the City Clerk: 
A.  Evidence of insurance as required by Section 10-5-8 of this Municipal Code; 
B.  A letter of agreement between operator of the vehicle and holder of the Certificate of Operation to provide dispatching services; 
C.  Evidence that all persons who may operate the vehicle possess a valid chauffeur's license; 
D.  Evidence that the vehicle to be licensed has passed current State and City inspections as required; and 
E.  A copy of the financial statement of each operator including complete and accurate of all assets and liabilities, gross earnings, operator expenses and income. All such statements shall be sworn to by each operator or duly authorized agent. 
F.  A copy of financial statement of each operator, including complete and accurate books and records of all property, operations, receipts and disbursements and a true statement of all assets and liabilities, gross earnings, operator expenses and income. All such statements shall be sworn to by each operator or duly authorized agent.  
10-4-3 - EXPIRATION OF LIVERY VEHICLE LICENSE 
Licenses shall expire each June 15 following the date of issue unless sooner terminated by the City Clerk.  
10-4-4 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
The revocation of the Certificate of Operation shall automatically revoke all livery vehicle licenses authorized by said Certificate of Operation.  
10-4-5 - LICENSE FEES 
License fee shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per year or portion thereof and shall be non-refundable in whole or in part. Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by ordinance. The City Clerk shall issue a suitable sticker or tag, which shall be displayed in the lower right corner of the front windshield of the vehicle in said license described. The license may be transferred to any livery vehicle put into service by the same operator to replace one permanently withdrawn from service, provided notice in writing of such substitution is filed with the City Clerk at the time of transfer and replacement vehicle meets all requirements of this Article. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid for purchase of each replacement livery vehicle license. 
(Ordl No. 2003-31, 5-5-2003; Ord 2006-31, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2010-41, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011)  
CHAPTER 5 - OPERATION OF LIVERY VEHICLES[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-31, 5-5-2003; Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011. 
 
10-5-1 - STATE LICENSE 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it bears a State license duly issued.  
10-5-2 - LIVERY VEHICLE LICENSE 
No livery vehicle shall be operated by other than a person possessing a duly issued livery vehicle license.  
10-5-3 - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 
No livery vehicle shall be operated by other than a person possessing a duly issued chauffeur's license.  
10-5-4 - EQUIPMENT 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear-vision mirror, and windshield wiper in good condition, and such other equipment as is required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.  
10-5-5 - INSPECTIONS 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it has been inspected by or under the direction of an employee designated by the Police Chief and found to be in safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance and all of the provisions of this Article have been complied with.  
10-5-6 - CONDITION OF LIVERY VEHICLE 
If any licensed livery vehicle shall become unsafe for the transportation of passengers or shall become unclean or unsightly in appearance, such license may be suspended by the Police Chief or his designee, until the vehicle and all its appurtenances shall be put in fit condition for public use.  
10-5-7 - UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE UNSAFE LIVERY VEHICLE 
It shall be unlawful, for the purpose of transporting passengers, for any person to drive, or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved in the City any livery vehicle which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such equipment as is required under the terms of this Article or the Statutes of the State of Illinois relating to passenger vehicles.  
10-5-8 - INSURANCE 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it is insured in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit against liability for injuries or death. Said Insurance shall name the City of Park Ridge as an additional insured. There shall be on deposit in the office of the City Clerk a currently valid certificate or policy issued by an insurance company with a rating of B or better from Best's Insurance Raters or alternative as approved by the Procedures and Regulations Committee and in the event that such policy or certificate of insurance at any time becomes ineffective by reason of notice served upon the City or otherwise, or in the event that the operator of a livery vehicle has failed to deposit such currently valid certificate or policy of insurance, the license herein provided for the operation of the livery vehicle shall likewise terminate forthwith and without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 2003-31, 5-5-2003)  
10-5-9 - CONDUCT OF CHAUFFEUR 
It shall be unlawful for any chauffeur of a livery vehicle while on duty to carry or possess intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous drug in a livery vehicle or be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or dangerous drugs whether or not such chauffeur possesses a prescription for such narcotic or dangerous drug, or to use any profane or obscene language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace in any way.  
10-5-10 - OBEYING TRAFFIC RULES 
It shall be the duty of every chauffeur of a livery vehicle to obey all traffic rules established by State Statute or City ordinance.  
10-5-11 - USE IN PERPETRATION OF CRIME 
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any livery vehicle to be used in the perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.  
10-5-12 - SUBSTITUTION OF LIVERY VEHICLE 
It shall be unlawful for an operator to substitute a livery vehicle unless such vehicle has passed inspections as may be required and notification has been made in writing to the City Clerk.  
10-5-13 - APPEARANCE 
All chauffeurs of livery vehicles must be clean and neat in dress and person and present a professional appearance. Each driver dress code shall require the driver's hair and facial hair be neatly trimmed and groomed. No driver dress code may permit drivers on duty to wear a T-shirt, tank top, body shirt, swimwear, jogging suit, or other similar type of attire as an outer garment; and any form of shorts or other pants that are not at least as long as mid-calf. While on duty, each driver shall be hygienically clean, well-groomed, neat, and dressed in accordance with the approved driver dress code of the taxicab company with which he or she is affiliated.  
CHAPTER 6 - SPECIAL CONDITIONS—TAXICABS 
SECTION 
 
10-6-1 - DISPLAY NAME OF LICENSEE 
Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side in letters not less than two inches high and readable from a distance of 20 feet the name of the holder of the Certificate of Operation. Each taxicab shall be designated by a different number of such number shall also appear on each side and rear of such taxicab. Further, all taxicabs owned and/or operated by the holder of a Certificate of Operation shall be identically painted so that they are readily identifiable. However, no coloring scheme or name shall be similar to that of any other taxicab company possessing a valid Certificate of Operation in the City.  
10-6-2 - TAXIMETER 
Each taxicab shall be provided with an approved, accurate and inspected taximeter to register, in plain view of the passenger, the fare as accumulated while said taxicab is in operation. The dial thereof shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be equipped with a device which, when activated, causes said meter to commence to register the fare being assessed. It shall be the duty of the driver of every taxicab, at the termination of his services, to cause the taximeter to be in a non-recording position and call the passenger's attention to the fare registered. The taximeter shall not be changed until the fare has been paid or a charge ticket thereof made out and delivered to the person hiring such taxicab. Any passenger shall be entitled to receive, upon his request, a receipt for the fare paid.  
10-6-3 - INSPECTION OF TAXIMETER 
The Police Chief or his designee shall inspect, test, and seal all taximeters in use in the City, as the Police Chief may deem necessary. Whenever a complaint is made that any taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately, it shall be the duty of the Police Chief to immediately cause an inspection and test such taximeter, and if said taximeter is not properly and accurately registering, it shall be unlawful to operate the taxicab until it is equipped with a taximeter approved by the Police Chief. The owner or operator of any taxicab shall upon demand deliver to the Police Chief or his designee the taxicab together with the taximeter or the taximeter detached therefrom for inspection and test. Said owner or operator may be present or represented at the time such inspection and test is made. The Police Chief may require other tests to determine whether or not the taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately.  
10-6-4 - SEALING OF TAXIMETER 
When a test shows that a taximeter correctly records the charge of fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers, it shall be sealed, and a certificate of the test shall be issued to the owner. If the taximeter registers incorrectly or inaccurately an inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged and said vehicle will not be operated until the taximeter passes the required tests. No person(s) controlling or operating any taxicab shall transfer the taximeter to any other taxicab unless a new inspection and certification of such taximeter is made. No person shall tamper with, break or mutilate any taximeter, cable or the seal thereof.  
10-6-5 - DISPLAYING RATES OF FARE 
There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab, in a conspicuous place and in such a manner that the same may be easily and conveniently read by the person riding in such taxicab, a card upon which shall be printed in plain legible type the rates of fare as prescribed by this Article.  
10-6-6 - HOURS OF OPERATION 
Unless otherwise permitted, the holder of a Certificate of Operation shall provide taxicab service 24 hours per day seven days per week. For the purpose of meeting the public demands estimated for different hours of their daily operation, the Certificate of Operation may specify a minimum number of taxicabs to be operated in specified hourly periods. 
(Ord. of 1-1999)  
10-6-7 - RENDERING TAXICAB SERVICE 
Every person holding a Certificate of Operation in accordance with the terms of this Article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. They shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open during hours designated in the Certificate of Operation for the purpose of receiving and dispatching calls. They shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the corporate limits of Park Ridge as soon as they can do so, and if said services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers as to how long it will be before the said call can be answered and give the reason therefor. 
Any operator who shall refuse to accept a call within the corporate limits of Park Ridge at any time when such operator has available taxicabs, or who shall fail to refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this Article and the certificate granted to such operator shall be subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
It shall be the duty of the chauffeur of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person conducts himself in an orderly manner. The chauffeur shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the taxicab.  
10-6-8 - PARKING 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be parked upon any street, other than at a designated taxicab stand, and in any City-owned parking facility, except upon written authorization from the Procedures and Regulations Committee.  
10-6-9 - REMAINING IN PARKED TAXICAB 
Every chauffeur shall remain in his taxicab when it is parked at a taxicab stand except that any chauffeur may leave his taxicab unattended for a 15-minute period at any time while it is parked at such taxicab stand.  
10-6-10 - SOLICITING PASSENGERS 
It shall be unlawful for any chauffeur or employee of the operator to solicit passengers by signal, sign, sounding of horn, or oral request.  
10-6-11 - PASSENGER REQUIRED TO PAY FARE 
It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of the trip.  
10-6-12 - TAXICABS COMING INTO CITY 
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit any public passenger vehicle from coming into the City to discharge passengers accepted for transportation outside the City. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab not licensed by the City to come into the City to pick up a passenger unless that passenger is to return to that community in which the taxicab is licensed, and then only when such transportation has been arranged for in advance either by writing or by telephone. While said vehicle is in the City, no roof light shall be used to indicate that the vehicle is vacant or subject to hire, and a white card bearing the words "Not for Hire" printed in black letters not less than two inches in height shall be displayed on the windshield of said vehicle. No person shall be solicited or accepted in said vehicle for transportation from any place within the City unless prearranged as indicated above. Any person in control or possession of said vehicle who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties as herein provided in this Article.  
10-6-13 - TAXICAB STANDS DESIGNATED 
The west side of Summit Avenue commencing 140 feet south of the curb at Touhy Avenue and continuing southerly and easterly for a distance of 120 feet is hereby designated and established as a taxicab stand; the first parking space south of the first alley north of Higgins on the west side of Fairview is hereby designated and established as a taxicab stand; the first parking space west of Prospect on the north side of Devon is hereby designated and established as a taxicab stand; three spaces at the Dee Road Station designated as a taxicab stand.  
10-6-14 - NO SMOKING IN TAXICABS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco at any time in any taxicab. Violations of this Section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Every taxicab shall be posted with a "No Smoking" sign.  
10-6-15 - AIR CONDITIONING 
Any taxicab newly placed in service after September 1, 1993 shall be equipped with a properly functioning air conditioning system which shall be maintained in operating condition at all times.  
CHAPTER 7 - SPECIAL CONDITIONS—LIMOUSINES 
SECTION 
 
10-7-1 - UNLAWFUL ACTS 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a limousine service within the City to do any of the following acts. 
A.  Equip a limousine with a taximeter; 
B.  Wait at a taxicab stand for passengers; 
C.  Cruise the streets or in any way attempt to solicit business on the streets.  
CHAPTER 8 - RATE OF TAXICAB FARES[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-31, 5-5-2003; Ord. 2015-52, 8-17-2015. 
 
10-8-1 - RATE OF TAXICAB FARES 
Each taxicab company issued a Certificate of Operation must provide a list of its rates of fare and charges to the Police chief or his/her designee in writing, by January 1 of each year and at least 30 days prior to a change in rates of fare or charges. A schedule shall also be posted showing the rates of fare and charges for out of town destinations. No charge shall be made for any person under 12 years of age when accompanied by an adult. 
(Ord. No. 2015-52, 8-17-2015)  
10-8-2 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2011-59, 11-7-2011)  
ARTICLE 11 - PUBLIC SERVICES[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. of 12-1999. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 94-50, 9-12-1994; Ord. 2015-25, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 2015-36 , 6-1-2015. 
 
11-1-1 - APPLICATION REQUIRED 
No person, firm or corporation shall install any pipes in any public property, or make any connection to the water mains or the sewer mains of the waterworks and sewerage system of the City of Park Ridge except upon written application to the City Engineer and the issuance of a permit by said Engineer for such connection. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit desired, the location to be used, and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the City Engineer.  
11-1-2 - WATER AND SEWER TAP ON INSPECTION CHARGE 
A charge is hereby established for the inspection of the physical tap-on to either water or sewer system as prescribed in Section 20-7-7. Such charge shall not be part of the connection charge specified in Section 3 but shall merely defray the cost to the City for employing and maintaining personnel to carry out the inspection of tap-on connection into either its water or its sewer system. The fee shall be uniform with regard to each physical connection into either system without regard to the size of the connection or the number or type of units which the single connection shall serve. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
11-1-3 - ESTABLISHING A CONNECTION CHARGE AND SUBCLASSES THEREOF 
A.  Established; When Assessed; Determination: There is hereby established within the City of Park Ridge a charge for connecting into the waterworks or sewerage systems of the City. Such charge is to be assessed against new or additional users of the sewage collection system or the water system of the City and shall be known as the "Connection Charge." The charge shall be payable at the time a building or connection permit is issued. Contained within the "Connection Charge" are a number of sub-charges or sub-categories. In some instances, the charge established shall be a sum fixed within this Chapter. In other instances, such charge shall be based upon the cost to the City of the extension of a particular part of the system. In some instances, a sub-charge may be based upon the volume and strength of the proposed usage. If the building plans are not susceptible to an accurate estimate of the volume and strength of the usage, the person desiring to make the connection shall pay that portion of the fee based upon the most accurate estimate which can be made upon the plan submitted. At the time that the sewer and/or water connection is in full use, a reevaluation of the volume and strength of the usage shall be made and an adjustment of the fee shall be applied. Such reevaluation shall be made within one year of the date at which the operation, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, shall have reached its full use. 
The "Connection Charge" shall be determined by adding together the sub-charges which are applicable to the particular new or additional user of the system. There shall be four sub-charges, the sum of which shall constitute the total connection charge for entrance into the water and/or sewer system. The four sub-charges shall be known as: 
1.  The Water Connection Tap-on Fee; 
2.  The Water Meter Fee; 
3.  The Sewer Connection Tap-on Fee; and 
4.  The Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee. 
B.  Water Connection Tap-on Fee: The Water Connection Tap-on Fee shall be based upon the size of the water tap made into the water system. This fee is intended to reimburse the City for a portion of the water system previously created by the City into which a user now seeks to connect. The schedule of taps and charges shall be as provided in Section 20-7-3. 
C.  Water Meter Fee: The Water Meter Fee shall be based upon the size of the meter installed as required by Section 11-1-5 of this Chapter and shall be as prescribed in Section 20-7-4. This fee is intended to reimburse the City for the cost of the meter. 
D.  Sewer Connection Tap-on Fee: The Sewer Connection Tap-on Fee shall be as provided in Section 20-7-5. 
E.  Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee: The Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee is hereby established to reimburse the City for its costs in extending sewer and water lines to serve new and additional users and to increase its capacity to produce and transport water and to transport sewage. The City may provide, at its own initial expense, for the construction of expansions and extensions of its water supply system and for the increase in size of its sewage pumping plant and the extension and expansion of its sewer mains to certain areas within the City. In so doing, the City seeks to provide a material benefit to the property owners abutting such improvements and to encourage the development of such property. To reimburse the City for the funds so expended, the City has created a Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee. Such fee shall be based upon the pro rata share of the cost of said exploration, construction and extension, which cost was required to provide the sewer and water services being made available to the new or additional user. The Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee shall be based upon all such costs including but not limited to engineering fees, supervision, legal fees, land costs and construction. 
When a new or additional user of the system wishes to connect into the sewer and/or water system of the City, he shall request from the Director of Public Works an estimate of the sum of the Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee attributable to the property which he wishes to serve with municipal utilities. The Director of Public Works shall certify to such applicant the then current amount of the Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee attributable to the property sought to be served. In arriving at the Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee, the Director of Public Works may request such information from the applicant as shall be reasonably necessary in order that he may compute the amount of the fee. He shall, for example, be allowed to inquire as to the use which the applicant desires to make of the land. If an applicant should disagree with or dispute the amount of the Water and Sewer Expansion and Extension Connection Fee, in whole or in part, as determined by the Director of Public Works, he shall be allowed to appeal such decision to the Public Works Committee of the City Council. The Committee shall allow the applicant to appear before it, either at a regular or special meeting or otherwise, to present his objections to the estimate of costs. The Committee may require the Director of Public Works to appear before it to explain the manner in which such connection fee has been computed. The decision of the Committee regarding this matter shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
11-1-4 - USE OF PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AND SEWER REQUIRED 
A.  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or party or parties in possession of any house, structure, institutional or commercial establishment or any other building of any other character located on property abutting on the public waterworks and sewerage system, to cause such house, structure, institutional or commercial establishment or any other building of any other character to be connected with the said waterworks and sewerage system within 36 months from the date that water or sewerage facilities become available to such property. 
B.  If water and sewerage facilities are available to any property on the effective date of this ordinance but are not then connected to buildings on the property, all buildings must be so connected within 36 months of the effective date of this ordinance. Any water wells and private sewer or septic systems abandoned or no longer in use after connection to City water and sewerage systems shall be sealed as required by law.  
11-1-5 - WATER METERS AND SHUT-OFF VALVES 
A.  Meters Required: No water shall be drawn from the City mains to any premises unless said premises are equipped with an accurate, approved and adequate meter (together with a meter interface unit) furnished by the City on the application of the owner or occupant of the premises. No water from the City water mains shall be used in and about any premises unless it is drawn through and measured by such meters. New water meters shall be furnished at the expense of the owner or occupant and replacement meters shall be furnished at the expense of the City except in the event of tampering or freezing. 
B.  Meter Installation: Meters and meter interface units shall be installed by the City, its authorized employee or designee, or the property owner's licensed contractor. All new meter installations shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Building Inspector. They shall be installed in a place easy of access and shall be kept free from all obstructions so that the same may be easily read and inspected, and shall be protected by the consumer from freezing and other dangers, and the location thereof must be approved by the Building Inspector. When a meter is placed on any pipe connected to a hot water boiler or other hot water appliance, a check and relief valve of a type approved by the Building Inspector shall be placed between such meter and such boiler or hot water appliance to protect the meter from back-pressure of steam of hot water. The City shall have the right at any reasonable time to remove a meter temporarily for the purpose of testing its accuracy. Any meter which fails to register within 2% of the correct amount shall be repaired or replaced. 
C.  Tampering with Meter: It shall be unlawful for any person except personnel authorized by the City authorities, to tamper with, alter, or injure any part of the City waterworks or supply system, and it shall be unlawful to interfere with, to by-pass or to tamper with in any manner whatsoever any meter. No meter shall be moved or disturbed without authority obtained from the City authorities. 
D.  Shut-off Valves: Shut-off valves in approved type service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible, and shall be protected from frost. 
E.  Meter Reading Required: It shall be required that the owner, occupant, or party or parties in possession of any premises equipped with a water meter to permit the installation of a meter interface unit to facilitate a current reading of said meter and communication between the meter and the City automatic meter reading system. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2019-39 , § 1, 6-3-2019)  
11-1-6 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS 
A.  Sewer System: All repairs to that portion of the main sewer line or pipe encompassed within its outer circumference, as extended longitudinally, shall be made by and at the expense of the City. All repairs to that portion of the sewer service lying outside of the outer circumference, as extended longitudinally, of the main sewer line or pipe shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served. All repairs to the house sewer, including that portion of the joint connection, "Y" or "T" lying outside of the outer circumference of the main sewer line or pipe, shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served. In the event that failure develops or occurs in that portion of the sewer system to be maintained by the owner of the premises, the City may close the public water curb stop and discontinue the service of water to the premises until the required repairs are made to the defective portion of the sewer system by the owner of the premises. 
B.  Water System: All repairs on that portion of the service pipes between the water main and the inlet side joint of the curb stop (shut-off valve) shall be made by and at the expense of the City. All repairs to that portion of the service pipes from, but not including, the inlet side joint of the curb stop to the premises served and the plumbing system of the building shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served, excepting that meters shall be maintained, repaired and replaced at the expense of the City. In the event that leakage develops in that portion of the service pipe to be maintained by the owner of the premises, the City may close the curb stop and discontinue the service of water to the premises until the required repairs are made by the owner of the premises.  
11-1-7 - RIGHT OF ACCESS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM 
Employees of the waterworks and sewerage system shall have the right of access to any premises served by the waterworks and sewerage system for the purpose of reading water meters, for the purpose of making inspections of the water meters, for the purpose of making repairs in order to maintain in good condition and provide for the protection of said system and the efficient management thereof and for the installation and removal of meters. Any person refusing to permit the said employees of the waterworks and sewerage system access to his premises shall be subject to cessation of utility services until the required opportunity to inspect is accorded and, for billing purposes, the City may estimate the quantity of water consumed and, for that purpose, may take into consideration the amount of water known to have been consumed in a comparable previous period. 
(Ord. No. 2008-34, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-83, 11-16-2009)  
11-1-8 - CLASSES OF SERVICE 
There are hereby established the following classes of water service and sewer service available for use in premises connected to the City water mains and sewer mains: 
A.  Metered Construction Water Service: Such service shall be available to all residents and responsibility for such service shall begin upon transfer of property or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy in the event that a demolition permit was approved by the City for the property, as in this Chapter provided, only to premises on which building permits have been issued by the Building and Zoning Administrator for the construction of a building on said premises; provided further, that such service shall not permit the use of water for purposes other than construction on said premises. 
B.  Metered Regular Water Service: Such service shall be available on application, as in this Chapter provided, only to premises on which the buildings standing thereon are certified to by the Building and Zoning Administrator as not being in violation of the Zoning Code, the Building Code, or the Plumbing Code of the City. In cases where a certificate of occupancy is required prior to occupancy of such building, no metered regular water service shall be made available or be given until such certificate of occupancy is issued pursuant to the Building Code of the City. 
C.  Metered Regular Sewer Service: Such service shall be required for any premises served by Metered Regular Water Service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2009-83, 11-16-2009)  
11-1-9 - RATES AND FEES 
All properties connecting with the water system of the City or taking and using water from the City's system shall pay the following rates and fees established for various water services and sewer services as described: 
A.  Rates for Water Services and Use in the City, per billing period: 
1.  Metered construction and regular service to a business unit or single dwelling unit: 
a.  Fixed charge based on meter size: 
	Through December 31, 2018 	Starting January 1, 2019 
5/8 " 	$  9.63 	$  9.68 
¾" 	$  9.63 	$  9.68 
1" 	$ 23.34 	$ 23.46 
1½" 	$ 46.69 	$ 46.92 
2" 	$ 74.70 	$ 75.07 
3" 	$210.09 	$211.14 
4" 	$466.86 	$469.19 
6" 	$933.71 	$938.38 
 
b.  Water rate per 1,000 gallons: $7.97 through December 31, 2018. On January 1, 2019 the rate will be $8.11. 
2.  Where one meter delivers water to more than one dwelling unit or to a combination of dwelling units and a commercial or business unit, the above rates shall apply for fixed charges according to meter size and for variable rates according to usage. 
3.  In instances where there is more than one meter for a single location serving a single residence or business under the same ownership, only one fixed charge shall apply to that location. 
4.  The fixed charge in subparagraph A.1.a. is applied to all properties where a water meter is installed. The fixed charge in subparagraph A.1.a. continues to be charged while a property is vacant, in foreclosure, or the water service has been turned off because the fixed charge covers overhead and administrative costs that can be equally applied to all customers. 
B.  Rates for Sewer Use in the City, per billing period: 
1.  Fixed charge of $3.35 per account through December 31, 2018. On January 1, 2019 the rate will be $3.55 per account. 
2.  Regular service to a business unit or single dwelling unit: $1.42 per each 1,000 gallons through December 31, 2018. On January 1, 2019 the rate will be $1.51 per each 1,000 gallons. 
3.  The fixed charge in subparagraph B.1. is applied to all properties, regardless of whether a water meter is installed, upon transfer of the property or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy in the event that a demolition permit was approved by the City for the property. The fixed charge in subparagraph B.1. continues to be charged while a property is vacant, in foreclosure, or the water service has been turned off because the fixed charge covers overhead and administrative costs that can be equally applied to all customers. 
C.  Construction Service Meter Fee: For metered construction water service, the applicant shall be required to post the sum of $1,000.00 upon the filing of his application for such water service to guarantee payment for water used during construction and the prompt return in good condition of the construction water meter. Said amount shall not be returnable to the applicant in the event that said premises shall be occupied prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or in violation of terms of this Code providing for the construction and equipment of buildings. Said amount shall be returnable to the applicant, or his assignee, less a $50.00 service fee, plus such amount to pay for water used during construction, upon termination of metered construction water service and the prompt return of the construction water meter in good condition. 
D.  Delinquency Fee: A delinquency fee of 10% of the amount billed for water service, sewer service, and for any other fees and taxes included on the billing statement shall be added to the bill if payment is received after the due date appearing on the face of the bill. 
E.  New Account Fee: A service fee of $10.00 shall be paid by a new owner of property, upon transfer of the property for the initiation of metered regular water service. This new account fee shall also be paid for the initiation of metered regular water service upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any property for which the City has approved a demolition permit. 
F.  Shut-Off Posting Fee: A service fee of $20.00 shall be added to the bill of any consumer each time the City delivers or posts a notice of impending termination of water service due to nonpayment by the consumer of the bill for water service and sewer service. 
G.  Reinstatement Fee: In addition to any water service, sewer service, or other fees due, a service fee of $50.00 shall be paid by any consumer prior to reinstatement of water service following termination of such service for non-payment of fees or charges or for denial of access or for failure to repair a leak as provided herein or for illegal outdoor water use provided that if reinstatement of water service is requested other than during regular business hours, the fee shall be $250.00. 
H.  Billing Period: This is a two-month period of time. All bills to which reference is made in this Section 11-1-9 shall be sent out six times per year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 2013-16, 3-04-2013; Ord. No. 2013-57, 12-16-2013; Ord. 2015-25, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 2016-30 , § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2018-40 , § 1, 11-7-2018)  
11-1-10 - RESALE PROHIBITED 
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the City supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made and the meter installed.  
11-1-11 - BILLS 
All water and sewer bills shall be due and payable on the twentieth (20th) day following the date of the bill. If said bill is not paid on or before the twentieth (20th) day following the date of the bill, water service shall be terminated by the City and service shall not be again resumed until all arrears are paid to the City. 
(Ord. 2006-34, 4-3-2006; Ord. 2008-34, 6-2-2008)  
11-1-12 - BILLING NOTICE AND ENFORCEMENT 
A.  For all existing service connections, the name and mailing address of the person to whom the property is transferred will be added to the account and that person is responsible for payment of the fees therefor. Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any property for which the City has approved a demolition permit, the name and mailing address of the property owner will be added to the account and that person is responsible for payment of the fees therefore. The person may terminate water service by giving notice to the City not less than five days prior to the date of termination, specifying the date on which service is to be terminated. Service shall be cut off unless the City receives a new request for service. The basic rate in Section 11-1-9(a)(1)(a) and 11-1-9(B)(1)(a) continues to be charged while a property is vacant, in foreclosure, or the water service has been turned off because the basic rate covers charges for the City's water system as a whole and includes the infrastructure that serves each property within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-83, 11-16-2009) 
B.  If any water service or sewer service fees remain unpaid for more than 60 days, such fees shall become a lien against the real estate to which the water service was provided. In addition to any other remedies for nonpayment, the City may enforce said lien by filing a claim for lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, which lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord 2006-34, 4-3-2006)  
11-1-13 - TERMINATION 
The delivery of water from the City water main to any premises shall terminate notice in any of the following instances and in such instances the officers and City employees of the City are directed to shut off the service line connecting the Municipal water main with said premises: 
A.  Metered regular water service shall terminate when the invoice for water theretofore delivered to said premises is not paid on or before the twentieth (20th) day following the date of bill. The City shall turn off the water service and water service shall not again be resumed until all arrears are paid to the City and a service charge, as specified in Section 11-1-9(G), is paid for resumption of service. The City will provide written notice of impending termination of water service to the consumer at least seven days prior to the termination of such service. The notice shall state that the delinquency could result in a lien being filed against the property and that the service will be terminated on the stated date unless within that time period the City receives a written request from the owner, occupant or user stating a desire to dispute or discuss the delinquent payment, in which case a hearing will be scheduled before the Finance Director or his/her designee prior to discontinuation of service. 
B.  Metered construction water service shall terminate as soon as either: 
1.  The construction of the building on said premises has been completed pursuant to building permit; or 
2.  A certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to the Building Code of the City; or 
3.  Said premises become occupied and are put to the use for which said building has been erected; or 
4.  Water drawn through said meter is used for any purpose other than the construction of the building on said premises. 
C.  Both classes of metered water service shall terminate when a duly authorized official or employee of the City designated to read, inspect, test or repair meters is denied permission to read, inspect or test a meter, or repair or replace a meter installed upon such premises. Such denial shall be construed to include failure by the owner to remove any obstructions or encasements or any other interference which would prevent reading, repairing or replacement of a water meter. Failure of any owner to permit entry or access as herein set forth, after five days written notice of the existence of such denial of access, shall result in the termination of the water service without further notice, and water service shall not be again resumed until the terms and provisions of this Chapter are fully complied with to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, and a service charge, as specified in Section 11-1-9(G), is paid for resumption of service. 
D.  Metered water service shall terminate upon failure of an owner to repair a leak which exists between the buffalo box and the water meter, within five days after written notice of existence of such a condition, whereupon the City shall turn off the water service without further notice and water service shall not again be resumed until the terms and provisions of this Chapter are fully complied with to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, and a service charge, as specified in Section 11-1-9(G), is paid for resumption of service. 
E.  Metered water service shall terminate upon failure of an owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any premises to furnish the City with a current meter reading for two or more consecutive billing periods, within five days after written notice has been furnished. The City shall turn off the water service without further notice and water service shall not again be resumed until a current meter reading is furnished and a service charge, as specified in Section 11-1-9(G), is paid for resumption of service. In addition, the City may issue a notice of violation, which will require the attendance of the owner, occupant, or party or parties in possession of the premises before the City's Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer and may result in a fine of up to $500.00. The Finance Director, or his or her designee, is authorized to issue notices of violation for violations of this Paragraph E. 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2008-34, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-61, 8-17-2009)  
11-1-14 - SUMMER OUTDOOR WATER USE RESTRICTIONS 
A.  From and after May 15 of each year, to and including September 15 of each year, outdoor use of City water shall be permitted at even numbered buildings or lots only on even numbered after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available. "Outdoor use" includes but is not limited to, use on lawns, gardens, trees and shrubs and recycling of water in pools and fountains. The number of a building or lot is the number assigned by the Building and Zoning Administrator as provided in Article 9, Chapter 5 of the Municipal Code; unless otherwise specified, such number is the primary street address of the building or lot. Any number ending in zero shall be deemed an even number. 
B.  No person, firm, corporation or governmental entity shall use or permit to be used any City water in violation of paragraph A hereof on any premises of which such person, firm, corporation or governmental entity is the legal or beneficial owner, tenant, custodian, manager or in whose name the City water meter or service is registered. Any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity convicted of violating this Section shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for any continued or repeated violation following a warning notice or complaint of violation issued by any designated City employee. Upon the third such violation in any calendar year, the City shall terminate water supply to the subject premises and may condition reinstatement of such water supply on the deposit with the Director of Finance of a cash or surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00 to guarantee compliance with this Section. 
C.  Any designated City employee observing a violation of this Section who is unable after reasonable effort, to contact anyone responsible for the premises where the violation is occurring, is authorized to go on the premises to shut off the water being used illegally, and shall post notice of the violation at the building entrance or at the location of the illegal use. All violations shall be reported to the Director of Public Works. 
D.  The foregoing provisions of this Section shall not apply to any person who, upon application, has been issued a permit for outdoor water use in accordance with the following: 
1.  A special permit for outdoor water use may be issued by the Director of Public Works for watering newly placed sod or grass seed. Such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed two weeks. 
2.  Such special permit may be denied, or revoked on 24 hours notice, in the event of drought, excessive water use in the City, or mechanical or other problems with the City's water delivery system.  
11-1-15 - SPECIFICATIONS AND RULES 
The Director of Public Works and Building Inspector are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations consistent with this Chapter for the connections to the waterworks and sewerage system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and all the other appurtenances and extensions thereto, and amend the same from time to time as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall comply with the said specifications and rules for connection to the waterworks and sewerage system or shall be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided.  
11-1-16 - NOTICE 
A copy of this Ordinance, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, Cook County, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the waterworks and sewerage system of the City on their properties and the fact that such liability begins upon the transfer of property to an owner or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any property for which the City has approved a demolition permit. 
(Ord. 2009-83, 11-16-2009)  
11-1-17 - PENALTY PROVISIONS 
Any person, firm, corporation, association, agent or legal representative violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00, and each day that the violation continues shall subject such person to an additional penalty of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. Whether or not a court has determined that a violation of this Ordinance has taken place and assesses a penalty therefor shall not preclude the City from seeking a recovery of any unpaid charges, fees or other sums due the City under this or other ordinances because of the furnishing by the City of its utility services. In addition, if any connection is made to the City water mains or sewer system without a permit as required by Section 11-1-1 of this Chapter, the fee for such permit shall be twice the amount specified in Sections 11-1-2 and 11-1-3. The Finance Director, or his or her designee, is authorized to issue notices of violation for violations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-83, 11-16-2009)  
CHAPTER 2 - EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN 
SECTION 
 
11-2-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires 
Electric utility company means any person or entity engaged in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the City. The term shall not include any person or entity that delivers electricity to fewer than 50 persons within the City. 
Emergency energy plan . means a planned course of action developed by an electric utility company to be implemented when the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the supply.  
11-2-2 - SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN 
Every electric utility company must adopt an emergency energy plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is later. The City Manager in the exercise of reasonable discretion may extend this 30-day period for an additional 30 days for good cause shown. Every such company shall submit to the City Manager any emergency energy plan adopted by the company no later than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is later. The company shall notify those officials within 24 hours of any significant revisions to a plan and the rationale for the revisions. Such revisions shall be submitted as soon as is practicable and reviewed in accordance with Section 11-2-4. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
11-2-3 - CONTENTS OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN 
The plan shall include, at a minimum, information detailing: 
•  The circumstances that would require the implementation of the plan; 
•  The levels or stages of the emergency plan; 
•  The potential impact of the plan on public health and safety, and on the duties of City public health and safety agencies; 
•  What steps the company has taken to mitigate those potential health or safety problems; 
•  The geographic limits of each outage area; 
•  The number of customers within each outage area; 
•  Identification of customers and facilities within each outage area for which a service interruption would pose increased risk to public health and safety, including but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, buildings in excess of 80 feet in height, day care centers, persons on life support systems, radio and communication facilities for police, fire, or public works personnel, sewer and stormwater pumping facilities and treatment facilities, and fresh water pumping stations and treatment facilities; and 
•  The anticipated sequence and duration of service interruptions.  
11-2-4 - REVIEW OF PLAN 
Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the City, the City shall review the plan. In order to assure appropriate coordination with public health and safety agencies, the City shall have the right to accept or reject the following elements of the plan: (1) the potential impact of the plan on public health and safety, (2) the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the City's health and safety agencies; and (3) what steps the company has taken to mitigate those potential health or safety problems. Such acceptance or rejection must be made by the City, in writing, within 30 days after date on which the plan was submitted. If a plan is rejected, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. In such case a revised plan shall be resubmitted within 30 days after notice of the rejection is given. The City shall accept or reject the revised plan in writing within 30 days after the date on which it was resubmitted. An electric utility company is in violation of this chapter if it fails to have in place an emergency energy plan approved by the City within 120 days after the plan was required to be submitted under section 2 of this Chapter.  
11-2-5 - IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN 
Whenever an electric utility company determines that it is necessary to implement an emergency energy plan, the company shall notify the City Manager or his designee, pursuant to a notification procedure approved by the City Manager. The notification shall be made as soon as practicable and shall be made prior to implementation of the plan. The City Manager may waive the notice requirement to accommodate exigent circumstances. Notice of the implementation of each level or stage of the emergency energy plan shall be made under this section pursuant to rules promulgated by the City Manager. The notification shall be made for each of the following actions: 
•  The use of operating reserves—spinning; 
•  The curtailment of service to "interruptible" customers (customers who have agreed to interruption of service under certain circumstances pursuant to their contract with the electrical utility company); 
•  The declaration of a control area emergency; 
•  A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use (the notification shall include the specific wording of the appeal); 
•  The determination of the need for an intentional interruption of service pursuant to the emergency plan (the notification shall include the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area); and 
•  Such other actions requiring notice pursuant to rules promulgated. 
The notification of such intentional service interruptions shall be made immediately upon the determination that the interruptions are necessary. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two hours prior to the time of the interruption, and in no case shall the notification be made less than 30 minutes prior to the interruption. Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any notification requirements contained in the Electric Franchise Agreement or otherwise required by law. Whenever an electric utility company implements an emergency energy plan, the company shall provide appropriate personnel to staff the City's emergency response facilities as provided in the City's Emergency Management Plan.  
11-2-6 - PENALTY; REIMBURSEMENT 
Any electric utility company that violates this chapter or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 and not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Whenever the City incurs any expenses in providing the services of public health and safety agencies as a result of 
1.  An electrical utility company's violation of this chapter or rules promulgated hereunder; or 
2.  The intentional interruption of power by an electric utility whether or not pursuant to an emergency energy plan that company shall reimburse the City for all amounts expended within 30 days of a certified invoice from the City. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
11-2-7 - CONSTRUCTION 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe service as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 511 101 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
CHAPTER 3 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2011-07, 1-17-2011. 
 
11-3-1 - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Chapter is to diminish threats to public health, safety and welfare caused by runoff of excessive stormwater from new development and redevelopment. This excessive stormwater could result in the inundation of damageable properties. The cause of increases in stormwater runoff quantity is the development and improvement of land and as such this Section regulates these activities to prevent adverse impacts. 
This Chapter is adopted to accomplish the following objectives: 
•To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or flood hazards to itself or others. 
•To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control project, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations caused by increased stormwater runoff quantities from new development 
•To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources.  
11-3-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Detention Basin . A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity or pumping of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm. 
Development . Any man-made change to real estate, including: 
a)  construction or reconstruction of a commercial building or any addition to a commercial building, parking lot or accessory structure; or a residential development with a minimum size of 1 acre; 
b)  construction or reconstruction or roads, bridges, parking lots or similar projects; 
c)  filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, or other non-agricultural; 
d)  any other activity that alters the magnitude, frequency, deviation, direction, or velocity of stormwater flows from a property. 
Drainage plan . A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and environmental features, as well as the drainage system and environmental features which are proposed after development of a property. 
M.W.R.D. . Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. 
Natural . Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without intervention by man. 
One hundred year event . A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a 1% chance of occurring in any given year. 
Property . A parcel of real estate. 
Reconstruction . Rebuilding, rehabilitating, renovating or remodeling a building, parking lot or accessory structure to the extent of 50% or more of its present value. 
Stormwater drainage system . All means, natural or man made, for conducting stormwater through or from any property to a point of final outlet from that property. The stormwater drainage system includes but is not limited to any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and pumping stations. 
Stormwater runoff . The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are collected in channels or conduits. 
Storm sewer . A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater. 
Two-year event . A runoff, rainfall or flood event having a 50% chance of occurring in any given year.  
11-3-3 - APPLICABILITY 
This Section shall apply to all development in the City of Park Ridge.  
11-3-4 - DRAINAGE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
Each applicant for a building permit for any development, as defined herein, or grade change permit shall submit a proposed drainage plan in accordance with provisions of this Chapter. The submittal shall include sufficient information to enable the City Engineer to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in managing stormwater runoff. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage plan. The information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions.  
11-3-5 - DRAINAGE PLAN 
The proposed drainage plan shall consist of the following: 
A.  Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at one-foot contours under existing and proposed conditions, and areas upstream and downstream, necessary to determine off-site impacts of the proposed drainage plan. The map shall utilize USGS elevations. 
B.  Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions of existing and proposed drainage system features of the property and immediate vicinity including: 
1.  watershed soils classifications; 
2.  location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales; 
3.  sanitary or combined sewers; 
4.  depressional storage areas; 
5.  delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and watersheds affected by the development; 
6.  detention facilities; 
7.  roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets. 
C.  The following methods in order of priority, shall be utilized in the drainage plan: 
1.  minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the needs of the project; 
2.  attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions and preserve existing natural stream channels; 
3.  infiltrate runoff on-site; 
4.  provide stormwater detention structures; and 
5.  construct storm sewers.  
11-3-6 - DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS, AND METHODS  
11-3-6.1 - DESIGN FORMULA 
Unless some other method is approved by the City Engineer, runoff shall be determined by the Rational Method, as expressed by the design formula Q=CIA, in which: 
A = Total tributary drainage area in acres 
I = Average Rainfall Intensity, in inches per hour 
C = Coefficient of Runoff, and 
Q = Runoff, in cubic feet per second 
11-3-6.2: AREA: The area in acres used in the design formula shall be the water shed area tributary to the point in the system under consideration, and shall include any tributary area that may lie outside the development not provided with stormwater holding facilities. 
11-3-6.3 INTENSITY: The average rainfall intensity used in the design formula shall be based on rainfall frequencies set forth in Bulletin 70 "Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois" prepared by the Illinois State Water Survey, 1989. 
11-3-6.4 RUNOFF COEFFICIENT: The runoff coefficient C is the ratio of runoff to rainfall and shall be as follows: 
a. all impervious areas (paved or hard surfaced areas of all types and buildings), C shall equal 0.95 (water surface C = 1.0); 
b. all previous areas such as lawn areas (all areas not classified as impervious), C shall equal 0.25. The runoff coefficient used in design shall be the weighted average of (a) and (b). Within a development, the runoff coefficient shall be computed assuming complete development. 
11-3-6.5: RELEASE RATES: The drainage system for a property shall be designed to control the discharge from the property for the two-year and 100-year critical duration event levels. The discharge from events less than or equal to the two-year event shall not be greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of property drained. The 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per acre of property drained. The discharge for parking lot detention shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per acre for any event up to 100-year. 
11-3-6.6: STORMWATER DETENTION: Stormwater detention sized in accordance with the M.W.R.D. requirements must be provided for all developments. 
11-3-6.7: METHOD OF DISCHARGE CONTROL: Discharge shall be controlled by means of a restrictor, either single pipe outlet or orifice plate. The pipe restrictor shall consist of a minimum 2-foot long pipe properly sized with a minimum three-inch diameter. A cleanout shall be placed immediately adjacent to this restrictor. Methods of acceptable detention are dry bottom detention basins, underground detention vaults, underground oversized pipes, and parking lot detention. 
11-3-6.8: EXCESSIVE RELEASE RATE, FEE: Where the minimum three inch diameter outlet allows release rates in excess of amounts permitted in Section 11-3-6.5 above, a fee in an amount equal to that specified in Section 11-3-9 shall be paid. 
11-3-6.9: PARKING LOT DETENTION: The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed twelve inches for more than six hours. Inlets and catch basins shall be provided so that flow from said lots is not carried across any public sidewalk line or across or around any major intersection. 
11-3-6.10: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS REQUIRED: Within 60 days upon completion of construction of the development, as-built drawings shall be submitted for review and approval by the City Engineer.  
11-3-7 - SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 
The drainage system components, especially all detention basins, shall be designed to protect the safety of any person coming in contact with the system during runoff events.  
11-3-8 - EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES 
Where detention areas are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.  
11-3-9 - FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION 
When a proposed development will not cause any increase in the existing rate of runoff from the property, or 
1.  the 0.15 cfs release rate is exceeded even though the minimum three inch restrictor specified in Subsection 11-3-6.8 is utilized; or 
2.  the development is a reconstruction of an existing building having a lot coverage of 75 percent or greater; or 
3.  the stormwater detention required by this Chapter cannot reasonably be provided, as determined by the City Engineer. 
The developer or owner shall pay to the City a fee in the amount as prescribed in Section 20-7-1. Sites larger than one acre must provide partial or complete onsite detention. 
Such fees shall be utilized by the City for the purpose of constructing stormwater management improvements for the City. 
(2006-49,6-19-2006)  
11-3-10 - MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY 
Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities located on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property.  
CHAPTER 4 - MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM 
SECTION 
 
11-4-1 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Agency means the Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County. 
B.  Municipal Waste System means the waste collection, transportation, and disposal system of the City of Park Ridge operated under contract or franchise pursuant to Section 11-4-4, including all physical assets of the City used for the collection, transportation, and disposal of System Waste, all amounts on deposit in the Municipal Waste System Fund, and all amounts collected on account of rates and charges imposed under this Chapter, if any. 
C.  Municipality or City means the City of Park Ridge. 
D.  Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, or corporation, or a receiver, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
E.  Project Use Agreement means the 1992 Project Use Agreement by and between the City and the Agency as amended from time to time. 
F.  System Waste means garbage and general household waste discarded by persons occupying single-family residences and two-family residences. System Waste does not include: 
1.  garbage and general household waste discarded by persons occupying residences containing more than two dwelling units; 
2.  institutional waste; 
3.  commercial and office waste; 
4.  industrial lunchroom waste; 
5.  construction and demolition waste, except incidental amounts less than 15 gallons by volume; or 
6.  recyclable materials and yard waste as defined in Section 5-12-18 of this Code.  
11-4-2 - FINDINGS 
The City Council of the City of Park Ridge hereby finds, as follows: 
A.  It is necessary for and in the best interests of the City of Park Ridge to regulate and control the collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste in the exercise of its police power in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents; and 
B.  The City of Park Ridge is authorized pursuant to Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution; Section 11-19-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-19-1; and Section 3.2 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, 5 ILCS 220/3.2 to provide for the method or methods of collection, transportation, and disposal of municipal waste within the corporate limits to provide that the method chosen may be the exclusive method to be used within the corporate limits; and 
C.  The City of Park Ridge, acting pursuant to Article VII, Section 10 of the Illinois Constitution and Section 3.2 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with other north and northwest suburban Cook County municipalities, thereby creating the Agency to provide an efficient and environmentally sound waste disposal system; and 
D.  The City of Park Ridge has entered into a Project Use Agreement by which the Agency will acquire, construct, operate, equip and improve a municipal solid waste project to provide for the disposal of system waste of the Municipality and other members of the Agency; and 
E.  Under the Project Use Agreement, the Municipality is obligated to establish a municipal waste disposal system to cause System Waste collected within its corporate limits to be delivered to the Agency and to make certain payments to the Agency, all as described in the Project Use Agreement; and 
F.  It is necessary and in the best interests of the Municipality to provide for the environmentally sound and efficient collection, transportation, and disposal of System Waste by creating a Municipal Waste System, by providing for the disposal of system waste by delivery to the Agency and to impose the rates and charges provided for herein.  
11-4-3 - REQUIRED USE OF MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM 
A.  All persons owning or occupying real estate within the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge shall dispose of System Waste through the Municipal Waste System. All System Waste shall be collected by or on behalf of the City pursuant to the terms of this Chapter and shall be delivered to a transfer station as directed by the Agency and the City or as otherwise agreed to by the Agency and the City under the Project Use Agreement. 
B.  No person shall dispose of System Waste through the Municipal Waste System unless the System Waste complies with all rules and regulations applicable thereto and established from time to time by either the City or the Agency. 
C.  Any person disposing of System Waste through the Municipal Waste System shall pay the rates and charges established by the City under the provisions of Section 5, if any.  
11-4-4 - PRIVATE COLLECTORS AND HAULERS 
A.  No person shall collect, transport or dispose of System Waste without a contract or franchise issued pursuant to this Section. 
B.  Any person holding a contract or franchise to collect, transport, or dispose of System Waste shall comply with the following obligations as a condition of that contract or franchise: 
1.  Comply with all the laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of System Waste as may be enacted from time to time by any lawful authority, including the State of Illinois, the City of Park Ridge, and the Agency. 
2.  Deliver all System Waste to the transfer station designated by the Agency and the City. 
3.  Maintain all equipment used to collect, transport and dispose of System Waste in good repair and working order and operate it efficiently and effectively. 
4.  Maintain accurate books and records and make them available to the City on demand. 
C.  Nothing in this Chapter is intended to impair any contract or franchise issued before the effective date of this ordinance to any person which authorizes the person to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste which constitutes System Waste to a location other than the transfer station designated by the Agency and the City.  
11-4-5 - THE MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM FUND; IMPOSITION OF RATES AND CHARGES 
A.  There is hereby created and established an enterprise fund of the City of Park Ridge known as the Municipal Waste System Fund, which shall be separate and apart from all other funds and accounts of the Municipality as provided below in Paragraph D. 
B.  Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall recommend and the City Council shall adopt a budget for the Municipal Waste System. The budget shall estimate the revenue required to: 
1.  pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the Municipal Waste System, including all obligations to the Agency under the Project Use Agreement; 
2.  pay as they become due interest on and principal of any revenue bonds or other obligations payable from the revenues of the Municipal Waste System; 
3.  provide for all unpaid claims; and 
4.  maintain appropriate depreciation and reserve funds, including reserve funds, including reserves for uncollected charges. 
The budget shall estimate the amounts available to pay those obligations from: 
1.  taxes levied and anticipated to be collected pursuant to law; 
2.  other amounts deposited in the Municipal Waste System Fund; and 
3.  rates and charges to be imposed on persons disposing of System Waste through the Municipal Waste System, if any. 
C.  The rates and charges imposed for use of the Municipal Waste System, if any, shall be sufficient, after taking into account monies then on hand in the Municipal Waste System Fund and the proceeds of taxes levied and to be collected which have been assigned and pledged to the Municipal Waste System Fund: 
1.  to pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the Municipal Waste System, including all obligations to the Agency under the terms of the Project Use Agreement; 
2.  to pay, as they become due, interest on and principal of any revenue bonds or other obligations payable from revenue bonds or other obligations payable from revenues of the Municipal Waste System; 
3.  to provide for all unpaid claims; and 
4.  to provide adequate depreciation and reserve funds for the Municipal Waste System, including reserves for uncollected charges. 
D.  All amounts collected from rates and charges imposed under this Section, if any, shall be deposited in the Municipal Waste System Fund, and together with all other amounts deposited in the Municipal Waste System Fund, shall be separate and apart from all other monies of the Municipality, except amounts deposited in the Municipal Waste System Fund may be invested together with other funds of the Municipality.  
CHAPTER 5 - STORMWATER UTILITY FEES 
SECTION 
 
11-5-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU) is the unit used to determine and apply the stormwater utility fee for each individual parcel. The ERU shall equal 2,800 square feet of impervious area. 
Impervious Area or Impervious Surface means those areas that prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and awnings. 
Parcel means any designated lot, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or other legal means and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
Improved means any parcel that contains any structure or impervious surface. 
Stormwater System means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including sewers, storm drains, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, retention ponds or basis, dams, creeks, river impoundments, man-made channels or storm drains and flood controls facilities and appurtenances thereof which are designed or used for the collection, control, transportation, treatment or discharge of stormwater, all located within the corporate limits of the City. 
Stormwater Utility means a stormwater management program that may include all or part of the following: administration, engineering, planning, operations, enforcement, educational and capital programs. 
Unimproved means any parcel that does not contain any structure or impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
11-5-2 - STORMWATER UTILITY; FUND 
A.  Stormwater Utility. The City hereby establishes a stormwater utility within the Public Works Department to provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, construction and enhancement of the City's stormwater systems and facilities. 
B.  Stormwater Utility Fund. The City hereby establishes a stormwater enterprise fund, hereafter called "Stormwater Utility Fund." All funds deposited into the Stormwater Utility Fund shall be used only for purposes of the stormwater utility as deemed appropriate by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
11-5-3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF STORMWATER UTILITY FEE 
The City hereby establishes a stormwater utility fee to be imposed on each parcel of property in the City, whether publicly or privately owned, at the rate set forth in Section 11-5-6.B.1. of this Code, as adopted by the City Council and adjusted from time to time. The City will begin collecting the stormwater utility fee on September 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-64 , § 2, 10-17-2016)  
11-5-4 - UTILITY ADMINISTRATION 
The City Manager, or his designee, shall administer the stormwater utility in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and may establish regulations to facilitate the implementation of the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
11-5-5 - CLASSIFICATION OF PARCELS 
For purposes of determining the stormwater utility fee, all parcels in the City are classified as one of the following: 
A.  Improved 
B.  Unimproved 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
11-5-6 - STORMWATER UTILITY FEE RATES 
A.  Authority to Set Rates. The City Council shall retain at all times the power and authority to set stormwater utility fee rates. The City shall review the adequacy of the stormwater utility fee rate annually in conjunction with the budget process. The rate shall be revised periodically to reflect any change in costs associated with capital, operation, maintenance, replacement and administration associated with the City's Stormwater Sewer System. 
B.  Rates. 
1.  The stormwater utility fee rate per Equivalent Runoff Unit (ERU) shall be $0.00 per month. 
2.  Improved. All Improved parcels in the City shall be assessed a stormwater utility fee based on the measured number of ERUs on the parcel multiplied by the rate per ERU as set forth in Section 11-5-6.B.1. above. 
3.  Unimproved. The City shall assess Unimproved parcels a stormwater utility fee that is equal to 0.5 ERU. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-64 , § 2, 10-17-2016)  
11-5-7 - STORMWATER FEE REDUCTION; PROCEDURE 
A.  Fee Reduction for On-Site Retention. The City desires to encourage and recognize the benefits of on-site stormwater retention by parcel owners. To promote on-site retention, the City will apply the "Unimproved" fee rate, as set forth in Section 11-5-6.B.3., for any parcel, or portion of a parcel, for which the impervious surface runoff is retained entirely on-site. To obtain the fee reduction ("Fee Reduction"), the parcel owner must comply with all requirements set forth in this Section. The Fee Reduction is only applied prospectively; no reduction shall be applied to any fee that has been paid, or assessed by the City, prior to the owner's completion of all requirements set forth in this Section. 
B.  Requirements. To obtain a Fee Reduction under this Section, the owner of a parcel must provide the following documentation: 
1.  A short, concise statement describing the reasons why the parcel at issue qualifies for a Fee Reduction under this Section; 
2.  A visual depiction of the area that is subject to the Fee Reduction request ("Reduction Area"); 
3.  A written opinion or report, signed by a licensed professional engineer, providing evidence that all stormwater runoff from the Reduction Area is permanently retained on-site without any use of the City's Stormwater Sewer System ("Professional Engineer Opinion"); 
4.  Any additional information as the owner(s) may wish to submit for consideration; and 
5.  Contact information (name, address, phone number, etc.), for the Owner, Requestor or Owner's designated representative for the parcel. 
C.  Procedure. The City Manager, or his designee, shall review and make a decision whether to allow or deny the appeal within 60 days of receipt of a completed Fee Reduction Request. The decision shall be in writing and, if it denies the Request, it shall state the reasons for the denial. The City may, in its sole discretion, condition a Fee Reduction approval on any and all requirements designed to ensure continued compliance with this Chapter. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, a condition that owner(s) are automatically subject to the Stormwater Utility Fee if any impervious surfaces are added to the parcel or conditions relied on in the Fee Waiver Request are otherwise altered. 
D.  Burden of Proof. The owner(s) of the parcel that is subject to the Fee Reduction request bears the burden of proving beyond a preponderance of the evidence that the subject parcel is entitled to a Fee Reduction under this Section. 
E.  Renewal of Fee Reduction. If a request for a Fee Reduction request is granted, the Unimproved rate shall be applied to the Reduction Area for one year ("Fee Reduction Period"). At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the Fee Reduction, the owner shall a request for a Fee Reduction renewal, along with any documents or materials necessary to update any previous submission and disclose any changes to the Reduction Area or underlying basis for any Professional Engineer Opinion on file with the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
11-5-8 - DELINQUENT FEES; LIENS 
Whenever the Stormwater Utility Fee for a parcel becomes more than 30 days delinquent, the delinquent fee together with outstanding penalties shall become and constitute a lien upon the parcel. Statements rendered for any delinquent Stormwater Utility Fee shall be deemed notice of the lien to the owner(s) of the parcel if such statement is mailed to the owner(s) of the parcel as shown in the records of the supervisor of assessments by first class mail. No additional notice of lien is required to be sent to the owner(s) nor is a copy of the claim of lien required to be sent to the owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 2016-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-18-2016)  
ARTICLE 12 - BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. of 2000; Ord. No. 2008-82, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 2012-89, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. 2013-53, 12-02-2013; Ord. No. 2014-51, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2015-30, 5-18-15; Ord. No. 2015-06, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-61, 11-16-2015; Ord. No. 2015-24, 4-21-2015. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - TRANSIENT BUSINESSES[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-83, 10-9-2006; Ord. No. 2011-28, 4-18-2011; Ord. No. 2012-89, 12-3-2012; Ord. No. 2015-30, 5-18-2015. 
 
12-1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Chapter shall be construed as follows: 
A.  Food truck firm. A commercial vehicle that sells commercially manufactured pre-packaged frozen desserts. 
B.  Media. Any and all still, live, or motion picture production and related activities whether made on or by film, electronic tape, or any other electronic device used to produce theatrical motion pictures, television entertainment motion pictures, industrial motion pictures, television commercials, or still photography for use in any print or electronic Media. Film Production shall include the erection, dismantling, and transportation of the Production Equipment and the use of Production vehicles. For purposes of this Article 12, Media shall not include Film Production by a bona fide student or students of an elementary school, secondary school, or college program; for class credit and not for a commercial purpose. 
C.  Mobile food cart. A non-motorized food service cart in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for service, sale or distribution that exceeds the temporary use time period. 
D.  Mobile food vehicle. A commercially manufactured, mobile food unitor vehicle-mounted food service establishment designed to be driven on public streets in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for service, sale or distribution that exceeds the temporary use time period. 
E.  Owner. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in a transient business. 
F.  Person. An individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity. 
G.  Transient business. Any of the following activities of commerce or commercial activity conducted within the City: 
1.  Estate Sales. The selling of goods, chattels or real estate on behalf of an estate or personal representative of an estate; 
2.  Building Contracting. Engaging in one or more of the several building trades and other types of activities involving manual labor including, but not limited to, the trades and activities of excavators, plumbers, sewer construction and maintenance, concrete or mason work, carpenters, metal working activities, roofing trades, glazing activities, heating or air conditioning, electricians, plastering and lathing activities, tiling activities, painters and decorators, catch basin cleaners, sprinkler (lawn or fire), drywall activities, landscaping, forestry or tree services, or alarm system installation; 
3.  Transient Food Sales. The collection, delivery, carrying, or transportation of food, foodstuff, food products, beverages or drink or ice for sale or incident to sale to persons within the City from the public right-of-way or from private property not owned, controlled, or leased by the owner or operator of the property from which sales are made; 
4.  Transient Merchandise Sales The collection, delivery, carrying, or transportation of merchandise, material goods, chattels, wares, or printed material for sale or incident to sale to persons within the City from the public right-of-way or from private property not owned, controlled, or leased by the owner or operator of the vehicle from which sales are made; 
5.  Residential Services. The providing of any service or use of any profession or occupation licensed by the State of Illinois at a residential property within the City; 
6.  Scavenger/Junk Hauler. The collection, hauling, delivery, carrying and removal of residential or commercial garbage, refuse, junk, trash, rubbish, debris, wood, oil, grease, paper, metal, bricks, clothes, furniture, bottles or glassware for disposal, sale or otherwise by a motorized vehicle.  
12-1-2 - AMOUNT OF FEE 
Yearly License fees shall be as follows: 
Classification 	License Unit 	Yearly Fee 
Building Contractor 	Per firm 	$ 50.00 
Food Truck Firm 	Per truck 	$ 50.00 
Scavenger/Junk Hauler 	Per firm 	$ 50.00 
Estate Salesperson 	Per person 	$ 50.00 
Merchandise Truck Firm 	Per truck 	$ 50.00 
Residential Services Firm 	Per firm 	$ 50.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2013-53, 12-02-2013)  
12-1-3 - HOMEOWNER ACTING AS BUILDING CONTRACTOR 
Homeowners are not required to obtain a building contractor license. A homeowner, upon obtaining a building permit from the Building Official, may in his or her own home install, alter, or repair any building or structure, equipment, plumbing system, and/or electrical system, provided the homeowner shall reside in the residence being altered or repaired for a period of at least six (6) months following the final inspection for the building permit. If, during any scheduled inspections, it is found that the homeowner is not complying with the Building Code, the Building Official may require that a licensed building contractor be retained to complete the construction specified in the building permit.  
12-1-4 - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of electrical contracting without being licensed as an electrician or an electrical contractor for the current year in another city or village within the State of Illinois approved by the Building Official. The electrician or electrical contractor license must be obtained from a city or village that administers a competency exam based upon the National Electrical Code or City of Chicago Electrical Code. Such electrician or electrical contractor shall be required to show proof of such license before a building contractor license will be issued to engage in the business of electrical contracting in the City of Park Ridge.  
12-1-5 - CONTRACTOR INSURANCE 
Any person or firm engaged in the business as a building contractor shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect during the operation of the business liability and property damage insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for general liability per occurrence, $1,000,000 for bodily injury, and $2,000,000 for general aggregate from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois and with a minimum insurance rating of B++, as found in the current edition of A.M. Best's Key Rating Guide.  
12-1-6 - MOBILE FOOD VENDING 
A.  License Required; Application; Fees. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food vehicle or mobile food cart, as defined in this Chapter, within the City without first having obtained a license for that purpose. 
2.  The provisions of this Section are not exclusive. This Section shall not preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this Code or state and federal laws and regulations. 
3.  Any person desiring to operate a mobile food vehicle or mobile food cart shall make a written application for such license to the Community Preservation and Development Department, Health Division in accordance with Section 12-17-1. The application for such license shall be on forms provided by the Health Division and shall include the items listed in Section 12-17-1(b) and the following: 
a.  Name, signature and address of the owner. 
b.  Name and address of the approved commercial food source. 
c.  A description of the preparation methods and food product offered for sale, including the intended menu, display, distribution containers, and utensils. 
d.  Equipment list including equipment type, manufacturer and model number. 
e.  Plans and specifications for the mobile food vehicle or cart, including the proposed layout, photographs, mechanical schematics, and construction materials. 
f.  The proposed location(s) and dates and times of operation. 
g.  A description of plumbing facilities including type of water supply, public sewer provided, provisions for utensil washing and sanitizing, provisions for hand washing and the size of clear water tank. 
•Minimum size of water tank shall be five (5) gallons for mobile food carts and twenty (20) gallons for mobile food vehicle. 
•Minimum size of waste water tanks shall be one and one half (1.5) the size of the clear water tank. 
h.  A signed statement that the owner shall hold harmless the City and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the City, its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the license. Owner shall furnish to the City and maintain such public liability, food products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect owner, property owners, and the City from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from the operations under the license or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and with a minimum insurance rating of B++, as found in the current edition of A.M. Best's Key Rating Guide. The policy shall further provide that it may not be cancelled except upon thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the City. 
i.  The vehicle identification number of each mobile food vehicle. 
j.  A waiver signed by the owner and driver(s) authorizing the City to conduct a background check on each driver who will operate the mobile food vehicle or mobile food cart. The owner shall furnish a list of the persons who will be operating the mobile food vehicle or mobile food cart including their names and addresses and a statement that each such person has not been convicted of a felony within the past ten (10) years and that each such person is not required by law to register as a sex offender as required. 
k.  Other items deemed necessary by the City of Park Ridge, Health Division. Owner shall notify the Health Division within thirty (30) days of any changes to application information. 
4.  All mobile food carts and mobile food vehicles licensed under this Chapter shall pay an annual license fee as a food establishment based on the Risk type as identified in Section 12-2-2. 
B.  Form and Conditions of License. 
1.  In addition to naming the owner, the approved operating location site diagram, and other information deemed appropriate by the Health Division, the mobile food vehicle or mobile food cart license shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  Each mobile food vehicle vending license shall expire on December 31 of each year or as set by the City Council. 
b.  Business shall only be conducted at those locations listed on the license and during the hours listed on the license. 
c.  The license shall not be transferrable from person to person, vehicle to vehicle, or cart to cart. 
d.  Each license is valid for one (1) vehicle or cart only. 
2.  A mobile food vehicle owner who has a current valid license under this Chapter shall not be required to obtain a temporary food establishment permit in order to conduct business at a private event, but it must notify the Health Division in writing of the private event at least 10 days prior to the event. If the owner alters its current and approved menu for an event it shall be required to obtain a temporary food establishment permit in order to operate at a private event. 
C.  Sanitation; Inspections; Restrictions on Use. 
1.  All mobile food vehicles and carts shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The Health Division shall have the authority to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure all mobile food vehicles and carts are kept in a clean and sanitary condition. A Health Inspector bearing proper identification shall be permitted access to any mobile food vehicle or cart at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting to determine whether the owner has complied with the terms of this chapter. Additionally, the owner shall, on request, provide the Health Inspector with the records of the mobile food vehicle or cart to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used. Denial of access or to said records shall be deemed an interference with the Health Inspector in the performance of his/her duties. 
2.  All food storage, preparation and distribution of food, and vehicle equipment must meet applicable Illinois Department of Public Health standards and requirements. 
3.  All food, beverages, ice and other materials sold or used in preparation of goods to be sold must be obtained from an approved commercial source. 
4.  All off-site food preparation and food storage must be done at a licensed food establishment. Food cannot be prepared in a home. 
5.  All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting lids and properly disposed of at the affiliated licensed restaurant. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained into sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, trash receptacles, or any other place except the affiliated licensed restaurant. A garbage receptacle shall be easily accessible for customer use. Owner shall be responsible for all litter and garbage left by customers. 
6.  No mobile food vehicle shall be operated unless it bears a valid state license and no such vehicle shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, tires, lights, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wipers. All such equipment shall be in good working condition. The owner shall be required to furnish the City with an inspection certificate indicating that the mobile food vehicle is in safe mechanical condition. No mobile food vehicle shall be operated upon the streets of the City if an inspection indicates that the vehicle is not in a safe mechanical condition and may not be put back in operation until it has been repaired, submitted for retesting and a certificate issued indicating that it has no mechanical defects. 
7.  All mobile food carts and mobile food vehicles must prominently display the name and address of the owner. 
8.  Any power required for the mobile food cart or mobile food vehicle located on a public right-of-way shall be self-contained and shall not use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. Mobile food carts and mobile food vehicles on private property may use electrical power from an adjacent property only when the property owner provides written consent. All other power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or equipment shall be extended at grade across any City street, alley or sidewalk.  
12-1-7 - FILMING AND PHOTOGRAPHY PERMITS AND FEES 
A.  Permit Required. Except for activities that are expressly exempt under Subsection (F) of this Section, no person shall engage in any filming or photographing activities on any public property, right-of-way, or street, or use any City personnel for such activities without first having secured a permit from the City Manager pursuant to a written filming policy promulgated by the City, paid the fees required by Subsection (B), and complied with the requirements of Subsections (C) and (E), where applicable. 
B.  Fees. 
1.  Application fee. All filming and photography activities requiring a permit under this Section are subject to payment of a $100.00 non-refundable application fee. 
2.  Permit fee. In addition, the following permit fees shall apply for permitted activities: 
a.  Documentary or web media activities: $400.00 fee per location, per date. 
b.  Commercial still photography: $570.00 fee per location, per date. 
c.  Commercial filming: $1,350.00 fee per location, per date. 
d.  Non-commercial activities that utilize tripods, lights, or other specialized equipment or use City personnel: $70.00 fee per location, per date. 
3.  Use of Public Building/Grounds. In addition, any activity that involves the use of a public building shall be subject to an additional fee of $500.00 per day during regular operating hours. An additional fee shall be imposed for use of a public building or grounds during non-operating hours, as determined by the City. 
4.  Closure of Public Street or Right-of-Way. Any activity that involves the closure of a public street or right-of-way shall be subject to an additional fee of $500.00 per day. 
The fees set forth in this Subsection (B) are in addition to any costs of repair or any fees charged for the use of City equipment or City personnel. 
C.  Hold Harmless. A person engaging in activities requiring a permit under this Section must provide a hold harmless agreement to the City, in a form acceptable to the City. 
D.  Insurance. A person engaging in activities requiring a permit under this Section must provide evidence of insurance naming the City of Park Ridge as an additional insured in a form and amount acceptable to the City. 
E.  Security Deposit. A person engaging in activities requiring a permit under this Section shall provide a refundable security deposit to the City in the amount of $500.00 for documentary, web media, and commercial still photography, and $5,000.00 for commercial filming activities. 
F.  Exemptions. This Section does not apply to the following filming or photographing activities, provided such activities do not disrupt City operations and do not involve the use of City personnel: 
1.  Recording of meetings of any public body as authorized by the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq . 
2.  Non-commercial filming or photography activities that do not involve the use of tripods, lights, or other specialized equipment. 
3.  Filming or photography activities by students as part of a class or other educational program. 
(Ord. No. 2019-42 , § 1, 6-17-2019)  
CHAPTER 2 - COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-83, 10-9-2006. 
 
12-2-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Words and terms used in this Chapter that are defined in the Zoning Code shall have the definitions ascribed in the Zoning Code. Other words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Commercial business establishments. Any property or portion of property used for the exchange or buying and selling of a commodity or service, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Food Establishment is a premises which is used for the sale, dispensing, distribution, or serving of food, foodstuffs, or drink for consumption on or off the premises. 
2.  Service Establishment is a premises which is used for the business of rendering personal services including, but not limited to: 
a.  The cutting, styling, setting or washing of human hair or wig; 
b.  The wholesale distribution or storage of material goods or chattels; 
c.  The sale, servicing or storage of motor equipment or motor vehicles; 
d.  The washing, cleaning, dyeing, or repair of fabrics, wearing apparel, or footwear; 
e.  The storage, assembly, distribution, servicing, or repair of building materials or electrical equipment or mechanical equipment; 
f.  The storage or distribution of fuels or other petroleum products; 
g.  Printing, blueprinting, photocopying, multi-lithing, publishing, duplicating, or similar reproduction services; 
h.  The provision of facilities for a hotel, motel or apartment hotel, rooming house, nursing home, or similar housing facilities for transient or permanent guests; 
i.  The provision of facilities for education, instruction, training, participation in or presentation of the following, including, but not limited to, the fine arts; athletic skills; physical skills; entertainment or recreation; computer or business skills, excluding any schools operated under the authority of the State School Code; 
j.  Funeral homes; 
k.  Childcare facilities; 
l.  Contractor's shops and material storage yards; 
m.  Any swimming pool except those operated for family use at a single family detached dwelling unit. 
B.  Retail goods establishment. A mercantile establishment for the sale of goods and products to the general public, as opposed to a wholesale of goods or an establishment that sells services. 
C.  Professional establishment. A premises which is used for the business of rendering professional services, including, but not limited to, health, medical or dental care, banking or financial affairs, travel, insurance, legal affairs, real estate, clerical or data processing affairs, advertising, brokering, construction, architecture, engineering, planning, or accounting. 
D.  Temporary food service. Events where food is served to the public on a temporary basis. 
E.  Owner. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in a commercial establishment to maintain and manage its operation. 
F.  Service. Work that does not produce a tangible commodity.  
12-2-2 - AMOUNT OF FEE 
Yearly fees for registration of commercial establishments shall be as follows: 
Classification 	Step 	Floor area 
in Square Feet 	Annual Fee 
A-Food Establishment 			
 Risk 1 			$700.00 
 Risk 2 			450.00 
 Risk 3 			250.00 
B-Service Establishment 	1 	0—1,000 	150.00 
B-Service Establishment 	2 	1,000—5,000 	200.00 
B-Service Establishment 	3 	5,000—10,000 	300.00 
B-Service Establishment 	4 	10,000—20,000 	400.00 
B-Service Establishment 	5 	20,000 and over 	550.00 
C-Retail Sales Establishment 	1 	0—1,000 	100.00 
C-Retail Sales Establishment 	2 	1,000—5,000 	150.00 
C-Retail Sales Establishment 	3 	5,000—10,000 	200.00 
C-Retail Sales Establishment 	4 	10,000—20,000 	250.00 
C-Retail Sales Establishment 	5 	20,000 and over 	350.00 
D-Professional and Other 	1 	0—1,000 	50.00 
D-Professional and Other 	2 	1,000—5,000 	90.00 
D-Professional and Other 	3 	5,000—10,000 	130.00 
D-Professional and Other 	4 	10,000—20,000 	170.00 
D-Professional and Other 	5 	20,000—and over 	210.00 
E-Home Occupations 			35.00 
F-Temporary Food Service 			
 Risk 1 			75.00 
 Risk 2 			50.00 
 Risk 3 			25.00 
G-Pool 			100.00 
  
12-2-3 - COMPUTATION 
Total floor area for the determination of the yearly fee shall be calculated in accordance with the definition of "floor area" in Section 12-2-1. All measured area expressed in square feet shall be to the nearest square foot (if a fraction is one-half (½) square foot or more the square foot next above shall be taken). Food establishment and temporary food event fees shall be determined based on the risk type as set forth in the Illinois Department of Public Health publication "Food Service Sanitation Code" and any future revisions or updates.  
12-2-4 - SITE COVERED 
A separate license shall be required for each location of a commercial establishment. All buildings containing the principal or accessory uses (a) on the same lot or parcel; and (b) operated and managed by the same person or owner; and (c) having the same license classification shall require only one license. However, if two (2) or more buildings are separated by one or more dedicated public rights-of-way or by one or more buildings or vacant lots or parcels, or if any of (a), (b) or (c) above is not true, then a separate license shall be required.  
12-2-5 - MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATIONS 
Should the operation or management of a commercial establishment in one location by the same owner or person involve the operation of two (2) or more commercial business establishment classifications as defined in this Chapter, then, and in that event, the yearly license fee shall be determined as follows: 
A.  If the multiple classifications include a food establishment, then the food establishment fees shall apply for the total floor area of all classifications. 
B.  If the multiple classifications include a food establishment that sells, distributes, or serves only non-perishable and non-potentially hazardous prepackaged food and the amount of the food display area occupies less than thirty (30) square feet of floor space, such area shall not be considered a food establishment classification and the other classification shall be used to determine the annual license fee. 
C.  If the multiple classifications include a service establishment, but not a food establishment, then the service establishment fee shall apply for the total floor area of all classifications. 
D.  If the multiple classifications include a retail goods establishment but not a service establishment or food establishment, then the retail goods establishment fee shall apply for the total floor area.  
12-2-6 - EXCLUSIONS 
The terms and provisions of this Chapter shall not be made applicable to an outdoor café, a massage therapy establishment, or a Children's Hospital, which are licensed as prescribed in Article 5 Chapter 3.1, Article 5 Chapter 15, and Article 5 Chapter 14, respectively, in the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
12-2-7 - RE-INSPECTION FEE 
Any re-inspection deemed necessary by the City of Park Ridge shall be charged a fee consistent with section 20-4-3 of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge.  
CHAPTER 3 - EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2015-05, 2-02-2015; Ord. No. 2015-62, 11-16-2015. 
 
12-3-1 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Alarms. An "alarm" shall be construed to include and mean any device known as a fire, burglar, holdup or medical alerting alarm. 
B.  False Alarm. The transmission of any alarm signal caused by human error or mechanical malfunction, whether or not the exact cause of the error or malfunction is identified, or any other activation of the signal when no actual emergency exists, other than for testing purposes. 
C.  Subscriber. A person, firm, or corporation utilizing a direct alarm, digital dialer system or central station alarm for which the person pays a fee. 
D.  Type of Alarm Systems. 
Direct Alarms: A system connected directly to the Fire Department Communications Center from the source of the alarms by permanent, dedicated lines, which constantly scans its customers' alarms. 
Digital Dialer System: A system employing automatic telephone dialing devices. 
Local Alarm: Those alarms that create an audible sound on a premises when triggered and do not send a signal to any off-site location. 
Central Station Alarm System: Any alarm system company which is privately owned or that owns, leases or sells alarm systems, whose facility is staffed by employees who receive, record and validate alarm signals and relay the information of such signals to Police or Fire Department by any means.  
12-3-2 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED; FEE; APPLICATION 
A.  Every alarm system installed in any structure in the City shall be registered with the City, except those alarms which do not transmit a signal outside the structure in which they are installed. 
B.  Application for registration shall be on forms provided by the Finance Department. The application shall be signed by the user of the alarm system and shall provide that the applicant agrees that the City shall not be liable for any failure of service nor for any damage that might result from the installation or operation of the alarm system; and that the applicant shall hold the City harmless from all claims, demands, judgments, liability and costs arising from the operation of the alarm system. The applicant shall certify that he has provided for the maintenance service on the alarm system at any time. The applicant shall also provide the names of not less than two (2) persons having access to the alarm system at all times to reset it after activation. The applicant shall notify the Finance Director of any change in such person. 
C.  There shall be a one-time fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for registration of each alarm system, except those systems required to pay a monthly fee under Section 12-3-3(C). 
D.  Registration of any alarm system installed by a contractor required to be licensed by Chapter 225 ILCS 445/1 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes shall require evidence of such license. 
E.  No registration shall be accepted for any alarm service contractor not licensed by the State of Illinois. 
F.  An alarm system requiring a voltage exceeding sixty (60) volts to operate shall be installed only by a registered electrician with an approved building permit. Inspection and approval of the City Electrical Inspector will be required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-62 11-16-2015; Ord. No. 2015-62 11-16-2015)  
12-3-3 - DIRECT ALARMS AND DIGITAL DIALER SYSTEMS 
A.  All direct alarm systems and digital dialer systems shall meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  The system shall conform to all applicable standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the National Fire Protection Association. 
2.  Alarm systems shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in optimal physical condition. False alarms shall be conclusive proof that such optional condition is not being maintained. 
B.  Every alarm service company which has installed a direct alarm system or digital dialer system in the City shall provide a current list of such installations to the Fire Chief, or his representative. Such list shall include: 
1.  The name, home address and telephone number of the device's owner or lessee; 
2.  The address of the location where the device is installed and the telephone number at that location; 
3.  Other information as may be deemed necessary by the Fire Chief for the proper maintenance of system records. 
C.  The subscriber installing a direct connection or digital dialer connection to the City's alarm system shall pay to the City a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per month for each fire alarm. 
D.  Applicants making connection to the fire panels shall be required to furnish a suitable signal to the communications center. 
E.  No person shall operate or maintain a digital dialer system which dials any telephone number within the Fire Department except such number designated by the Fire Chief. 
F.  Digital dialers shall not be used for signaling fire or medical alert alarms.  
12-3-4 - CENTRAL STATION ALARM SYSTEM 
A.  All central station alarm systems shall meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  The system shall conform to all applicable standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the National Fire Protection Association. 
2.  Alarm systems shall be maintained by the owner or lessee in optimal physical condition. False alarms shall be conclusive proof that such optional condition is not being maintained. 
B.  Any owner of a protected premises, or other person or entity to contract for, arrange, or otherwise cause or allow, a central station company to receive or retransmit alarm signals from a protected premises, must ensure that such central station alarm company possesses a valid certificate of operation.  
12-3-5 - LOCAL ALARMS 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any local alarm system to sound continuously for more than fifteen (15) minutes or repeatedly for more than twenty (20) minutes. The sounding of such alarm is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.  
12-3-6 - PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION; FEES FOR EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS 
A.  The Finance Director shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the operation of alarm systems, including local alarms, if any inspection or other evidence reveals noncompliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  If the Police Department or Fire Department responds to more than two (2) false alarms at any residential premises or more than four (4) false alarms at any commercial or institutional premise, having a fire, burglar, holdup, or medical alert alarm in a calendar year, the user of such alarm system shall pay the City the following amounts within thirty (30) days after the response for which the charge is made: 
Residential Alarms 		Commercial or 
Institutional Alarms 	
3rd response 	$ 50 	5th response 	$ 50 
4th response 	  60 	6th response 	  60 
5th response 	  70 	7th response 	 100 
6th response 	  80 	8th response 	 150 
7th response 	  90 	9th response 	 200 
8th response 	 100 	10th response 	 300 
9th response 	 150 	11th response 	 400 
10th response 	 200 	12th response 	 500 
After 10 	 200 	After 12 	 500 
 
1.  Within fifteen (15) working days after the respective Department responds to a false alarm, the Finance Director shall mail a notice to the alarm user of the charge. 
2.  Within fifteen (15) working days after receiving notice of a false alarm charge, the alarm system user may file a written request with the City Manager to reconsider whether a fee must be paid, stating the reasons for the request. 
3.  After the receipt of a request for reconsideration from a user, the City Manager shall notify the user of his decision. The City Manager's decision shall be final. 
4.  Whenever a new alarm system is installed, the user shall be given fifteen (15) days from the date of the installation of such alarm system within which no alarm from the premises shall be deemed to be a false alarm. 
C.  If the Police or Fire Departments respond to more than ten (10) false alarms at the same premise in a calendar year, or the user fails to pay the fees assessed for false alarms, the City Manager may revoke or suspend permission of the user to operate the alarm system.  
12-3-7 - PENALTY 
Except as otherwise set forth, any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.  
CHAPTER 4 - SALES AND ADVERTISING 
SECTION 
 
12-4-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Chapter shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Going out of business sale. Any sale, whether described by such name or by another name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale," "liquidation sale," "lost our lease sale," "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted. 
B.  Goods. All goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property. 
C.  Person. Includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association of two or more persons having a joint or common interest. 
D.  Removal sale. Any sale advertised or held in such a manner as to induce a belief that, upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted and thereafter moved to another location.  
12-4-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised, represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of business, insolvents, assignees or creditor sale of goods, or that it is a sale of goods which has been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, unless such person shall first have obtained a license to conduct such sale from the Director of Finance, provided, however, that this Chapter shall not apply to any sales directly ordered by any court or referee in bankruptcy, or to any person acting under the direction or supervision of State or Federal courts in the course of their office duties.  
12-4-3 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, CONTENTS, INVENTORY 
Any applicant for a license under this Chapter shall file an application in writing and under oath with the Director of Finance setting out the following facts: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant for the sale (must be the owner of the goods to be sold). In addition, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation, firm or association, the name and position of the individual filing such application. 
B.  The address where such sale is to be conducted. 
C.  The dates and period of time of the sale. 
D.  The name, address, email address, and telephone number of the person or persons who will be in charge of and responsible for the conduct of such sale. 
E.  A full explanation with regard to the condition of necessity which is the occasion for such sale. This shall include a statement of the descriptive name of the sale and the reasons why such name is truthfully descriptive of the sale. If it is a damaged goods sale, a statement shall include the time, location and cause of such damage. 
F.  If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business sale, it shall contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale. 
G.  If the application is for a license to conduct a removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale and the location of the premises to which the business is to be removed. 
H.  A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods that are to be sold, which shall: 
4.  itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand name, if any, to clearly identify it; 
5.  list separately any goods which were purchased during a sixty (60) day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license; and 
6.  show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with the name and address of the seller of the item to the applicant, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to the applicant, and the total value of the inventory at cost. 
B.  That no goods will be added to the inventory after the application is made or during the sale and that the inventory contains no goods received on consignment. 
C.  That the applicant has in the past maintained a place of business within the City where the goods so listed in his inventories have been sold or offered for sale for not less than four (4) months prior to the time of making application for such license. However, the subsection shall not apply to any applicant who has acquired a right, title or interest in the goods as: 
1.  an heir, devisee, legatee or surviving joint tenant; or 
2.  an executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or conservator; or 
3.  pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.  
12-4-4 - ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS 
The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear a number and a date of its expiration. A license issued under this Act shall be granted and valid only for the sale of the inventoried goods which are the property of the licensee. The license shall be good only for the premises specified in the application, and it may not be transferred or assigned.  
12-4-5 - DURATION OF SALE; LICENSE FEE 
A license to conduct a sale pursuant to this Chapter shall not be issued or valid for a period of more than sixty (60) days from the start of such sale. Such license may be renewed once for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the inventory. The application for the license shall be made not more than fourteen (14) days prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the application for renewal is made. The new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory.  
12-4-6 - LICENSE FEE 
A fee of $100.00 shall accompany an application for a license and for the renewal of a license.  
12-4-7 - COPY OF APPLICATION, INVENTORY AND LICENSE POSTED 
A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this Chapter, including the inventory, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the sales rooms or place where the inventoried goods are to be sold. Such copy need not show the purchase price of the goods. The duplicate copy of a license issued hereunder shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street.  
12-4-8 - SUBSTITUTION, ADDITION AND COMMINGLING OF GOODS; LICENSE VOID 
Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory filed pursuant to this Chapter, or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted pursuant to this Chapter, shall be unlawful and shall void any license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this Chapter, and such license shall cease to apply to such sale.  
12-4-9 - FRAUDULENT ADVERTISING; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise for the sale or disposition of any goods or service where such advertisement contains any assertion, representation, or statement which is untrue, misleading, or deceptive. This Section shall not apply to any agent of the seller for printing, publishing or advertising where such printing, publishing or advertising is made in good faith and without knowledge of its deceptive character.  
12-4-10 - PUMP PRICE ADVERTISING 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or permit the exhibition of a sign or other form of advertising display that communicates the purchase price of gasoline unless such sign contains in one set of identically sized digits the exact price shown on the pump, including all taxes and other charges.  
12-4-11 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 5 - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
SECTION 
 
12-5-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Coin-Operated Amusement Device: Any amusement machine or device operated by means of insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines, children's rides or musical devices. 
B.  Inspector: That person designated by the City staff to inspect vending machines or coin-operated amusement devices and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Maintain: The placing or exhibiting of, or allowing the placing or exhibiting of, or otherwise keeping a coin-operated amusement device or vending machine for the purpose of use or play. 
D.  Malfunction: Malfunction occurs whenever a member of the general public does not receive the item sought in the vending machine or does not receive the game or amusement provided by the coin-operated amusement device after depositing money in the machine or device. 
E.  Operator: Any person who, by contract, agreement or ownership, furnishes, installs, services, operates or maintains one or more vending machines or coin-operated amusement devices. 
F.  Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, company, firm, institution, trustee, association or any other public or private entity except a governmental institution. 
G.  Proprietor: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association that, as owner, lessee, proprietor or otherwise controls any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement device or vending machine is maintained. 
H.  Vending Machine: Any self-service mechanical container or device used for the sale or dispensing of any item or children's ride; the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token. Vending machine shall also mean any contrivance or device which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot or other opening, produces, plays or emits songs, music or other prerecorded entertainment, movie or television entertainment.  
12-5-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or proprietor to maintain a coin-operated amusement device or vending machine without having first obtained a license as required by this Chapter. Vending machines dispensing tobacco products shall also be subject to the regulations of Article 12, Chapter 9.  
12-5-3 - APPLICATIONS 
Any person desiring to operate one or more vending machines or coin-operated amusement devices in the City shall make application in writing to the Director of Finance on a form provided by the City and shall specify: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant and, if a firm, partnership, corporation or association, its principal officers and their addresses. 
B.  The address of the premises where the licensed device is to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place, and the square footage of floor space open to the general public. 
C.  The trade name and general description of the device to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer, and the serial number. 
The proper license fee shall accompany such application. If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. Such license shall be non-assignable and nontransferable, and shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued.  
12-5-4 - LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF LICENSES 
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to have more than one coin-operated amusement device for the first two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor space open to the general public and one additional license for each one thousand (1,000) additional square feet, provided that additional devices may be licensed as an accessory use to a restaurant when authorized by a special use permit issued pursuant to the Zoning Code of the City. In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, any license issued pursuant to a special use permit may be revoked for violation of any of the conditions of that permit.  
12-5-5 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
The City shall have the right to revoke any license for any malfunction or for the violation of any other regulation of the City.  
12-5-6 - TERM OF LICENSE 
Each vending machine or coin-operated amusement device license shall be for a period of one license year, which shall begin on January 1 and shall terminate on December 31 of the year of issuance. Each license shall be issued at the full yearly rate; provided, however, that where such permit is issued on or after July 1, the license shall be one-half (½) of the yearly fee.  
12-5-7 - FEE REQUIRED 
The required fee for each permit issued shall be collected in full at the time of the issuance. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee by reason of the death of the permittee or by any reason of nonuse of a license or discontinuance of the operation of the vending machine or coin-operated amusement device.  
12-5-8 - AMOUNT OF FEE 
Yearly fees for licenses to permit the operation of vending machines and coin-operated amusement devices located within the territorial limits of the City shall be as follows: 
Vending Machines requiring a deposit of (in coins): 
0.01 through 0.49 	$ 30.00 
0.50 or more 	$ 50.00 
Coin-operated amusement device 	$150.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-67, 12-15-2014)  
12-5-9 - LICENSE TAG OR INSIGNIA 
The operator's permit number, of a size and style approved by the City, shall be conspicuously displayed on each vending machine and coin-operated amusement device. The proprietor of any vending machine shall, in a conspicuous location on the vending machine, place the following notice: 
"In the event of machine malfunction or unsanitary conditions, contact the Health Inspector of the City of Park Ridge." 
The notice shall also contain the name, address and phone number of the operator.  
12-5-10 - PENALTY 
Any person, operator, proprietor or owner of any vending machine or coin-operated amusement device located within the City violating any of the terms and provisions of this Chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue.  
CHAPTER 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. 2003-56, 10-7-2003; Ord. No. 2015-24, 4-21-2015. 
 
12-6-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
A.  It shall be unlawful to engage in Regulated Service of any alcoholic beverage without first having obtained a City liquor license. Every person engaged in Regulated Service of alcoholic beverages in the City shall obtain the appropriate liquor license authorizing the service of the specific type and character of alcoholic beverages and the specific type of business or activity at which it may be provided. The fee to be paid for such licenses shall be as set forth in section 12-6-6 of this code. 
B.  Except for certain temporary City permits, there shall be no service of alcoholic beverage by the Licensee until the Licensee has obtained a liquor license required by the state. If the state suspends or revokes the state license for any reason, it shall be deemed a violation of the Park Ridge license if any service is made during the period of the state suspension or revocation. 
C.  All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place that is visible to patrons.  
12-6-2 - EXCEPTIONS 
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to: 
A.  Alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with act of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder; 
B.  Flavoring extracts and syrups and food products; 
C.  Patent and proprietary medicines or medicinal, antiseptic, culinary and toilet preparations; 
D.  Scientific, industrial and chemical products not made for human consumption; 
E.  Any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (.5%) or less of alcohol by volume. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any of the following from using or possessing alcoholic liquor in a strictly professional practice: 
A.  A duly licensed practicing physician or dentist. 
B.  Hospitals or like institutions in the treatment of bona fide patients of that institution. 
C.  Drugstores employing a licensed pharmacist in the lawful filling of prescriptions. 
D.  The authorized representative of any house of worship dispensing wine for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony typically conducted by that house of worship.  
12-6-3 - APPLICATION FOR A LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE 
A.  Application for a local liquor license shall be made to the Commissioner. The application shall be on forms provided by the Commissioner. Only completed forms may be considered. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $250.00 and the applicable license fee(s) as set forth in section 12-6-6 of this code. If a new application is made after January first, the license fee(s) shall be prorated according to the number of months left in the year; provided that no fee(s) shall be reduced by more than 50%. The month in which the application is made shall count as a whole month. 
B.  The Licensee shall provide written notice to the Commissioner of any change in any information set forth in the application within thirty (30) days of the change. 
C.  Before a license may be issued to any applicant, background checks (which shall include the submission of fingerprints to appropriate agencies) shall be performed with respect to the key individuals owning and/or operating the licensed business. At a minimum, the local manager or managers and the persons functioning as the chief operating officer and chief financial officer shall be subject to such background checks. An investigation will be performed to enable the Commissioner to ascertain whether the issuance of a license will comply with all applicable regulations of the City. The Commissioner may accept the fingerprints from another jurisdiction for persons not residing or working within fifty (50) miles of the City. A reasonable fee may be charged by the police department for each person required to be fingerprinted. For purposes of this subsection, the Commissioner may require such documentation as he or she deems appropriate to determine who must be fingerprinted. The Commissioner's decision as to fingerprinting shall be final. (Background checks are not required for temporary permits.) 
D.  By accepting a City liquor license, the Licensee consents to the service of process and the acceptance of any other document by or on any employee or agent of the Licensee or the posting of the process or document on any entrance to the licensed premises.  
12-6-4 - APPLICATION PROCESS COMPLETION 
No license may be issued by the Commissioner until all information and documentation required in the application has been provided, all of the reports from the various departments and agencies with respect to background checks have been completed and all fees have been paid. The foregoing notwithstanding, the Commissioner may, in the Commissioner's sole discretion, issue a limited license prior to the completion of a background check under the following circumstances: 
A.  The limited license shall not exceed ninety (90) days. 
B.  No information is currently known which would cause the applicant to be ineligible for a license. 
C.  The Licensee has demonstrated, in writing, that the business will most likely not survive if the license is not granted immediately. 
D.  The Commissioner retains the absolute right to revoke the license, without a hearing, if subsequently discovered information would, in the sole discretion of the Commissioner, have made the Licensee originally ineligible for the license. 
E.  The Licensee executes a release and hold harmless statement that is satisfactory to the City Attorney and absolutely releases and absolves the City, its officers and employees from any liability for the refusal of the Commissioner to subsequently issue a regular license.  
12-6-5 - RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES 
A.  No liquor license may be issued to any of the following: 1) a partnership; 2) a sole proprietorship; 3) a corporation that is neither incorporated in Illinois nor qualified and registered under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois; 4) a limited liability company that is neither organized in Illinois nor qualified under Illinois law to transact business in Illinois. These limitations shall not necessarily apply to a temporary permit. 
B.  No liquor license may be issued to any entity: 
1.  Which does not legally or beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
2.  Which is a limited liability corporation whose members are corporations and not natural persons. 
3.  Which is not an owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the business to be operated by the licensee. The Commissioner shall have sole discretion in making such determination. 
4.  At the time of application for renewal of any Park Ridge license, would not have been eligible for such a license upon first application. 
5.  Which does not hold a valid Park Ridge class II business license for the premises. 
6.  To which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued for the current tax period. 
7.  Not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license. 
8.  Which does not designate a manager for the premises. 
9.  If a manager, officer, director or five percent (5%) or greater shareholder or Limited Liability Company member: 
a.  At the time of application for renewal of a liquor license would not have been eligible for a license upon a first application. 
b.  Is an employee or elected official of the City. 
10.  Which, upon review of the application taken as a whole by the Commissioner, is deemed by prior actions as indicated from the application or background check, to be a substantial risk of not abiding by the regulations of the City. 
11.  Whose alcohol service operation is run by an independent contractor unless the independent contractor is also eligible for and obtains a license in the same category. 
12.  Owes any fees, fines or taxes to the City. 
C.  Unless upon due investigation, the Commissioner determines that such individual has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust, no liquor license shall be issued to any entity when a manager, officer, director or five percent (5%) or greater member or shareholder: 
1.  Has been found guilty of any offense with regard to the sale or possession of alcoholic liquor or any felony. 
2.  Has been found guilty of any other crime opposed to decency or morality. 
3.  Has previously had a liquor license revoked in any other jurisdiction. 
4.  Has been found guilty of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture of alcoholic liquor. 
5.  Has been found guilty of a gambling offense as set forth in the Illinois Criminal Code in effect at the time of application or renewal.  
12-6-6 - CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES 
A.  Licenses: Liquor licenses in the City shall be divided into the following classifications: 
1.  Package license: 
Class P General Package: $2,500.00 
2.  Restaurant License: 
Class R Restaurant: $2,500.00 
3.  Specialty licenses: 
Class S-1 Home Delivery: $1,000.00 
Class S-2 Bring Your Own Bottle (BYOB): $1,000.00 
Class S-3 Off-Site Dispensing: $750.00 
Class S-4 Complimentary Service: $500.00 
Class S-5 License with Special Conditions: As set by the City Council 
B.  Temporary Permits: 
Class T-1 Park Ridge Civic Permit: $25.00/day 
Class T-2 Non-Park Ridge Provider: $75.00/day 
C.  License Endorsement Menu: 
1.  Banquet: $250.00 
2.  Catering: $250.00 
3.  Corkage: $250.00 
4.  Growler: $250.00 
5.  Outdoor Seating: $250.00 
6.  Sampling: $250.00 
7.  Bar/Lounge: $500.00 
8.  Golf Cart: $500.00 
9.  Gourmet Beverage: $500.00 
10.  Live Entertainment: $500.00 
11.  Private Club: $500.00 
12.  Gasoline Sales: $1,500.00 
13.  Grocery Café: $1,500.00 
14.  Farmers Market: $250.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-17 , § 1, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-18-2018)  
12-6-7 - DESCRIPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
The restrictions on a particular license, permit, certification or endorsement shall be binding on the Licensee. No premises or activity may be operated in violation of such restrictions and regulations. No license, permit or endorsement may be issued unless the applicant's business is specific to one of the following: 
I.  Class P License (Package): 
A.  Prohibitions. 
1.  Consumption on the premises (except pursuant to the appropriate endorsement). 
2.  Delivery or offer of delivery of single containers of refrigerated or chilled alcoholic beverages; except for bottles of wine containing at least 750 milliliters and except pursuant to the appropriate Endorsement. 
3.  Delivery of alcoholic beverages in any container other than its original sealed and unopened package (except pursuant to the appropriate Endorsement). 
4.  Gasoline sales (except pursuant to the appropriate Endorsement). 
5.  Delivery at any place other than retail food stores and drug stores with not less than 10,000 square feet of retail sales area (except pursuant to the appropriate Endorsement). 
B.  Area Requirements. Unopened packages of alcoholic beverages may be displayed for sale throughout the store, but no more than a total of 20% of retail floor space may be devoted to the display of alcoholic beverages. The 20% calculation shall include all retail floor space, the two (2) locations within the store and the one (1) outdoor patio used for on premise consumption. 
C.  Proof of Age. An electronic scanning device shall be installed for the purpose of reading the birthdates embedded in identification cards issued by the Illinois Secretary of State. 
II.  Class R License (Restaurant): 
A.  Qualifications: 
1.  The premises shall be primarily devoted to the preparation, cooking and serving of meals. 
2.  The premises must have a kitchen and dining room and staff and equipment as deemed adequate by the City health authority. 
3.  The sale of alcoholic beverages may only be made if incidental and complementary to the service of complete meals, which are served and eaten at tables or booths; unless the licensed premises has a Bar/Lounge Endorsement. The sale of alcoholic beverages may be deemed incidental and complementary to the ordering and service of complete meals only if such sale: 
a.  is made to a patron who orders a complete meal with the intent of consuming same; or 
b.  is made to a patron waiting to be seated or to a seated patron prior to ordering, provided the person making such sale reasonably believes such patron intends to order and consume a complete meal. 
4.  The following restrictions shall apply to the delivery of alcoholic beverages when the sale is not incidental and complementary to the ordering and service of complete meals: 
a.  Such sales may be made only in a Bar/Lounge Space and consumption of alcoholic beverages without a meal shall be restricted to the Bar/Lounge Space; except that after 9:00 p.m., sales of alcoholic beverages may be made throughout the licensed premises with or without the ordering of food. 
b.  No separate outside entrance to the Bar/Lounge Space shall be permitted. 
c.  Live entertainment may be permitted only if the Licensee has applied for and received a Live Entertainment Endorsement. 
d.  The floor area of the combined Bar/Lounge Space and Live Entertainment area shall not exceed either of the following: 
i.  25% of the Total Interior Space of the Licensed Premises; 
ii.  40% of the Public Space of the Licensed Premises. 
iii.  Each Licensee shall submit an accurate drawing showing actual dimensions of the Total Interior Space of the premises. The Licensee shall accurately indicate on the drawing the precise area that is dedicated as Bar/Lounge Space and Live Entertainment space. Such area depicted on the drawing shall be the only space in which Bar/Lounge or Live Entertainment activities may take place. The Licensee shall not increase the space actually used for a Bar/Lounge and Live Entertainment unless a new floor area drawing is submitted to and approved by the City. 
5.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed at any time that the kitchen is not fully staffed and operational. 
6.  All unfinished drinks shall be cleared from the premises within one half hour after the closing time. It shall be a violation of this section if after the passage of such one half hour there are alcoholic beverages in any container other than an unopened or corked or otherwise properly reclosed original container that has been returned to the appropriate place of display or storage. 
7.  Subject to the above, the premises may be kept open during hours when service is prohibited, but no alcoholic beverages may be delivered, consumed or remain on tables or a bar during such hours. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorize any licensed premises to remain open for business or to admit the public to the premises at or during any hour when that premises is required to be closed by virtue of any other City regulation or restriction. 
8.  Jukeboxes, video and arcade games are permitted in accordance with article 14, chapter 2 and article 12, chapter 5, of the Municipal Code. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to play a video or arcade game located in an R licensed establishment unless the minor is accompanied by a person who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
9.  Infused beverages may be delivered but only in accordance with state regulations. 
III.  Class S Licenses (Specialty): 
A.  Home Delivery License; Class S-1 for the delivery of alcoholic beverages in original containers to a specific address. Regulations specific to the Class S-1 license: 
1.  If the delivery originates in Park Ridge but is delivered outside the City, such delivery shall be in accordance with the laws of the jurisdiction where delivery is made. 
2.  There shall be no display or advertising of alcoholic beverages on any residential premises. 
3.  Only beer and wine may be delivered within the City pursuant to a Class S-1 license. 
4.  Delivery within the City must be made directly into the hands of an actual individual and may not be "dropped off" at an address. 
B.  Bring Your Own Wine or Beer License. Class S-2 shall allow patrons to bring beer and wine into a restaurant establishment for the purpose of consumption in that establishment. Regulations specific to the Class S-2 license: 
1.  A corkage fee may be assessed to the participating patrons. 
2.  Consumption of corkage beer and wine shall be limited to those patrons dining in the restaurant and seated at a table. Corkage service shall not be available in a Lounge. 
C.  Off-Site Dispensing License. Class S-3 shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at special events. Regulations specific to the Class S-3 license: 
1.  Sales may be made in individual servings only for immediate consumption at special events. 
2.  The Licensee must be hired to serve the alcoholic beverages at a specific event at which food shall be served and only to those persons attending the event. 
D.  Complementary Service: Class S-4 shall authorize a business engaged in providing non-food goods or services to the public to allow the consumption of beer and wine by its patrons that: (1) is brought to the premises of the business by the patron (BYOB) and/or (2) is served by the business; as a complement to the patron's purchase of goods or services offered by the business (complementary service). A class S-4 license shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The licensee may provide patrons of the business with individual servings of wine or beer in glasses at no charge, or may provide glasses and ice for patrons who bring their own beer or wine to the premises. 
2.  No wine or beer may be served to or consumed by persons on the business premises except as a complement to the patron's contemporaneous purchase or consumption of goods and services made available to the public by the licensee. 
3.  The complementary service or consumption of beer or wine at the licensed premises is limited to not more than three servings of alcoholic beverages by a patron during any single calendar day, regardless of whether the beverage is provided by the licensee or brought to the licensed premises by the patron. No alcoholic beverages other than beer or wine are permitted. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee, its agents, and employees to permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open container of wine or beer regardless of whether the container is provided by the licensee or brought to the licensed premises by the patron. 
5.  The licensee must maintain general liability insurance coverage as required by Section 12-6-16. 
6.  In no case shall the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor take place outside of the normal business hours of the business. 
7.  An S-4 license shall not be issued to any business which operates primarily as a packaged liquor store or restaurant. 
E.  License With Special Conditions: Class S-5, the corporate authorities may, from time to time, create conditional licenses which are based on the license classifications set forth above, but which contain additional conditions and restrictions. These licenses with special conditions, while created by the City Council, shall remain subject to issuance by the Commissioner. 
1.  S-5 Arts and Crafts Studio License: This S-5 license allows an arts and crafts studio to sell beer and wine to its patrons for on-premises consumption, subject to the following special conditions and restrictions: 
a.  An arts and crafts studio is defined as a place kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public as a place in which the public may participate in activities that include painting, ceramics, woodworking, and craft design and construction projects utilizing fibers, metals, wood, or glass. 
b.  Only beer or wine may be sold or served to, or consumed by, any patron. 
c.  The sale and service of alcoholic beverages to a patron must be a complement to and accessory to the patron's participation in craft-making activities. 
d.  The sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed at any time when a craft-making session is not in actual operation. 
e.  No more than 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine may be sold or served to, or consumed by, a patron during any single calendar day. 
f.  It shall be unlawful for the licensee, its agents, and employees to permit any patron to leave the licensed premises with an open container of beer or wine. 
g.  The licensee must maintain general liability insurance as required by Section 12-6-16. 
h.  All employees engaged in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with the training requirements of Section 12-6-20.F. 
i.  The business must comply with all state and local liquor licensing laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
j.  The annual license fee for this S-5 Arts And Crafts Studio License shall be $1,500.00. 
IV.  Permits; Temporary 
A.  Regulations Applicable to All Temporary Permits: 
1.  The Commissioner may attach such conditions as are appropriate for that specific temporary permit. 
2.  For temporary permits, the Commissioner, in his or her sole discretion, may accept host or general liability coverage as a substitute for dramshop insurance. 
3.  The term of the permit shall be within the sole discretion of the Commissioner, but in no event may permits be issued for more than five days. 
4.  No more than 12 such permit days shall be available to any one organization during a license term. 
5.  The applicant is responsible for securing any applicable state permit. If the State Liquor Commission requires a permit and it is not obtained, then the City temporary permit shall be deemed void ab initio. It is the responsibility of the applicant to determine whether or not a state permit is needed and issuance of a City permit has no bearing on the issue of whether a state permit is required. 
6.  All other regulations of this chapter shall apply to the permit. 
B.  Specific Temporary Permits: Temporary permits are divided into the classifications set forth below: 
1.  Class T-1 Permit. A Class T-1 permit shall authorize the delivery or sale of alcoholic liquor by a bona fide Park Ridge entity or business not generally engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages, at a designated location where such sale is not otherwise prohibited, in conjunction with social, recreational, fund-raising or special commercial event. 
a.  A Class T-1 permit shall be valid only during the hours set forth on the permit. A Class T-1 license may not be renewed or extended. 
b.  A Class T-1 license shall authorize the delivery or sale of alcoholic beverages by the glass; it is not necessary that the sale be in connection with or complementary to the sale of food. 
c.  A Class T-1 license shall authorize the delivery or sale of alcoholic beverages only in (i) an enclosed building or structure, including a tent, and (ii) at open-air counters or stands located within a controlled space. Consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place only within such enclosed building or structure or controlled space. No person under the age of 21 years may prepare, sell or deliver alcoholic beverages pursuant to a Class T-1 license. 
d.  Applications for a Class T-1 license shall be made to the Commissioner on a form provided by the Commissioner, not less than thirty (30) working days prior to the date for which the license is to be issued. The Commissioner may waive any other provisions of this chapter 6, which are determined to be inapplicable to a Class T-1 license. In addition to all information required by the Commissioner, applicants for Class T-1 license shall provide, at the time of application, a certificate of insurance, which names the City of Park Ridge as an additional insured, verifying that the applicant has obtained dram shop/liquor liability insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The certificate of insurance shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner. The applicant shall also provide evidence of having obtained any other permits and licenses required for the event at the designated location. No bond shall be required for a Class T license. 
e.  After review of the license application, the Commissioner may issue a Class T-1 license and shall advise the Police Department, the Liquor License Review Board and the City Council of such issuance. 
f.  Each person who prepares, sells, delivers or serves any alcoholic beverages pursuant to a Class T-1 license is required to sign a letter of understanding, on a form approved by the Commissioner, that states that the person has been advised of the rules and regulations regarding the preparation, sale, delivery and service of alcoholic beverages by the Class T-1 liquor license holder. 
g.  Persons who prepare, sell, deliver or serve any alcoholic liquor pursuant to a Class T-1 license are not required to complete a certified alcohol servers' training. 
h.  The fee for each Class T-1 license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
2.  Class T-2 Permit. A Class T-2 permit shall authorize the delivery or sale of alcoholic liquor by a business or other entity that has a valid liquor license in the jurisdiction where the business or other entity is located, in conjunction with social, recreational or fund-raising events. 
a.  Unless otherwise specified, all the requirements, restrictions and obligations for a T-1 permit shall be applicable to a T-2 permit. 
b.  Persons who prepare, sell, deliver or serve any alcoholic beverages pursuant to a Class T-2 permit are required to complete a certified alcohol servers' training. 
c.  The fee for each Class T-2 permit shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
3.  Civic Organization Events. The following shall apply to civic organizations and the regulations of this chapter: 
a.  A civic organization may hold a fundraising event at a Licensed Premises without obtaining a permit under the following conditions: 
i.  The Commission is notified, in writing, at least seven (7) days in advance of the event. 
ii.  All food and alcoholic beverage service is conducted by the Licensee with the Licensee's employees and at Licensee's prices, as in the normal course of business for that license. 
b.  If the Licensee intends to provide food or alcoholic beverage service other than from its regular menu and at menu prices or if the cost of the service of alcoholic beverages is part of a donation or ticket price, then the civic organization must obtain a T-1 permit. 
c.  As to either subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the civic organization, but not the liquor Licensee, may advertise for the event in any manner permitted by law. 
V.  Endorsements 
A.  Any Endorsement shall be subject to such conditions as the Commissioner shall deem appropriate. 
1.  Banquet Facility Endorsement. This shall allow for the service of alcoholic beverages at private events for an R Licensee. Regulations specific to this Endorsement: 
a.  Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be on the premises only and in conjunction with food service pursuant to a contractual agreement for use of the establishment's facilities. 
b.  Consumption of alcoholic beverages at or over a bar shall be permitted, but all consumption shall be limited to those patrons who are guests invited specifically to the private event. 
2.  Park Ridge Caterer's Endorsement. This shall allow the service of alcoholic beverages, at an otherwise unlicensed premises, by a Park Ridge Licensee. The caterer may serve alcoholic beverages only at events to which specific persons (not the general public) have been previously invited or at a City sponsored event. 
3.  Corkage or Bring Your Own Bottle for an R Licensee to allow BYOB service subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12-6-7(III)B. 
4.  Growler Endorsement. This shall allow the delivery of beer, for off-premise consumption, by an R Licensee who is a craft brewer or a brew pub as these terms are defined in the Illinois Liquor Control Act. Regulations specific to this Endorsement: 
a.  The container must be supplied by the Licensee and not exceed 64 ounces. 
b.  The container must have a screw-on cap and be sealed in such a manner that if the seal is broken, it may not be resealed and the break will be obvious to the casual observer. 
c.  The container may only be sold in conjunction with the purchase of food from the R Licensee. 
5.  Outdoor Seating Endorsement. This shall allow the delivery of alcoholic beverages in the open or in a place adjacent to the licensed premises. Regulations specific to this Endorsement: 
a.  Subject to all other applicable license restrictions, the holder of a Class R license or Gourmet Beverage Endorsement may serve alcoholic beverages to a customer seated at a table located outside the licensed establishment, in strict accordance with article 5, chapter 3.1 of this code. 
b.  Outdoor tables may not be used as part of the Bar/Lounge Area. With respect to Class R Licensees, only customers ordering meals may be seated at outdoor tables. Outdoor seating capacity shall not be included in area calculations regarding license eligibility. 
6.  Sampling. 
a.  On Premise Sampling. This shall allow a Licensee to serve wine or beer in small and limited amounts, for sampling purposes only and in conjunction with sales promotional efforts occurring on the licensed premises. Regulations specific to on premise sampling: 
i.  The sampling shall be attended and supervised by a full time adult employee and may occur only in a designated area on the licensed premises; 
ii.  The actual amount of beer or wine sampled by an individual may not exceed two ounces; 
iii.  Signs or other materials advertising the availability of "sampling" may not be visible from the exterior of the licensed premises. 
iv.  Quantities may not exceed a total of ten (10) ounces per customer per day. 
b.  Off Premise Sampling. This shall allow a Licensee to conduct wine tasting and/or beer tasting at a Park Ridge licensed business. Regulations specific to off premise sampling: 
i.  The tasting may take place at a promotional event inside a business premises only; 
ii.  The tasting at any single business may not be made at more than two (2) such events in any license term; 
iii.  The Licensee shall notify the Commissioner, in writing, not less than fourteen (14) days before any off-premises tasting event. 
iv.  The tasting may only occur in a designated area on the premises of the Park Ridge licensed business; 
v.  Each individual sample may not exceed one ounce; 
vi.  The Licensee shall not charge for any of the samples. 
7.  Bar, Lounge Space Endorsement. This shall allow a Class R License to take advantage of the Bar/Lounge amenities set forth in Section 12-6-7(II)A(4). 
8.  Golf Cart Endorsement. This shall allow the delivery of alcoholic beverages to all locations on a golf course by a Class R Licensee who is the owner of both the golf course and the golf cart. 
9.  Gourmet Beverage Endorsement. This shall allow a Class P Licensee to offer wine or beer for on premise consumption. Regulations specific to a Gourmet Beverage Endorsement: 
a.  A Gourmet Beverage Shop license shall be available only in B-1 and B-4 zoning districts. 
b.  No "spirits" as defined by this chapter, may be delivered. 
c.  Glasses of wine or beer may be delivered on the licensed premises under the following conditions: 
i.  Hors d'oeuvres must be available for consumption with the wine. 
ii.  No more than 18 ounces of wine or 36 ounces of beer may be served to any individual during any day. 
d.  The area restrictions set forth in 12-6-7(i)B shall not apply to a gourmet beverage shop whose primary business is the sale of beer and wine. 
e.  Infused beverages may be delivered, but only in accordance with state regulations. 
f.  One single bottle per customer per day of refrigerated or chilled beer may be delivered for off-premises consumption. 
10.  Live Entertainment Endorsement. This shall allow the presentation of Live Entertainment. Regulations specific to a Live Entertainment Endorsement: 
a.  The application for this Endorsement shall include the nature and frequency of the Live Entertainment, the time of day at which it will be provided, the location of the live entertainment within the premises, the seating arrangement, whether a cover charge will be applicable and any other information the Commissioner may require. 
b.  All live entertainment shall be performed indoors and cannot be performed in any outdoor or sidewalk café. 
c.  No Live Entertainment shall be permitted on any licensed premises if that entertainment is audible at any point beyond the boundaries of the licensed premises. 
11.  Private Club Endorsement. This shall allow for delivery of alcoholic beverages at a private club. No Class R license or Endorsement shall be issued to any club established after August 1, 2003 that is located in a residential zoning district. 
12.  Gasoline Sales Endorsement. This shall allow for the sale of gasoline for motor vehicles by a Class P Licensee. Regulations specific to this Endorsement: 
a.  The sale of gasoline must take place at a building or structure that is physically separated from the licensed premises. 
b.  Wine and beer may be displayed and sold only from dispensers, the doors of which lock automatically and remain locked until the specific customer has been properly identified as being of legal age to purchase age-restricted products. Only an employee of the Licensee may open the electric locks on the dispenser doors. 
c.  Sales shall be monitored by live video and recording devices both inside and outside of the store. 
13.  Grocery Café Endorsement shall authorize the delivery of wine and beer for consumption on the licensed premises. Regulations specific to such Endorsement: 
a.  The sale of alcoholic liquor is authorized only at a grocery store of at least 35,000 square feet of above grade floor space. 
b.  The sale of wine and beer for consumption on the premises shall be limited to no more than three locations within the store and one outdoor patio. The indoor locations, whose site plan shall be subject to approval by the City, must include a barrier from the general shopping area. 
c.  On premise consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted throughout the entire retail floor area of the premises and a designated outdoor patio, provided the alcoholic beverages are purchased from one of the designated indoor sales areas referenced in paragraph b. Alcoholic liquor sold in original packages and intended for off-premises consumption shall not be opened or consumed on the premises. 
d.  An outdoor patio may be operated as an adjunct to this Endorsement if: 
i.  The patio, whose site plan shall be subject to approval by the City, must include a barrier from vehicular and pedestrian travel. 
ii.  No live or recorded entertainment may be conducted on the outdoor patio. 
iii.  The outdoor patio shall not be included in the 35,000 square foot requirement under (i) above. 
iv.  All outdoor seating shall be in strict accordance with Article 5, Chapter 3.1 of this Code (including but not limited to handicapped accessibility). 
e.  If, in any calendar year, the sale of wine and beer for on premise consumption exceeds 5% of the gross sales of the Licensee; the City shall have the absolute right to limit such sales in any way it deems appropriate. No later than January 31st of each year, the Licensee shall submit evidence of the percentage of such on-premises sales for the prior calendar year. 
f.  Hours shall be 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for sales of wine and beer for on-premises consumption. 
g.  No open wine or beer may be taken from the premises, except to be consumed at the Licensee's outdoor patio. 
14.  Farmers Market Endorsement. This shall allow a Licensee to conduct wine and/or beer sampling and the off-premises sale of packaged beer and/or wine at the Park Ridge Farmers Market, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  The Licensee shall notify the Commissioner, in writing, not less than 14 days before any sampling event; 
b.  The sampling may only occur in a designated area on the premises of the Park Ridge Farmers Market. The delivery of beer or wine may only take place in an enclosed building or structure, including a tent, and at open-air counters or stands located within a controlled space. Consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place only within such enclosed building or structure or controlled space. No person under the age of 21 years may prepare, sell or deliver beer or wine; 
c.  Each individual sample may not exceed one ounce and quantities may not exceed a total of three ounces per customer per day; 
d.  The Licensee shall not charge for any of the samples; and 
e.  Wine and/or beer may only be sold in the original packaging. Wine or beer sold in original packages and intended for off-premises consumption shall not be opened or consumed on the premises of the Park Ridge Farmers Market. 
(Ord 2015-53, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2016-16 , § 1, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 2016-17 , § 2, 3-21-2016; Ord. No. 2016-28 , § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-29 , § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-33 , § 1, 5-2-2016; Ord. No. 2017-24 , §§ 1, 2, 4-5-2017; Ord. No. 2017-60 , § 1, 11-6-2017; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-18-2018)  
12-6-8 - NUMBER OF LICENSES 
A.  The corporate authorities shall determine, by ordinance, the number of licenses that are available in each classification. (This limitation shall not apply to Temporary Permits or Endorsements, which shall be solely within the discretion of the Commissioner.) Neither the Commissioner nor any other person or entity may issue liquor licenses in a number that is in excess of the number authorized by the Corporate Authorities. A schedule of the currently authorized number of licenses available in each classification shall be maintained by the City Manager for the Commissioner. 
B.  The Corporate Authorities may decrease the number of licenses available in any or all classifications within the City. If the number of licenses in any or all classifications is decreased, the licenses shall be eliminated on the basis of seniority, so that the premises holding a license the least amount of time shall be eliminated first. However, the Commissioner may, with an accompanying written statement, eliminate licenses on the basis of quality of operation of the premises, considering such matters as previous violations brought before the Commissioner, the State Liquor Commission or other law enforcement issues and/or on the basis of articulable benefit or lack of benefit to the City. 
C.  Upon any license becoming forfeited, void or revoked for any reason, the number of available licenses in that classification shall automatically and simultaneously be reduced by one.  
12-6-9 - LICENSE TERM 
Each new license shall commence on the date specified on the license. Each renewal license shall commence on January 1. Every license shall terminate on the December 31 following the date of issuance. (This limitation shall not be applicable to permits and certifications.) If an application for a new license is received after October 31 of any year, the Commissioner shall have the authority to issue a license that runs through December 31 of the next year (a license period of up to 15 months); provided the applicant pays a license fee that is prorated to include the additional time for which the license is valid.  
12-6-10 - RENEWAL OF LICENSE 
Any Licensee may apply to renew a license. This renewal privilege shall not be construed as a vested right, but shall be completely subject to the Commissioner's right of review of the Licensee's background and history of operation in the State of Illinois. No license shall be renewed unless the State license number appears on the face of the application. Any Licensee that submits its renewal application to the City after the deadline set forth in the renewal notice will be assessed a late fee penalty of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17 , § 3, 3-21-2016)  
12-6-11 - NATURE OF LICENSE; TRANSFER PROHIBITED 
A.  A license shall be a privilege that may be claimed only by the person set forth on the license. The license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. The license shall not be alienable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to lien or other encumbrance. The license is not transferable either for consideration or not for consideration. Although regulations in subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section shall be generally applicable, the Commissioner shall have the sole discretion to determine whether the transfer of a business has occurred such that the transferee must secure a new license. Unless a new application has been filed and approved by the Commissioner, an illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and void in the following circumstances: 
1.  As to a closely held corporation, if any person owning twenty percent (20%) or more of the stock transfers the stock to another person who previously held less than fifty percent (50%) of the stock. Upon the death of any person owning twenty percent (20%) or more of the shares in a closely held corporation, the Commissioner shall be notified. 
2.  As to a public corporation, an illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and void if there has been a buyout, a takeover or any other transaction involving the sale or transfer of more than fifty percent (50%) of the stock or assets of the corporation. 
3.  As to a limited liability company, if there has been a change in the managing partner or change in or replacement of any member of the limited liability company of whom fingerprinting had previously been required. 
B.  If a Licensee is ordered into receivership or files for bankruptcy, the receiver or trustee may continue the operation of the business under the existing license pursuant to a written order of the appropriate court until the expiration of the license or until the passage of six (6) months from the date of appointment of a receiver or trustee whichever comes first. 
C.  Upon the alienation, sale, transfer, assignment or donation of the business for which the license is issued to any other than the Licensee, the liquor license shall automatically become void. 
D.  Any licensed establishment that has discontinued the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or that has not been open for business at least four (4) days per week for a period of thirty (30) days or more shall automatically forfeit its license. This forfeiture shall not apply in instances where the Licensee has previously notified the City Manager, in writing, of an intent to close the premises for a portion of a license term for remodeling or other similar purpose.  
12-6-12 - LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER 
The Mayor shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner ("Commissioner") and shall have the authority to administer the appropriate provisions of this chapter. The Commissioner may designate one or more persons to assist in the exercise of such powers and the performance of such duties, as he or she may deem necessary.  
12-6-13 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER 
The Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties: 
A.  All of the powers, functions and duties delegated to that office by this chapter and other ordinances of the City. This shall include, but in no way shall be limited to, the power to require any Licensee, at any time, to produce any and all records, that directly or indirectly relate to the operation of the Licensee's premises. 
B.  In addition to any other powers set forth in this chapter, the Commissioner may immediately suspend, pending the exercise of the right to a hearing, the privilege of service of alcoholic beverages of any Licensee who does not display a currently valid state or local liquor license or who in the judgment of the Commissioner is operating the business in such a manner as to endanger the community as set forth in section 12-6-15 below. 
C.  Accept and review original and renewal applications for liquor licenses and to approve or disapprove them. Applications may be approved only in strict accordance with this chapter 6 and only if the City Council has created a sufficient number of licenses in a particular classification. 
D.  Receive license fees and forward the same to the Director of Finance. 
E.  Make or cause to be made, by the various City departments or the Liquor License Review Board, such investigations as may aid the Commissioner in the performance of his or her duties. 
F.  Recommend to the City Council the approval or rejection of any request to create an additional liquor license in any licensing classification. 
G.  Enter or authorize any law enforcement officer or other City employee to enter and inspect a licensed premises at any time to determine whether any laws or City regulations have been or are being violated. 
H.  Receive complaints from any citizen that any applicable rules or regulations have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints. 
I.  Examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any original or renewal license applicant or any Licensee. For such purposes the Commissioner may issue subpoenas, which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any information pursuant to this Section, the Commissioner may authorize an agent to act on his or her behalf. 
J.  Keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued under this chapter. 
K.  Make and publish such other rules, regulations and forms as may be advisable to carry out the intent of this chapter 6. 
L.  Suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke any liquor license, permit or endorsement. These penalties may be imposed only after a hearing before the Commissioner or, in his or her sole discretion, the Liquor License Review Board.  
12-6-14 - LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW BOARD 
The Mayor, as Commissioner, may in his or her sole discretion, appoint a Liquor License Review Board ("Board"), consisting of the Commissioner and such members as the Commissioner may deem appropriate. The members of the Board shall be residents of the City. The Commissioner shall be the Chairman of the Board. The Board, at the direction of the Commissioner, shall have the authority to investigate and review all applications, renewals and complaints and to investigate the operation of all licensed establishments, conduct hearings, receive evidence and sworn testimony and make recommendations to the Commissioner. The Commissioner and the members of the Board shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties. Each member appointed shall serve a term of four years.  
12-6-15 - VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT 
The Commissioner may fine and/or suspend and/or revoke the liquor license, permit or endorsement of any Licensee that the Commissioner determines has violated any City regulation or other law of any kind or nature if the violation is related to the operation of the licensed premises. In addition, the Commissioner may fine any individual that the Commissioner determines has violated any provision of this chapter even if that individual is not a Licensee. The procedure for declaring and enforcing such fine, suspension or revocation shall be as follows: 
A.  The City Manager, the Chief of Police or the City Attorney may file a written charge of a violation with the Commissioner. 
B.  The charges shall be served on the Licensee. The charges shall set a hearing date and time informing the Licensee of the right to such hearing for the purpose of presenting evidence to dispute the charges. The matter shall be set for a hearing to take place not less than seven (7) nor more than twenty one (21) days after service of the charges on the Licensee. 
C.  The Commissioner may, in writing, delegate to the City Manager the authority to confer with the Licensee with respect to any charges ("Disposition Conference"). However, the penalty to be assessed and any waiver of a hearing shall be subject to the Commissioner's final approval. 
D.  If the Licensee fails to respond to the charges, the Commissioner may enter a default order against the Licensee. 
E.  If the Commissioner sustains the charge or any portion of it either after default, hearing or Disposition Conference, the Commissioner may, by written order, suspend or revoke the liquor license and/or may fine the Licensee. The fine may be in addition to a revocation or suspension. If the Commissioner decides to suspend the license, the term of the suspension shall be within the discretion of the Commissioner. 
F.  If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Commissioner finds the Licensee to be guilty of any charges, the Licensee will be responsible for all costs incurred for the hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, witness fees and attorney fees. This shall be in addition to any other penalties assessed against the Licensee. 
G.  All proceedings before the Commissioner shall be recorded and placed in a certified official record of such proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter. 
H.  Any appeal to the State Liquor Commission shall be as set forth in this section, including: 
1.  In the event of any appeal from an order or action of the Commissioner, the appeal to the State Liquor Commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings before the Commissioner. The only evidence which shall be considered in the review by the State Commission shall be the evidence found in the certified official record of the proceedings of the Commissioner. 
2.  At such time as the Commissioner receives notice of an appeal, the Commissioner shall file with the State Liquor Commission the certified official record of the proceedings. The State Commission shall review the propriety of the order or action of the Commissioner on the certified official record as provided by law. 
I.  Upon a finding of endangerment to the health, safety and welfare of citizens or property, the Commissioner may fine, suspend or revoke any license, permit or endorsement pursuant to this section, even if such endangerment is caused by persons other than the Licensee or the Licensee's agents or employees. 
1.  Such endangerment may include, but not be limited to, excessive noise by patrons while visiting the licensed premises, consumption of alcoholic beverages in areas immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, littering or destruction of neighboring property by patrons, traffic violations by patrons of the licensed premises, use of any illegal or controlled substance on or adjacent to the licensed premises, the necessity of police or other City services at the licensed premises or the necessity of police services caused by patrons after being served alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises. 
2.  No action may be taken against a Licensee by the Commissioner in circumstances described by this subsection unless it is shown that the Commissioner or the City, by any of its various departments, has given the Licensee written notice of the endangerment activities on at least two (2) occasions, and, in the opinion of the Commissioner, after a reasonable time period, such endangerment has not been sufficiently cured or remedied. 
3.  The power of the Commissioner to act in those situations is a recognition of the principle that the holding of a liquor license is a special privilege and not a right and that such a privilege, irrespective of the good intentions of the Licensee, remains absolutely subordinate to the welfare of the community.  
12-6-16 - INSURANCE 
A.  Every Licensee shall be required to obtain and maintain Dram Shop insurance coverage as required by statute or not less than $1,000,000 in host liability insurance. 
B.  If the person who owns the building or premises where alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed is not the Licensee, then that person shall be required to carry host liability insurance coverage or its equivalent for such premises in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.  
12-6-17 - LOCATION OF SERVICE 
A.  Location Specified on License: No liquor shall be served, offered for sale, kept for sale, displayed or advertised for sale or delivered to any person except at the exact location described in the liquor license. (See section 12-6-7(V) for specific Endorsements) 
B.  Specific Location Prohibition: No liquor license, other than an R License, may be issued for any premises that is within one hundred feet (100') of any place of worship, school or hospital. 
C.  Off Site Catering Privileges: No off site catering shall be permitted except pursuant to an Off Site Catering Endorsement as set forth in section 12-6-7. 
D.  Outdoor Service: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any Licensee to serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any outdoor area unless an Outdoor Seating Endorsement, Grocery Café Endorsement, Farmers Market Endorsement or Temporary license has been granted by the Commissioner pursuant to Section 12-6-7. 
E.  Change of Location: A liquor license shall allow the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon written permission to make such change, issued by the Commissioner after a report to the City Council. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the laws of this State and the regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-18-2018)  
12-6-18 - HOURS OF SALE 
A.  P Licenses: It shall be unlawful for a Class P Licensee to sell alcoholic beverages between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A Class P Licensee may ring up the sale of an alcoholic beverage until fifteen minutes after closing time; provided that the customer was in line prior to closing time. 
B.  All Other Licenses: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.  
12-6-19 - PROHIBITED ACTS 
A.  Every liquor Licensee is prohibited from engaging in the following acts: 
1.  Service to any person of an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price except as part of a meal package or party package. 
i.  Meal Package. 
(1)  Food service must be included. 
(2)  Meal package privileges are available only to holders of a R licensee. 
(3)  All other liquor code regulations shall apply including, but not limited to, over service of alcoholic beverages. 
ii.  Party Package. 
(1)  A Party Package: 
(a)  Must be arranged by invitation or ticket sales. 
(b)  Must be open to a defined number of guests and not open to the general public. 
(c)  Must include food service. 
(d)  May not last for more than three hours. 
(e)  Guests have identifiers such as wristbands, lanyards or tee shirts. 
(f)  Non-fixed price ticket holders must dine in a portion of the establishment that is discreet from the portion where the event is held. 
(g)  Is available only to holders of an R license. 
(h)  Requires application of all other liquor code regulations including, but not limited to, over service of alcoholic beverages. 
2.  Conducting or allowing drink promotion periods or happy hours; except pursuant to the following rules: 
(1)  Licensee must give notice of any drink promotion period (a) by signs on its premises or (b) on its website; at least seven days prior to the drink promotion period. 
(2)  Drink promotion periods are prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and closing time. 
(3)  The aggregate of all drink promotion periods for a licensed premises may not exceed 15 hours in any 7 day period. 
(4)  A single drink promotion period may not exceed 4 hours. 
(5)  All other regulations with respect to the delivery of alcoholic beverages shall apply. 
3.  Increasing the volume of spirits content in a drink on a given day without increasing proportionately the price otherwise charged for such a drink during the calendar week. 
4.  Encouraging or permitting any game or contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes. 
5.  Delivery of alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or in such quantity as to result in the person becoming intoxicated. 
6.  Allowing Bottle Clubs, as defined in this chapter. 
7.  To allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to: 
a.  Be seated at a Bar; or 
b.  Remain in or be seated in the Bar/Lounge Area. This subsection 7b shall not apply to seating at tables in the Bar/Lounge Area when the establishment's full food menu is available in that Bar/Lounge Area and the minor is accompanied by a parent. 
8.  Delivery of an alcoholic beverage to an Underage Person. 
B.  The prohibitions contained in (A) above shall not prevent a liquor Licensee from: 
1.  Offering free food. 
2.  Free tasting as allowed by a sampling Endorsement. 
3.  Offering room service to registered guests in hotels licensed for such services. 
4.  Offering of wine, by the open bottle. 
C.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, displayed or advertised for sale or delivered to any person except at the location, place or premises described in the liquor license, permit or endorsement application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-53, 9-21-2015)  
12-6-20 - CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS; SUPERVISOR ON PREMISES 
A.  Any act or failure to act of an employee or agent of the Licensee with respect to the licensed business shall be deemed to be the act of the Licensee. Any duty set forth in this chapter as a duty of the Licensee shall also be the duty of any agent or employee of the Licensee. 
B.  No employee or other server of alcoholic beverages may consume or be permitted to consume any alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises while on duty or while performing any duties of employment. 
C.  No person, including any employee, manager, owner or agent of the Licensee may consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises before or after the permitted hours of operation. 
D.  A person must be at least eighteen (18) years of age to deliver alcoholic beverages. Additionally, no person under twenty one (21) years of age may work as a bartender or deliver alcoholic beverages from behind a Bar. 
E.  A "Manager," as defined by this chapter, shall be on the premises at all times that the licensed premises is open for business. 
F.  All Licensees must be in compliance with the "Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training" (BASSET) state law and regulations. It is unlawful for alcohol servers to serve or sell, or permit any person to serve or sell, alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in a licensed establishment unless that alcohol server has completed the BASSET program and maintains a current BASSET certification in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-31 ; § 1, 6-19-2017)  
12-6-21 - COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS OF THIS CODE 
All licensed premises shall be maintained in full compliance with all other regulations of the City, including, but not limited to, those relating to the storage or sale of food, sanitary conditions, building and safety conditions.  
12-6-22 - SEALING AND REMOVAL OF OPEN WINE BOTTLES 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any Class R, S Licensee or Gourmet Beverage Shop endorsee may permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption so long as there is compliance with the following conditions: a) the patron has purchased a meal or hors d'oeuvres and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the licensed premises; and b) the partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises pursuant to this section is securely sealed by the Licensee prior to removal from the premises; and c) the bottle is placed in a transparent onetime use tamperproof bag; and d) the Licensee has provided a dated and time stamped receipt for the specific bottle of wine to the patron. It shall be the absolute duty of the Licensee to assure that the type of "tamperproof" bag that is used is such that any removal or attempted removal of the bottle from the bag will be obvious to any law enforcement officer. 
The wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this section and not tampered with shall not be deemed an unsealed container for the purposes of section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.  
12-6-23 - SIGNS 
Any signs on premises indicating the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be subordinate to the sign indicating the principal business of the licensed premises and shall conform to the description in the license application and all applicable sign regulations of the City.  
12-6-24 - IMPROPER INFLUENCE 
No applicant or Licensee or agent or employee of a Licensee shall offer anything of value to any City official or employee, directly or indirectly, to influence the issuance of a license or the enforcement of any provision of this chapter.  
12-6-25 - FINES, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
The Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter and/or may impose a fine of up to Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) if it is determined that the Licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable rules or regulations. The Commissioner may revoke or suspend any live entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter and/or may impose a fine of up to Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) if it is determined that the Licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable rules or regulations regarding live entertainment. However, no such license shall be revoked or suspended, or a fine imposed, except after a public hearing by the Commissioner or the Liquor License Review Board if the Commissioner shall so designate. No hearing shall be commenced until ten (10) days' after written notice to the Licensee affording the Licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. If the Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of the community, the Commissioner may, upon the issuance of written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than ten (10) days, giving the Licensee an opportunity to be heard not later than the end of that period. If the Licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such orders shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. All hearings before the Commissioner shall be on the record as set forth under Illinois law so that any appeal to the State Liquor Commission shall be on this record only and not de novo. Appeals shall be taken to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the Circuit Court in the manner provided by law.  
12-6-26 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Fines assessed by the court against any offender may be in addition to any penalty assessed against a Licensee in any administrative proceeding. 
A.  General. Unless another penalty is set forth in this chapter, every person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense and One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) for each subsequent offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any fines set forth in this chapter shall be assessed regardless of whether the violator is convicted or placed on supervision by the court. 
B.  Substance Abuse. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under 21 years of age and not enrolled as a student as Maine Township High School District 207 (or another equivalent secondary school), the court or administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a drug and alcohol education and abuse counseling program that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and requires a certified evaluation program and not less than four hours of counseling. If the violator agrees to attend such a program, the violator shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of $100.00 for a first offense. For a second offense, the offender shall attend a drug and alcohol education and counseling program of at least ten hours in duration as determined by the licensed program and shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of not less than $250.00. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under 21 years of age, is a first-time offender and is enrolled as a student as Maine Township High School District 207 (or another equivalent secondary school), the court or administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a drug and alcohol education program that is approved by the Board of Education of Maine Township High School District 207. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under 21 years of age and is either found guilty or pleads no contest and agrees to pay the applicable fine, the City will report the person to the Secretary of State's Office and his/her driver's license will be suspended in accordance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-45 , § 2, 6-6-2016)  
12-6-27 - DEFINITIONS 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be construed according to the definitions set forth below: 
Acting in the Course of Business: Any action taken by a person at a business premises in the City, or in furtherance of a business purpose in the City. 
Adult: Any person who has attained his or her twenty-first birthday. 
Alcoholic Beverages or Liquor: 
A.  Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid intended as a beverage and containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume. 
B.  Any beverage containing any scientifically detectable trace of alcohol and commonly known as "near beer," "nonalcoholic beer," or "nonalcoholic wine," whose taste, color, odor and consistency are similar to the alcoholic beverages known as beer and wine and, except for the reduced alcohol content, is marketed as being similar to beer or wine. 
Banquet Facility: A food service facility whose primary business is the hosting of parties, celebrations and events which are attended by specific invitees of a specific host as opposed to "drop in" or reservation dining by the general public. 
Bar: A barrier or counter, at and over which alcoholic beverages are opened, poured, prepared or served. (See also definitions of Customer Bar and Service Bar.) 
Bar/Lounge Space: That area of a Class R licensed establishment that is depicted on the required drawing described in section 12-6-7 of this chapter. Bar/Lounge Space shall include both those areas used for activities defined in "BAR" above and those defined in "LOUNGE" below. 
Beer: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation or infusion in a brew or concoction of barley or other grain, malt or hops, in water. This includes beer, light beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and other similar brews. 
Bottle Club: A type of service of spirits in which the spirits are purchased by the customer and then kept at a licensed premises for use or consumption by the customer on subsequent visits. 
Caterer: A person who, for compensation, provides food and service for a banquet, dinner or other special occasion where the recipients of the food or service are specifically invited to each particular event. (See section 12-6-7 of this chapter.) 
City: The City of Park Ridge, Cook County, Illinois. 
Control of Premises: The legal or beneficial ownership, rental, lease or licensure shall constitute control of property. Control may also exist where none of the aforesaid legal relationships apply, but where an adult occupies or is otherwise in charge of or charged with the supervision of a particular premises. 
Corkage: The bringing of an alcoholic beverage, by a patron, into a place of business for the purpose of consuming the alcoholic beverage on the premises. 
Customer Bar: A bar at a licensed premises that is open for actual visiting by, seating for or service to the customer. 
Delivery of Alcoholic Beverages: The sale, giving or exchange of an alcoholic liquor from one person to another. Delivery is meant to include the provision of any alcoholic liquor by whatever means to one person from another. 
Dramshop Insurance: That insurance required of every Licensee, the purpose of which is to insure the Licensee against the statutory liability imposed by the Illinois Liquor Control Act. 
Drink Promotion Period: Any period of the business day when an alcoholic beverage is offered to the public or segment of the public at a reduced price. 
Entertainment: Any playing of prerecorded music or voices or any live act or performance whether or not using sound amplification. 
Flight of Wine and Craft Beverages: A single serving of a variety of alcoholic beverages in small portions. 
General Public: The whole body politic including the people of the neighborhood, the City, the State of Illinois, the United States of America, and/or persons at large traveling through the City, as distinct from the designation of a particular person or group of persons. 
Growler: A sealed and refillable container of approximately one half gallon in size used for the retail sale of beer by microbreweries or brew pubs for off-premise consumption. 
Happy Hour: Any period of the business day when an alcoholic beverage is offered to the public or segment of the public at a reduced price. 
Host Liability Insurance: A typical business insurance coverage that protects an owner against claims that his or her business or premises caused damage or injury or caused liability to accrue to a business invitee. 
Hotel: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where a restaurant is located and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which fifty (50) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations for guests. 
Impairment: Any diminution or compromise of a person's physical, mental or perceptual abilities due to the consumption of an alcoholic beverage. Impairment does not require that the blood alcohol content be in excess of any particular gram of alcohol to milliliters of blood or breath ratio. 
Infused Beverage: An alcoholic beverage to which a fruit or vegetable has been added to impart the flavor of that fruit or vegetable. Infusion usually involves soaking or marinating for a period of days. 
License or Liquor License: That specific grant of the privilege and authority, pursuant to the exact requirements of this chapter, to a person to deliver alcoholic beverages in the manner set forth in the text of a designated classification. License, as used in this chapter shall, in applicable circumstances, include any permit or endorsement pursuant to section 12-6-6 of this chapter. 
License Term: The time between the issuance of a license and its expiration date. 
Licensed Premises: The building and land at the address for which the license is issued. For purposes of determining parameters of the location where an act is prohibited by this chapter, licensed premises shall include all off street parking, any public property immediately adjacent to the private address and the entirety of the contiguous property owned by the same entity owning the licensed premises. For purposes of determining the parameters of the location where an act is permitted by this chapter, licensed premises shall mean only the interior of the building at the licensed address unless an outdoor or other permit or certification specifically allows for activity on the exterior of the premises. 
Licensee: That person who has been issued a liquor license, permit or endorsement by the Commissioner. For purposes of actions required of or prohibited to a Licensee, this shall include the holder of a Park Ridge liquor license and any officer, principal, employee or agent of the license holder. 
License Review Board: A body of residents appointed by the Mayor to perform certain duties as set forth in Section 12-6-15. 
Live Entertainment: A musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret or comedy act performed live by one (1) or more persons. 
Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The office of the Mayor of the City, including appropriate legal counsel. This may include such other persons as the mayor may appoint, either by written policy or practice, to aid in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner will be referred to as the "Commissioner" in this chapter. 
Lounge: That portion of a licensed restaurant or club that is not part of the main dining area, where a customer bar and other seating is located, and that is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where alcoholic beverages may be consumed. 
Manager: That sole natural person, on the licensed premises, who is charged with the supervision, oversight and management of the entire business and physical premises. 
Meal Package: A special menu package where food and alcoholic beverages are included in a single price. 
Original Package: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container that is used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic beverages to contain and to convey any alcoholic beverages. Original package means that the container must not be or have been opened or unsealed. 
Parent: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian. 
Party Package: An offering by a licensee for private party functions or events for specific social or business occasion. 
Permit: That specific grant of the privilege and authority, pursuant to the exact requirements of this chapter, to a person to serve alcoholic beverages in the manner set forth in the text of a designated permit classification. 
Person: Any natural person or any legal entity of any kind or nature. 
Private Club: A not for profit organization maintaining a physical site in the city supported by the dues of its members. 
Public Space: Includes all of the interior space except those spaces used for cooking, food preparation, food storage, and restrooms. 
Restaurant: Any public place maintained, and held out to the public as a place primarily devoted to being a full service dining establishment at which the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals. Limited food service, as typically provided by drive-in restaurants, luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops, fast food operations and similar uses, are not included in this definition. 
Sale, Sell: Transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any other means for consideration. This shall include and mean all sales, soliciting or receiving an order for keeping or exposing for sale and keeping with intent to sell. It shall also include the exchange, transfer or trade for a ticket or token obtained for consideration. 
Server Only Bar: A bar on a licensed premises that is not open for actual visiting by or seating for the customer, but is used solely as a drink preparation area for servers. 
Service of Alcoholic Beverages (or Service): The sale, delivery, giving, service, providing or exchange of an alcoholic beverage from one person to another. Service of alcoholic beverages is meant to include the provision of any alcoholic beverage by whatever means by one person to another. This definition includes being an employee who actually serves alcoholic beverages or who is a cashier at a licensed premises. Service of alcoholic beverages by a Class P Licensee shall generally be referred to as "delivery of alcoholic beverages." 
Service of Alcoholic Beverages (Regulated): This is the type of service of alcoholic beverages that is regulated by this chapter. Regulated Service generally includes the following: Service at any location within the City: a) for value; or b) to the public from a business venue; or c) in the course of business; or d) at a civic event; or e) through a paid bartender at any location other than a private home. Also referred to as "Regulated Service." 
Service of Alcoholic Beverages for Value: The service of alcoholic beverages for any consideration of any nature. This shall include, without limitation, the inclusion of alcoholic beverages in a single price of admission and/or in the price of a ticket and/or the price of a meal, even if for charitable purposes. 
Spirits: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous beverages and such beverages when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances. 
Total Interior Space: All of the area inside the perimeter walls of the licensed premises and shall include all areas for cooking, service, food storage, food preparation, restrooms, public dining, and Bar/Lounge Space. 
Underage Person: Any person who has not attained his or her twenty first birthday. 
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or "spirits," as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-53, 09-2-2015)  
CHAPTER 7 - FARMERS MARKET 
SECTION 
 
12-7-1 - FARMERS MARKET 
There is hereby established in the City of Park Ridge a marketplace to be known as the Farmers Market for the sale of produce, and processed, packaged, or prepared food, subject to the procedures and regulations hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2006-38, 5-1-2006)  
12-7-2 - TIME AND PLACE 
The Farmers Market shall be located in an area designated by resolution of the City Council and shall be conducted on such days and during such hours as the Council may prescribe.  
12-7-3 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
The market shall be divided into spaces designated by the market master(s). No person may occupy any space within the market unless he has received an occupancy permit issued by a master and has paid the applicable fee therefor. The fee shall not be a tax or license but shall be used to defray the cost of administration and promotion of the Farmers Market and enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
12-7-4 - PERMIT FEE 
A.  Farmers Market permit may be issued either for an entire season or for one day. No person may receive more than three daily permits in any season. 
B.  The fee for a Farmers Market permit shall be established by the Farmers Market Committee so that the operation of the Farmers Market, to the extent practicable and in light of all other revenue sources, shall be a self-sustaining enterprise. 
(Ord. 2001-11, 3-5-2001; Ord. No. 2006-38, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
12-7-5 - PERMIT APPLICATION 
Applications for a Farmers Market permit shall be made on forms prescribed by the Farmers Market Committee. Such applications shall contain and include the following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone of the applicant and, if a business name, the name of the individual owner of the business. 
B.  Description of product to be sold. 
C.  Identification of the state and county in which the produce to be sold is grown or gathered. 
D.  Name and address of any person other than family members and employees of the applicant involved in preparing, packaging, transporting, or otherwise processing the product. 
E.  Name and address of persons to be actually in charge of applicants' sales. 
F.  A warranty that the produce to be sold will be grown, gathered, or produced by the applicant personally, his family, or employees, and not purchased for resale. 
G.  Such other information as the Market Master(s) may require. 
H.  A certificate of insurance naming the City and the Farmers Market Committee as additional insured that will be in full force and effect during the operation of the Farmers Market in the amount of $1,000,000 for general liability per occurrence from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and with a minimum insurance rating acceptable to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2006-56, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
12-7-6 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
A.  Scales for products sold by weight shall conform to established standards of the State of Illinois. 
B.  Prices shall be prominently displayed. 
C.  Hawking and crying out is prohibited. 
D.  Any animals or pets brought to the market shall be kept at least ten feet away from any booth selling food that is regulated by the Illinois Department of Public Health Retail Food Store Sanitation Code or Food Service Sanitation Code including processed, prepared or packaged food products. Any person who brings an animal or pet to the market shall comply with all applicable provisions of Article 5 Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code entitled, "Animals." 
E.  Sale of the following is prohibited: 
1.  Any unwholesome, adulterated, spoiled, or contaminated food product. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Reserved. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Reserved. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Reserved. 
9.  Any live animals. 
10.  Any alcoholic beverages, except by a City of Park Ridge liquor license holder with a Farmers Market endorsement. No more than three vendors may engage in the delivery or sale of beer or wine for each day of market operation. 
F.  No waste, garbage, or refuse shall be permitted to accumulate or remain in the market area. 
G.  All food items, all persons handling food items, and all equipment for transportation, storage and display of food items shall comply with the sanitary regulations promulgated by the Health Authority. 
H.  The label for any pre-packaged or wrapped food items shall comply with the Illinois Department of Public Health Retail Food Store Sanitation Code and the Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code. 
I.  When food that is regulated by the Illinois Department of Public Health Retail Food Store Sanitation Code or Food Service Sanitation Code such as processed, prepared or packaged food products is provided regardless of whether there is a charge for the food, an application for a temporary food establishment Health Permit shall be submitted to the Health Authority. No person may sell or give away any food for which a temporary food establishment Health Permit is required until the Health Authority has approved such permit. 
J.  No person may sell any processed, prepared or packaged food or prepare any food on site in the Farmers Market unless the food and any ingredients that would be used on site comes from a facility that is either licensed by a local health department or a state or federal food agency, or is inspected by the Illinois Department of Public Health as a food processor, warehouse or packer. 
(Ord. 2006-38, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 2(Exh. B), 6-18-2018)  
12-7-7 - MARKET MASTERS 
There shall be up to two Market Master(s) who shall be appointed by the Farmers Market Committee from among its members. The Market Master(s) shall have general responsibility for the administration of the market and enforcement of rules and regulations. The Farmers Market Committee shall have general responsibility for promulgation of rules and regulations for the operation of the market. The Market Master(s) shall have the authority to approve Farmers Market permits, to revoke Farmers Market permits for any violation of this ordinance or any law or regulation or conduct detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, to designate assigned spaces in the market, and to do all other things necessary to the operation of the operation of the market. The Farmers Market Committee shall be supported by the Community Preservation and Development Department and all revenue and expenses of the Farmers Market shall comprise a separate object class in the Department's budget. 
(Ord. No. 2006-38, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
12-7-8 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this Chapter or failing to comply with an order of the Market Master(s) or the Health Authority, shall be fined not less than $50.00 for the first violation, not less than $100.00 for any subsequent violation and not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Violations of this Chapter shall be adjudicated in the manner prescribed in Article 20, Chapter 6 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-38, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 2, 10-2-2017)  
CHAPTER 8 - ROOMING HOUSES 
SECTION 
 
12-8-1 - DEFINITIONS 
ROOMING HOUSE: Includes "boarding house" and "lodging house" and means an establishment as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-30-3 except that the term includes those establishments open to the public where accommodations are provided to any number of persons on a transient basis and whether or not any meals are provided to guests. Rooming house also includes "bed-and-breakfast" establishments as defined in 50 ILCS 820/1 et seq. except that such establishments include those with more than five (5) guest rooms and those in operation for less than ten (10) nights in any twelve (12) month period. "Rooming house" shall not include community residences as defined in the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance.  
12-8-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the City of Park Ridge a rooming house without a license issued by the City. 
B.  A rooming house license shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of issue and may be renewed for additional periods of six (6) months provided that it complies with this Code. 
C.  The fee for a rooming house license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
D.  Application for a rooming house license shall be made to the Director of Community Preservation and Development on forms provided.  
12-8-3 - ROOMING HOUSE REGULATIONS 
Any rooming house required to be licensed by this Code shall as a condition of receiving and continuing to enjoy the privilege granted by the license comply with 50 ILCS 820/1 et seq. and the following regulations: 
A.  The premises shall be occupied by the owner as a principal residence. 
B.  The license certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within ten (10) feet of the main entrance to the premises. 
C.  The premises shall be open to inspection by any authorized City police official, fire building, and health inspector. 
D.  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for all motor vehicles used by any guests. 
E.  The establishment shall meet the fire safety requirements set forth in 50 ILCS 820/6. Additionally, the establishment shall: 
1.  provide a hard-wired smoke detector in each guest room and in all common areas in accordance with requirements of the City fire inspector of a type which upon activation transmits a signal to a central receiving station; 
2.  comply with Sections 817.0 and 822.0 of the BOCA National Building Code, 1990, as amended by Article 15-1-3 of this Code regulating stairways, exit signs, and lights; 
3.  comply with Section 20-2 and 20-3 NFPA101-1985 regarding means of escape and fire protection; 
F.  The liability insurance required by 50 ILCS 820/7 shall be in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
G.  Bathroom facilities shall be provided as follows: 
1.  at least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the housing inspector and in good working condition for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof who may be accommodated within a rooming house including members of the operator's family where they share the use of said facilities; 
2.  all such facilities shall be located within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible to all persons sharing such facilities and from a common hall or passageway and provided that such facilities shall not be located more than one (1) floor above or below the rooming unit or units served; 
3.  every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water under pressure at all times; 
4.  if the rooming house has only one (1) bathroom for use by the occupants of the rooming units, said bathroom shall not be located in a basement except by written approval of the housing inspector. 
H.  Food service, if provided for any meal, shall be in accordance with the provisions of 50 ILCS 820/4. Rooming house guests shall not be permitted access to kitchen facilities to prepare their own food, and no cooking shall be permitted in guest rooms. 
I.  Linen and soap service shall be provided in accordance with 50 ILCS 820/5. 
J.  No bedroom may be occupied by more than two (2) adults. Every such room shall contain not less than eighty (80) square feet of floor space for one (1) person and not less than one hundred thirty (130) square feet of floor space for two (2) people. 
K.  Access to and from each bedroom shall be accomplished without passing through any other bedroom. Bedroom doors shall have locks to insure privacy. 
L.  The premises shall meet applicable requirements of the "American with Disabilities Act." 
M.  The premises shall comply with the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance regarding home occupations and signs.  
12-8-4 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.  
CHAPTER 9 - TOBACCO PRODUCTS[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2012-89, 12-3-2012. 
 
12-9-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
A.  Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco, nicotine gels and dissolvable nicotine products or any electronic smoking device. 
B.  Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products. 
C.  Electronic smoking device means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other regulated substances. "Electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, hookah pen, vape pens or any other product name or descriptor. An electronic smoking device excludes any product approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a nontobacco product used for medicinal purposes and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 3, 7-17-2017)  
12-9-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products within the City without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license required by this Code.  
12-9-3 - LICENSE APPLICATION 
Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the Health Officer.  
12-9-4 - LICENSE FEE 
The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).  
12-9-5 - PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY—SIGNS 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of 21 years. 
B.  Signs informing the public of this age restriction shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: 
PURCHASE AND SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE ARE PROHIBITED BY LAW. 
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background. The letters shall be at least one inch (1") high. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away or display tobacco products for sale at any location where the consumer can acquire those products through self-service. All tobacco products may only be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can access tobacco products without assistance by an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply to customer self-service from vending machines as described in the section of this article titled "Vending Machines—Locking Devices." 
( Ord. No. 2018-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
12-9-6 - PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent his or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 5, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
12-9-7 - POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco products. However, the possession by a person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home is not prohibited. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 5, 7-17-2017)  
12-9-8 - FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away, or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the City, any school district or any park district.  
12-9-9 - VENDING MACHINES—LOCKING DEVICES 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of 21 years. 
B.  Paragraph A above shall not apply to any premises where access by persons under the age of 21 years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of the business located at such premises. 
( Ord. No. 2018-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
12-9-10 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES 
Every act of omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act of omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.  
12-9-11 - SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING; FINES; APPEALS 
A.  The Mayor or his/her designee is charged with the administration of this Chapter. The Mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter if it is determined that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter. In lieu of or in addition to the suspension or revocation of a license, the Mayor may levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed five hundred ($500) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  The licensee shall be notified of a determination to revoke or suspend a license or of the imposition of a fine by the Mayor. The notice shall inform the licensee of the right to request a hearing before the Administrative Adjudication Division's Hearing Officer regarding the proposed action. The notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation, suspension, or imposition of a fine. The notice shall be personally served or mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his/her last known address and shall provide the licensee with the right to request a hearing before Administrative Adjudication Division's Hearing Officer within twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date such notice was personally delivered or placed in the mail. Any request for a hearing must be made in writing and submitted to the Mayor via personal delivery or mail, postage prepaid. If no such request for a hearing is received, the Mayor's determination shall become final. 
C.  The Administrative Adjudication Division shall set a place, date, and time for the hearing and shall notify the licensee of that information. The initial hearing date shall not be more than thirty (30) days after the Mayor receives the written request for a hearing. 
D.  The licensee shall have the right to be represented at such a hearing by legal counsel. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision and findings of fact. Such decision and findings of fact shall be mailed to the licensee within five (5) business days following the conclusion of the hearing or the receipt of any transcript, whichever is later. 
E.  Twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of any suspension or revocation, the City of Park Ridge Police Department shall post on all entrances to the licensee's premises a notice entitled "Notice of Revocation/Suspension." Such notice shall be substantially similar to the following: 
NOTICE OF REVOCATION/SUSPENSION 
The license for this establishment, ___________, which is held by___________is: 
___________ suspended for the following dates: (insert dates) 
___________ revoked beginning on___________(date) at___________a.m./p.m. 
pursuant to Section 12-9-11 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code for violations of Section(s) ___________ of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. For additional information, please contact the Mayor at the City of Park Ridge at ___________. 
Anyone who removes a Notice of Revocation/Suspension before the suspension period is completed or less than seven (7) days after posting of a Notice of Revocation/Suspension shall be subject to a fine of $___________. 
F.  Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked or who has been fined by the Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer shall have the right to seek judicial review of the decision pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. Any applicant or license holder who files such an action for judicial review shall pay the costs of preparing and certifying the record of proceedings pursuant to Section 5/3-109 of the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-109.  
12-9-12 - SALES BY MINORS PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee or licensee's agent or employee to engage, employ, or permit any person less than eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation and a minimum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each subsequent violation.  
12-9-13 - ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES; MINORS 
If the offense is related to Sections 12-9-6 or 12-9-7 of this Chapter, the minor is a first-time offender and is enrolled as a full-time student at a public school district located in the City (or another equivalent private or parochial school), the court or administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a diversion and education program that is approved by Maine Township High School District 207. If the violator agrees to attend such a program, the violator shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of $25.00 for a first offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 4, 7-17-2017)  
CHAPTER 10 - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES[7] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2012-89, 12-2-2012. 
 
12-10-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person directly or indirectly to own or operate a sexually-oriented business without a license. 
B.  A sexually-oriented business is one in which the dominant commercial activity is sale, rental, or exhibition of material depicting: 
1.  human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
2.  aspects of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or 
3.  fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, or any performance of such sexual activities.  
12-10-2 - ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE 
A.  A license to own and operate a sexually-oriented business may be issued only to a natural person who is 
1.  not less than twenty-five (25) years of age; and 
2.  a resident of the City of Park Ridge or who agrees to become such within thirty (30) days of issuance of a license. 
B.  No such license may be issued to any corporation. Further, no license shall be issued to any natural person who 
1.  has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for determination of eligibility to receive a license or has given false or deceptive information; or 
2.  has been convicted in any jurisdiction of any felony or of any offense involving sexual conduct or obscenity or has owned directly or indirectly any sexually-oriented business as to which a license has been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction.  
12-10-3 - TERM OF LICENSE; FEE 
A license shall be valid for a period of one (1) year unless sooner terminated or revoked. The fee for each license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).  
12-10-4 - HOURS OF OPERATION 
No business licensed under this Chapter shall be open to the public before 9 a.m. or after 9 p.m. or at any time on Sunday.  
12-10-5 - MINIMUM AGE 
No person shall be employed in any licensed sexually-oriented business who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age. No person shall be allowed to enter such business premises who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.  
12-10-6 - OTHER SALES PROHIBITED 
No licensed sexually-oriented business shall be permitted to sell any food, beverage, or tobacco product.  
12-10-7 - INSPECTIONS 
Any premises licensed under this Chapter shall comply with all reasonable rules and regulations of the City Health Department, Fire Department, and Police Department and shall be subject to inspection by any authorized City officer at any reasonable time.  
12-10-8 - VISIBILITY; LIGHTING 
Any premises licensed under this Chapter shall have a front window or windows and an interior arrangement such that there is a clear and unobstructed view from outside the premises, through the front window(s) into all parts of the premises accessible to customers. Lighting in all parts of the premises accessible to customers shall be not less than 150-foot candles at all times that the building is open for business.  
12-10-9 - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, HEARING, FINES, AND COST 
A.  The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of this Chapter. The Mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Chapter, and may levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed by the Mayor shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing before the Liquor License Review Board with not less than ten (10) days written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The hearing shall be conducted as in the case of hearings regarding liquor license violations, and the Liquor License Review Board shall have the power to recommend to the Mayor findings and policies for violations of this Chapter. The Mayor shall serve a written order setting forth his findings and any penalty to be imposed. 
C.  Any licensee determined by the Mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, in addition to any fine imposed, pay to the City the costs of the hearing before the Mayor on such violation. The Mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the City for said hearing including, but not limited to, court reporters' fees, the cost of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the City or such lesser sum as the Mayor may allow. The licensee shall pay said costs to the City within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the Mayor. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this Chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of a fine.  
12-10-10 - TRANSFER OF LICENSE 
The license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. The license shall permit the licensed activity only on the premises described in the application and license.  
12-10-11 - BOND REQUIRED 
No license shall be issued unless the licensee shall first deposit with the City a bond with a corporate surety, such corporate surety to be a "AA"-rated surety company regularly authorized to act as surety and approved by the Commissioner of Insurance with respect to its rating as a surety company. Such bond shall provide against any violation by the principal, his agents, or employees of any of the terms of this Chapter or any rules and regulations now in force or which may hereafter be enforced in the City affecting the operation of such business. The penalty of such bond shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), and the purpose of such bond shall be to cover the costs of enforcement, prosecution, as well as the cost of hearing by the Mayor on the question of suspension or revocation of the license.  
12-10-12 - PENALTY 
In addition to, or in lieu of, any administrative sanction imposed pursuant to Section 12-10-9 above, any violation of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of law, be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.  
CHAPTER 11 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[8] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-37, 5-19-2003. 
 
12-11-1 - REGISTRATION 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers, including holders of a State-issued authorization pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-401), engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the City shall register with the City, as provided in Section 12-11-7. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-2 - LICENSE 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier which desires to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the City for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the City shall first obtain from the City a license granting the use of such public ways, as provided in Section 12-11-8.  
12-11-3 - FRANCHISE 
A.  Telecommunications Franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier which desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the City, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or areas in the City, shall first obtain from the City a franchise granting the use of such public ways as provided in Section 12-11-9. 
B.  Cable Television Franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier which desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the City for the purpose of providing cable television service to persons in the City shall first obtain a cable franchise from the City as provided in Section 12-11-10. 
C.  Application To Existing Franchise Ordinances And Agreements. This Chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until: 
1.  the expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement; 
2.  an amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. 
D.  Application to Holders of State-Issued Authorizations. Sections 12-11-2, 12-11-3, 12-11-8, 12-11-9 and 12-11-10 of this Chapter shall not apply to any holder of a State-issued authorization pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-401). 
(Ord. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-4 - PENALTIES 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.  
12-11-5 - OTHER REMEDIES 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-1998)  
12-11-6 - SEVERABILITY 
If any Section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.  
12-11-7 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS REGISTRATION 
A.  REGISTRATION REQUIRED. All telecommunications carriers and providers, including holders of a State' issued authorization pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-401), that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the City, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the City, shall register with the City pursuant to this Chapter on forms to be provided by the City Clerk, which shall include the following: 
1.  The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates; 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement; 
3.  A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the City; 
4.  A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the City; 
5.  Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this Chapter; 
6.  Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed by the City; 
7.  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the City; 
8.  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the City; and 
9.  Such other information as the City Clerk may reasonably require. 
B.  REGISTRATION FEE. Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
C.  PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION. The purpose of registration is to: 
1.  provide the City with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services within the City, or that own or operate telecommunication facilities within the City; 
2.  assist the City in enforcement of this Chapter; 
3.  assist the City in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the City; and 
4.  assist the City in monitoring compliance with local, State and Federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-8 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE 
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the City for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the City. 
A.  License Application. Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Chapter shall file an application with the City which shall include the following information: 
1.  The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant; 
2.  A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities; 
3.  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services; 
4.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities; 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route; 
c.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers; and 
d.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; 
5.  If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route; 
6.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities; and 
b.  The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities; 
7.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways: 
a.  The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and 
b.  The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities; 
8.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion date; 
9.  A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
10.  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities; 
11.  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application; 
12.  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services; 
13.  All required fees, deposits or charges; and 
14.  Such other and further information as may be required by the City. 
B.  Determination by the City. The City Council may enact an ordinance granting a license. In determining whether to grant a license the Council shall consider the following factors, in addition to any others it may deem relevant: 
1.  The financial and technical ability of the applicant; 
2.  The legal ability of the applicant; 
3.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities; 
4.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted; 
5.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted; 
6.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways; 
7.  The service that applicant will provide to the community and region; 
8.  The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted; 
9.  The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities; 
10.  Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies; and 
11.  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. 
C.  Agreement. No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the City have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions of the license. 
D.  Non-Exclusive Grant. No license shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. 
E.  Rights Granted. No license shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
F.  Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. 
G.  License Route. A telecommunications license shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. 
H.  Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with Article 9, Chapter 2 of the Code and with the following terms and conditions: 
1.  Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility; 
2.  A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available; 
3.  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the City, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground; 
4.  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way of the City, a licensee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the license term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways; and 
5.  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the licensee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers. 
I.  Construction Permits. All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in this Chapter provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. In addition, licenses must comply with the permit requirements of Section 9-2-4. 
J.  Compensation to City. Each license granted under this Chapter is subject to the City's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. 
K.  Amendment of Grant. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the City which are not included in a license previously granted under this Chapter. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the City shall grant a license amendment without further application. 
L.  Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its license shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the City for renewal of its license which shall include the following information: 
1.  The information required pursuant to Section 12-11-8A; and 
2.  Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the City and the licensee. 
M.  Renewal Determinations: The City Council may renew a license in the same manner as provided for original issuance. 
N.  Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal: No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this Chapter have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the City. 
(Ord. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-9 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE 
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier which desires to occupy public ways of the City and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the City. 
A.  Franchise Application. Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this Chapter shall file an application with the City which shall include the following information: 
1.  The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant; 
2.  A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities; 
3.  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services; 
4.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities; 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route; 
c.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers; and 
d.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; 
5.  If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route; 
6.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities; and 
b.  The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities; 
7.  If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways: 
a.  The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and 
b.  The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
8.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates; 
9.  A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
10.  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities; 
11.  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application; 
12.  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services; 
13.  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising; 
14.  An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the City that applicant intends to use or lease; 
15.  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the City and other public, educational and governmental institutions; 
16.  A description of applicant's access and line extension policies; 
17.  The area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area; 
18.  All required fees, deposits or charges; and 
19.  Such other and further information as may be requested by the City Manager. 
B.  Determination by the City. The City Council may enact an ordinance granting a franchise. In determining whether to grant a franchise the Council shall consider the following factors, in addition to any others it may deem relevant: 
1.  The financial and technical ability of the applicant; 
2.  The legal ability of the applicant; 
3.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities; 
4.  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted; 
5.  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted; 
6.  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways; 
7.  The service that applicant will provide to the community and region; 
8.  The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted; 
9.  The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities; 
10.  Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies; and 
11.  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. 
C.  Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the City have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions of the franchise. 
D.  Non-Exclusive Grant. No franchise granted under this Chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. 
E.  Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. 
F.  Rights Granted. No franchise granted under this Chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
G.  Franchise Territory. A telecommunications franchise granted under this Chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the City to be served by the franchisee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. 
H.  Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with Article 9, Section 2 of the Code and with the following terms and conditions: 
1.  Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility; 
2.  A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available; 
3.  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the City, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground; 
4.  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way of the City, a franchisee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways; 
5.  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers; and 
I.  Construction Permits. All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in this Chapter provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. In addition, licenses must comply with the permit requirements of Section 9-2-4. 
J.  Compensation To City. Each franchise granted under this Chapter is subject to the City's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. 
K.  Nondiscrimination. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. 
L.  Service to the City. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the City at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. 
M.  Amendment of Grant. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the City which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Chapter. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the City shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. 
N.  Renewal Applications. A franchisee that desires to renew its franchise under this Chapter shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 150 days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the City for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information: 
1.  The information required pursuant to Section 12-11-9A; and 
2.  Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the City and the franchisee; 
O.  Renewal Determinations. The City Council may renew a franchise in the same manner as provided for original issuance. 
P.  Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the City.  
12-11-10 - CABLE FRANCHISE 
A.  General. In addition to the provisions outlined in Section 12-11-9 regarding franchise application, grant and authority, Cable Operators other than holders of a State-issued authorization pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-401) are subject to the provisions and the requirements outlined in this Section. 
1.  Cable Operators are subject to this Chapter in its entirety and the Cable Act. 
2.  If a conflict arises between the language in Section 12-11-10 and the rest of this Chapter, Section 12-11-10 shall prevail. 
B.  Description of System. The minimum capacity for a cable system shall be 450 MHz with at least 50 downstream channels. The Cable Operator shall, as a condition of the granting of a franchise, provide the City with a written description of the cable system within the City, including technical characteristics, channel capacity, channel carriage, and a strand map. The Cable Operator shall provide the City with an updated description, upon request or whenever substantial changes in the system are made. 
C.  Channel Allocation. The Cable Operator shall, to the maximum extent possible, assign as dial locations for local broadcast stations carried on the system, numbers available by either a cable-ready television or a converter, which correspond to their respective FCC-assigned TV station call numbers, unless the station has negotiated a more favorable position in the channel line-up. 
D.  Access Channels. The Cable Operator shall provide access channels on the subscriber network for the exclusive use of designated institutions. 
1.  The number and use of said channels will be prescribed in the franchise agreements. 
2.  The City shall determine the channel allocations for such designated institutions. 
3.  Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service. 
4.  The Cable Operator shall make every reasonable effort to assign P.E.G. (Public, Educational, Government) channels to the same channels assigned by other providers within each municipality, and in contiguous municipalities. 
5.  The Cable Operator shall list the specific assigned user on each channel in every channel line-up. A new channel chart shall be issued to subscribers by bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to any changes. 
6.  P.E.G. channels may not be reassigned without forty-five (45) days' notice to the City. The franchise shall notify subscribers of any P.E.G. channel reassignments by bill messages or bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to the change. P.E.G. channels may not be reassigned more than once in any twelve (12) month period. 
7.  The Cable Operator shall be responsible for any established costs incurred by the City due to a change in channel assignment for any P.E.G. channel which was not requested by the user. These costs may include stationery, business cards, and public notices. The Cable Operator will incur these costs for no more than a one-month period. The Cable Operator shall discuss reimbursement of special promotional items, such as T-shirts or other special items, with the affected user on a case-by-case basis. 
E.  Extension Of Service. Following the initial construction of the Cable Operator's telecommunications system, the Cable Operator shall extend its system and make service available as follows: 
1.  Unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement, within forty-five (45) days after notification by the City of an annexation having a minimum density of twenty-five (25) units per street mile, begin construction of its telecommunications system within such annexed area to provide service to each person requesting such service. Weather permitting, construction and activation to the annexed area shall be completed within forty-five (45) days. 
2.  The City shall notify the Cable Operator of the construction of any new development within the City by delivering to the Cable Operator a final plat of survey, to include final design for all utilities for that development. For developments having a minimum density of twenty-five (25) units per street mile, the Cable Operator shall deliver to the City its construction design plan and have applied for all necessary permits and licenses within thirty (30) days of said notification. Weather permitting, construction shall begin within thirty (30) days after the receipt of all necessary permits and licenses. Construction, including restoration, shall be completed within forty-five (45) days. 
3.  Within thirty (30) days after signing a contract and approved design with any multiple dwelling unit for the provision of service, the Cable Operator shall begin construction and installation of its system in such multiple dwelling unit. Construction and installation shall be completed within thirty (30) days. 
4.  Cable Operator shall provide service to areas not meeting the minimum density of twenty-five (25) units per street mile within six (6) months after notification by the City. If the Cable Operator determines that a line extension is not economically feasible, it may request relief from this provision. Approval of such request shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
5.  Cable Operator further agrees that any litigation instituted by a third party shall not suspend Cable Operator's obligation to construct and install the cable communications system in accordance with the construction time schedule unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
F.  Technical Standards. The distribution of all signals throughout the system, including the combined degradation effects of both upstream and downstream carriage, no matter where the signals originate or are terminated, shall meet the applicable industry standards set for the delivery method being used. 
1.  All applicable regulatory standards shall be observed as if each and every one were stated herein. In the event that enforcement of said regulatory standards is discontinued or the regulatory agency charged with enforcement is dissolved, the standards shall remain in full force and effect until the City exercises its right hereunder to amend this agreement to require such standards as it shall deem necessary. 
2.  In the areas where standards have not been developed, the system shall operate at the equipment manufacturers' specifications until measurable standards have been developed. The Cable Operator shall be obligated to ensure that the signal quality is of the highest practicable level achievable for the components in question. For the first year that newer equipment for which no standards have been developed is in use, the Cable Operator will report monthly on the reliability and performance of said equipment. Thereafter, if the equipment is functioning within the levels anticipated, the Cable Operator may test and report on the same schedule as the rest of the communications system. 
G.  Testing. The Cable Operator shall conduct appropriate monitoring and measurements utilizing appropriate measuring devices, including devices capable of measuring signal leakage in microvolts/meter, to ensure that the system is performing within the applicable standards. When such monitoring or measurements indicate that performance has fallen below these standards, corrective action shall be taken to restore proper performance. All channels on the system shall be monitored daily by a visual inspection of the picture and listening to the audio for general performance and audio level balance. 
1.  At a minimum, measurements shall be made monthly at the head end, and quarterly at two randomly selected, longest cascades in each community to ensure that all channels on the system are operating properly. Measurement of all operational parameters shall be made semi-annually at the head end and four geographically divided locations, at the ends of the longest cascades in each community, on all channels. 
2.  If the City suspects an area is not performing in accordance with the applicable standards, it may order the Cable Operator to test in that location within forty-eight (48) hours' notice from the City. 
3.  Newly constructed sections shall be tested within one week of activation, and results reported to the City. 
4.  The Cable Operator shall submit copies of its federally required proof-of-performance testing within thirty (30) days of its completion. 
H.  Reliability. The Cable Operator shall employ a professional engineer or equivalent, and a service and repair force of competent technicians, capable of maintaining the system in accordance with the technical performance service requirements in this agreement. 
1.  The Cable Operator shall install and maintain a standby power system that provides a minimum of three (3) hours duration throughout the distribution networks. 
2.  System head ends and distribution system as well as standby power will have remote status monitoring. 
I.  Maintenance. The Cable Operator shall perform routine maintenance within the following parameters: 
1.  The Cable Operator shall interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after cable-casting notice of service interruptions at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. 
2.  Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and repair with notification to the City, on any day except Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays. 
3.  Routine maintenance may be performed during the daylight hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any day except Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays, up to twice a year upon notification to the City. 
J.  Performance Evaluation. The City and the Cable Operator shall hold performance evaluation meetings in the month of February of each calendar year to discuss the performance of the Cable Operator during the previous year. 
1.  The City may periodically do a more extensive evaluation of the Cable Operator's performance, which may include a financial or technical audit. The Cable Operator shall fully cooperate with the City during all reviews and evaluations. 
2.  If, at any time, the City determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate performance, it may require the Cable Operator to perform tests directed toward the suspected inadequacies. The Cable Operator shall prepare results and a report within thirty (30) days after notice. 
3.  Within thirty (30) to thirty-six (36) months prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the City shall begin an evaluation of the Cable Operator's performance over the life of the franchise. 
4.  All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced by the City in a newspaper of general circulation ten (10) days prior to such meeting. Cable Operator shall place an announcement of the highest use origination channel on the system no less than three (3) times during the hours of 7:00 p.m. for five (5) consecutive days preceding the meetings. 
K.  Renewal. To the extent applicable, renewal shall be governed by the Cable Act. 
L.  Service to the City. Applications for franchises shall include proposals for the provision of public, educational and governmental access to the telecommunications system. 
M.  Emergency Override. The Cable Operator shall provide the equipment required to automatically interrupt programming on all channels of the subscriber network by means of an audio message to present emergency information by public and law enforcement officials of the City. Such equipment shall be accessible through any City facility at no charge for the equipment, installation or maintenance. 
N.  Books And Records. The Cable Operator shall maintain books and records of its operation within the City to show total revenues by service category in sufficient detail, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
1.  Cable Operator shall maintain all books and records required for regulation of rate by the appropriate governmental authority. 
2.  Cable Operator shall maintain such books and records for the City separate from any other operation, provided, however, that any expenses, expenditures or revenues, which apply to both the system in the City and any other operation, shall be reasonably allocated between all such operations. 
3.  Cable Operator shall keep appropriate records of all requests for installation of service, service calls, and outages, showing the date completed and any corrective action taken. A summary of the above-listed information shall be submitted to the City prior to the annual performance evaluation meeting. 
4.  The required books and records shall be made available in the Cable Operator's local office during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the City within thirty (30) days after such request has been made. 
O.  Duty To Provide Information. The Cable Operator shall submit to the City copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies and other governmental bodies relating to its telecommunications operations within the City. 
1.  Copies of the Cable Operator's schedule of charges, contract or application forms, subscriber user services, policies regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the Cable Operator's policy in connection with subscriber or user services shall be filed with the City and updated as necessary, and shall be made available for public inspection by Cable Operator's local office. 
2.  Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by the Cable Operator with federal or state agencies having jurisdiction over telecommunications, or the same received from said agencies, shall be furnished simultaneously to the City by the Cable Operator. 
3.  Within ten (10) days of a written request from the City, each Cable Operator shall furnish the City with information sufficient to demonstrate: 
a.  That the Cable Operator has complied with all requirements of this Chapter. 
b.  That all City sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes or applicable franchise fees due the City in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities provided by the Cable Operator have been properly collected and paid by the Cable Operator. 
c.  In addition to the annual filing required in this Chapter, all books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the Cable Operator with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and intervals.  
12-11-11 - FEES AND COMPENSATION 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the City related to the enforcement and administration of this Chapter. 
B.  Application and Review Fee. 
1.  Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Sections 12-11-8 and 12-11-9 shall pay a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer, whichever is greater. 
2.  The application and review fee shall be deposited with the City as part of the application filed pursuant to Sections 12-11-8 or 12-11-9. 
3.  An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section, less: 
a.  five hundred dollars ($500.00); and 
b.  all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with the application. 
C.  Other City Costs. All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the City for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement. 
D.  Reserved Compensation for Public Ways. The City reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted property rights. 
E.  Compensation for City Property. If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy City Property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the City. 
F.  Construction Permit Fee. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to $500.00 or 1% of the estimated cost of constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the City Engineer, whichever is greater. 
G.  Annual Fees. Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the City equal to $500.00 as reimbursement for the City's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users. 
H.  Cable Fees. Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in Section 12-11-10. 
I.  Regulatory Fees and Compensation not a Tax. The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in Paragraph D. of this Section, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.  
12-11-12 - CONDITIONS OF GRANT 
A.  Location Of Facilities. All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with Article 9, Chapter 2 of the Code and with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement: 
1.  A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility. 
2.  A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. 
3.  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the City, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground. 
4.  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way of the City, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways. 
5.  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers. 
B.  Compliance with J.U.L.I.E. All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of J.U.L.I.E. 
C.  Construction Permits. All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Section 12-11-13. However, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. 
D.  Interference with the Public Ways. No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the City Engineer. 
E.  Damage to Property. No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any City property, public ways of the City, Other Ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto. 
F.  Notice of Work. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the Public Ways of the City or Other Ways without ten working days advance notice to the City. 
G.  Repair and Emergency Work. In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances, provided the Grantee shall notify the City as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable. 
H.  Maintenance of Facilities. Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements. 
I.  Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the City, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for: 
1.  The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvement in or upon the public ways; and 
2.  The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways. 
J.  Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the City, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the City shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the City. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
1.  Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise; 
2.  Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the City; 
3.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise; 
4.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit; and 
5.  If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise. 
K.  Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. 
L.  Damage to Grantee's Facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused by the malicious acts of the City, the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the City as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the City. 
M.  Restoration of Public Ways, Other Ways and City Property. 
1.  When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any Public Ways, Other Ways or City Property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City. 
2.  If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's or franchisee's sole expense and the licensee or franchisee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. 
3.  A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways or property. 
N.  Facilities Maps. Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the City with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. 
O.  Duty to Provide Information. Within ten days of a written request from the City Manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the City with information sufficient to demonstrate: 
1.  That grantee has complied with all requirements of this Chapter; 
2.  That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the City in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee; and 
3.  All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and intervals; 
P.  Leased Capacity. A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior City approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided: 
1.  Grantee shall furnish the City with a copy of any such lease or agreement; and 
2.  The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Q.  Grantee Insurance. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as co-insureds: 
1.  Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than 
a.  $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person, 
b.  $5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident, and 
c.  $5,000,000 for all other types of liability; 
2.  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident; 
3.  Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000; and 
4.  Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000. 
5.  The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license or franchise, and license such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
6.  Within 60 days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section. 
R.  General Indemnification. Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this Chapter. 
S.  Performance and Construction Surety. Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the City as may be required by this Chapter or by an applicable license or franchise agreement. 
T.  Security Fund. Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the City by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the City in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the City, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of grantee so long as any of grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of the City. 
1.  The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the City pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the City. 
2.  Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the City shall give written notice to the grantee: 
a.  Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost or expenses which the City has incurred by reason of grantee's act or default; 
b.  Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable; 
c.  Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the City before the City withdraws the amount thereof from the security fund, if applicable; 
d.  That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the City Manager or his designee. 
3.  Grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days after written notice from the City that there is a deficiency in the amount of the fund. 
U.  Construction and Completion Bond. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the City equal to 100% of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the City shall be deposited before construction is commenced. 
1.  The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the City Engineer, including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the construction. 
2.  The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City: 
a.  Timely completion of construction; 
b.  Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards; 
c.  Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City; 
d.  Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the construction; 
e.  The submission of "as-built" drawings after completion of the work as required by this Chapter; and 
f.  Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. 
V.  Coordination of Construction Activities. All grantees are required to cooperate with the City and with each other. 
1.  By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the City with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public ways. 
2.  Each grantee shall meet with the City, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the City to schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways. 
3.  All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the City Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. 
W.  Assignments or Transfers of Grant. Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein. 
1.  No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12 months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. 
2.  Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before construction of the telecommunications system has been completed. 
3.  Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system shall provide and certify the following information to the City not less than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer: 
a.  Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment; 
b.  All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant to Sections 12-11-8 and 12-11-9 of this Chapter with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee; and 
c.  Any other information reasonably required by the City. 
4.  No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this Chapter. 
5.  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise. 
6.  Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the City under this Section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the grant. 
X.  Transactions Affecting Control of Grant. Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of 10% or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring City approval pursuant to Section 12-11-12V. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from City approval. 
Y.  Revocation or Termination of Grant. A license or franchise granted by the City to use or occupy public ways of the City may be revoked for the following reasons: 
1.  Construction or operation in the City or in the public ways of the City without a license or franchise grant of authorization; 
2.  Construction or operation at an unauthorized location; 
3.  Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee; 
4.  Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise; 
5.  Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein; 
6.  Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the City; 
7.  Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways; 
8.  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Chapter; 
9.  Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the City; 
10.  Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee; 
11.  Violation of material provisions of this Chapter; and 
12.  Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement. 
Z.  Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the City Manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence: 
1.  That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance; 
2.  That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and 
3.  That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. 
AA.  Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the City Manager as provided in Section 12-11-12Y, the Manager shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. 
BB.  Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this Chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors: 
1.  Whether the misconduct was egregious; 
2.  Whether substantial harm resulted; 
3.  Whether the violation was intentional; 
4.  Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements; 
5.  Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and 
6.  Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. 
(Ord. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-13 - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
A.  General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the City except as provided in this Chapter and as required by Article 9, Chapter 2. 
B.  Construction Codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code. 
C.  Construction Permits. No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the City without first obtaining a construction permit in accordance with Article 9, Chapter 2, therefore, provided, however: 
1.  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the City unless the telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the City; 
2.  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise; and 
3.  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee. 
D.  Applications. Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the City and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate: 
1.  That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations; 
2.  The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles; 
3.  The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public ways; 
4.  The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the underground route proposed by the applicant; 
5.  The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the City, but not within the public ways; 
6.  The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways; and 
7.  The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. 
E.  Engineer's Certification. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. 
F.  Traffic Control Plan. All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
G.  Issuance of Permit. The City Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document comply with all requirements of this Chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate. 
H.  Construction Schedule. The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the City Engineer ten working days before commencing any work in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further notify the City Engineer not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public ways. 
I.  Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The City Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with such requirements. 
J.  Display of Permit. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the City Engineer or his representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. 
K.  Survey of Underground Facilities. If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements. 
L.  Noncomplying Work. Upon order of the City Engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Chapter, shall be removed. 
M.  Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city ways and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit within city ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance. 
N.  As-Built Drawings. Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the City with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. 
O.  Restoration of Improvements. Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and provide property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of construction. 
P.  Landscape Restoration: 
1.  All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise, license, permit replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work. 
2.  All restoration work within the public ways shall be done is accordance with landscape plans approved by the City Engineer. 
Q.  Construction Surety. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in Section 12-11-12T. 
R.  Exceptions. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this Section. 
S.  Responsibility of Owner. The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2008-12, 2-25-2008)  
12-11-14 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise: 
A.  Affiliate means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person. 
B.  Annual Gross Revenue. Reserved. 
C.  Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §532, et seq., as now and hereafter amended. 
D.  Cable Operator means a telecommunications carrier other than the holder of a State-issued authorization pursuant to Section 21-401 of the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-401) providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the City as that term is defined in the Cable Act. 
E.  Cable Service for the purpose of this Chapter shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act. 
F.  City means the City of Park Ridge. 
G.  City Property means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this Chapter. 
H.  Corporate Authorities means the Mayor and City Council of the City. 
I.  Excess Capacity means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities. 
J.  FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level. 
K.  ICC or Illinois Commerce Commission means the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois. 
L.  Other Ways means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights-of-way within the City, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the City. 
M.  Overhead Facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
N.  Person means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers. 
O.  Public Street means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the City which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. 
P.  Public Way means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the City, but only to the extent of the City's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities. 
Q.  State means the State of Illinois. 
R.  Surplus Space means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment. 
S.  Telecommunications Carrier means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property within the City, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service. 
T.  Telecommunications Facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
U.  Telecommunications Provider means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities. 
V.  Telecommunications Service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium. 
W.  Telecommunications System . See "Telecommunications Facilities." 
X.  Underground Facilities means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities. 
Y.  Usable Space means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Z.  Utility Easement means any easement owned by the City and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. 
AA.  Utility Facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the City and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services.  
12-11-15 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2003-37, 5-19-2003)  
CHAPTER 12 - GARAGE OR YARD SALES 
SECTION 
 
12-12-1 - DEFINITION 
Garage sale means any activity in which personal property, whether new or used, other than titled vehicles is offered for sale to the public and displayed in the yard, driveway or garage of residential property.  
12-12-2 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
A permit from the City is required for every garage sale.  
12-12-3 - PERSON ELIGIBLE TO OBTAIN PERMIT 
A garage sale permit may be issued only to the supervising resident of the property where the garage sale is to occur.  
12-12-4 - LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERMITS 
No more than three permits may be issued for the same location in any calendar year.  
12-12-5 - SIGNS AND BANNERS 
Signs or banners advertising the garage sale or giving directions to the location of the sale may not be attached to any utility pole, traffic control device or tree, nor placed anywhere within the public right-of-way, including the sidewalk, berm, parkway or street, anywhere within the City. The supervising resident of the property where the garage sale is located shall be presumed to be the person placing or causing the placement of signs or advertising. Any signs or advertising, which violates this section, may be removed by any person and discarded in any trash container.  
12-12-6 - DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE 
Garage sales are permitted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. A permit shall authorize the garage sale to take place on no more than three consecutive calendar days.  
12-12-7 - OBTAINING AND POSTING PERMIT 
Application for a garage sale permit shall be made to the City identifying the location of the sale, the name and telephone number of the supervising resident, and the dates of the sale. The permit shall be displayed at the location of the garage sale at all times when the sale is in progress. 
(Ord. 2005-113, 11-21-2005)  
12-12-8 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY 
Any person who shall conduct a garage sale without a permit, or in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not less than $50.00.  
CHAPTER 13 - VALET PARKING BUSINESSES 
SECTION 
 
12-13-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Valet Parking Operator means a person who provides a valet parking service for patrons of any business establishment, including his own business. 
B.  Valet Parking Service means a service provided to patrons of any business establishment, which service is incidental to the business of the establishment and by which a person on behalf of the establishment takes temporary custody of the patron's motor vehicle and moves, parks, stores or retrieves the vehicle for the patrons' convenience. 
C.  Director means the Director of Public Works of the City of Park Ridge.  
12-13-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED—APPLICATION—FEE 
A.  No person shall conduct a valet parking service unless he has a valid valet parking operator license issued in accordance with this Chapter. 
B.  Application for a valet parking operator license shall be made to the Director on forms provided by him for that purpose. Each valet parking operator license issued shall be for a one-year period only, commencing on January 1, and shall have designated thereon the name and address of the licensee and the business establishment(s) to be served by the licensee. 
C.  Applications for the renewal of a valet parking operator license shall be made to the Director on forms provided by him for that purpose not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of the license to be renewed. 
D.  A valet parking operator license shall be nontransferable, and any attempt to transfer a license shall result automatically in the immediate expiration of the license. 
E.  The fee for a valet parking operator license or renewal thereof shall be $ 100.00.  
12-13-3 - ISSUANCE CONDITIONS 
A.  No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the Director that he has obtained liability insurance covering all locations at which he operates or seeks to operate in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for general liability and property damage, and $100,000.00 per occurrence for garage keeper's legal liability. The insurance policy shall be for a term at least coextensive with the duration of the license and shall not be subject to cancellation except upon 30 days' prior notice to the Director. Upon termination or lapse of the licensee's insurance coverage, any license issued to him shall automatically expire. 
B.  No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the Director that each business establishment for which the valet parking service is to be provided has made available a loading zone at least 25 feet in length within 100 yards of its premises for the pickup and delivery of the patrons vehicles. Where the loading zone is to be on-street, the business establishment must have obtained approval of the Director for the location of the loading zone. A single loading zone may serve more than one business establishment served by a single valet parking operator. 
C.  No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued to any applicant who has been found in violation of any provision of this chapter two or more times within the 180-day period prior to the date of the application or three or more times within the 365-day period prior to the date of the application.  
12-13-4 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
A.  Every valet parking operator shall, during the hours of service display an 18-inch by 24-inch valet parking license sign in front of the business establishment being served and, if the loading zone for that establishment is not immediately adjacent to the business establishment, a similar sign at the loading zone. The sign shall display the name of the operator and cost, if any, on the valet parking license sign in four-inch dark blue lettering. 
B.  No valet parking operator shall park or permit its agent to park patrons' vehicles upon any public property except at locations approved by the Director, nor upon any private property except with permission of the owner thereof. 
C.  Every valet parking operator shall place or cause his agent to place on the dashboard of each patron vehicle a sign or placard of a size no smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in such a manner so as to be conspicuously visible through the windshield of the patron vehicle. The sign or placard shall contain the following information in red or black letters no less than one inch high: "This Vehicle Parked By (valet parking operator) For Customer Of (business establishment)." In addition each attendant of a valet parking operator shall while on duty, wear conspicuously placed on his clothing an insignia which identifies the valet parking operator for whom the attendant is working. 
D.  All valet parking attendants must, upon taking custody of a patron's vehicle, issue a numbered receipt to each customer containing the name, address and telephone number of the company providing the valet service, a statement that the company has liability insurance as required by law, the cost of the valet service, and the time and date the valet parking operator took custody of the vehicle from the patron. 
E.  Upon presentation by the patron to the parking attendant of the numbered receipt, the patron's vehicle shall be delivered in a timely manner to the loading zone. Upon returning a vehicle to a patron, the parking attendant shall time stamp the receipt with the time and date the valet parking operator surrendered custody of the vehicle. No valet parking operator shall cease operation until all vehicles have been returned to all patrons.  
12-13-5 - VIOLATION; PENALTY 
A valet parking operator license may be suspended or revoked by the Director upon not less than 48 hours' notice to the licensee and an opportunity to be heard, and a finding by the Director that the licensee has violated any provision of this Chapter. In addition, any person convicted in a court of law of a violation of any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 for each offense, and each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.  
CHAPTER 14 - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW[9] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-80, 10-15-2007. 
 
12-14-1 - CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW 
A.  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the City's boundaries. 
B.  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this Chapter shall be incorporated into this Chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City.  
12-14-2 - ENFORCEMENT 
The City does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the City.  
12-14-3 - PENALTIES 
The City, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
A.  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
B.  The City shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
C.  A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in (b).  
12-14-4 - CUSTOMER CREDITS 
The City hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-80, 10-15-2007)  
CHAPTER 15 - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE[10] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-81, 10-15-2007. 
 
12-15-1 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Cable Service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
B.  Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
C.  Gross Revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the City. 
1.  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
a.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
b.  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
c.  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
d.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges. 
e.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service termination charges. 
f.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
g.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the City. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the City divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
h.  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix). 
i.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
j.  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
2.  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
a.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
b.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
c.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
d.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the City and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
e.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
f.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
g.  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
3.  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
D.  Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
E.  PEG means public, education and governmental. 
F.  PEG Access Support Fee means the amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the City for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
G.  Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
H.  Service Provider Fee means the amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a City for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
I.  Video Service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.  
12-15-2 - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED 
A.  Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the City. 
B.  Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the holder's gross revenues. 
C.  Notice to the City. The holder shall notify the City at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the City. 
D.  Holder's Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the City. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this Chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the City. 
E.  Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
F.  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the City in which a fee is paid. 
G.  Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section 12-15-2(b).  
12-15-3 - PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED 
A.  PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the City in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to 12-15-2. 
B.  Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the City or its designee for PEG access support in the City. 
C.  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City or to the entity designated by the City to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 12-15-2(d). 
D.  Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
E.  Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under Section 12-15-3(b).  
12-15-4 - APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES 
All determinations and calculations under this Chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.  
12-15-5 - NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the City, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the City's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.  
12-15-6 - AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER 
A.  Audit Requirement. The City will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the City imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the City. If all local franchises between the City and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
B.  Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the City's submission of an invoice for the sum.  
12-15-7 - LATE FEES/PAYMENTS 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.  
CHAPTER 16 - TEMPORARY OVERNIGHT SHELTERS[11] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2008-82, 11-17-2008. 
 
12-16-1 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Client. A person using the services of an overnight shelter. 
B.  Director. The Director of Community Preservation and Development. 
C.  Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or company or any organization of any kind. 
D.  Temporary Overnight Shelter or Shelter. As defined in Section 16.3 of the Zoning Ordinance.  
12-16-2 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain or to permit to be conducted, operated or maintained or participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance of a temporary overnight shelter in the City of Park Ridge without a valid license issued by the City. Any entity required to be an applicant for a Special Use Permit for a temporary overnight shelter shall also be required to be an applicant for the license for such a shelter. 
B.  A temporary overnight shelter license shall be valid for a period of one year form the date of issuance and may be renewed for additional one-year periods provided that it complies with all applicable Code provisions and ordinances of the City. 
C.  Licenses shall be not transferable either as to location or to person or organization. 
D.  Upon completion of all inspections of the premises and a review of a completed application, the Director shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding whether to issue a temporary overnight shelter license to an applicant that meets the required standards set forth in this Chapter and all applicable sections of the Park Ridge Municipal Code and ordinances of the City. The City Council shall vote whether to accept or reject the Director's recommendation. 
E.  At the second City Council meeting in May of each year, the City Manager shall issue a written report to the City Council on the number, location and status of temporary overnight shelters in the City. This shall include, but not be limited to, the number and nature of complaints received for each location and the number and nature of any calls for police assistance at each location.  
12-16-3 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE 
A.  Application for a temporary overnight shelter shall be made to the Director of Community Preservation and Development on forms provided and shall include: 
1.  The location of the premises for which the license is sought; 
2.  The proposed maximum number of persons to be housed in the shelter; 
3.  The total square footage, and calculation of same, of the sleeping area; 
4.  The name and address of the applicant or applicants if an individual and, if a firm, partnership, corporation or association, the principal address of the entity and name and address of its officers; 
5.  The name, address and telephone number of an individual that will be responsible for the supervision and management of the shelter; 
6.  The date of special use approval; 
7.  An Operation Plan. Such plan must include: 
8.  Guidelines to be used for the shelter, including but not limited to, policies regarding admission criteria, including health screening, background checks and provision of identification cards, procedures for termination of stay and procedures to limit length of stay; 
9.  A communication plan that describes how the applicant will communicate with the local community, neighborhood, business owners and adjacent neighbors on a regular basis, and how community issues and concerns will be addressed; 
10.  Rules to prevent loitering by clients of the Shelter. 
11.  If food is to be served, the plan for the service and/or preparation of such food; and 
12.  Such other information as determined by the Director in order to implement this Chapter. 
B.  The annual fee for a temporary overnight shelter license shall be $50.00.  
12-16-4 - REGULATIONS 
A.  Inspection. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Director shall cause an inspection to be made of the proposed shelter by the City's Fire Department and Health and Building Divisions. The applicant shall allow the City's staff and inspectors reasonable opportunity to inspect the applicant's location for which the license is requested and to interview the applicant's agents and employees. During the term of licensure, the shelter shall be open to inspection by any authorized City police official and fire, building or health inspector. 
B.  Display of License. The license issued by the City shall be posted in a conspicuous place within ten feet of the main entrance to the shelter. 
C.  Insurance. Any person engaged in the ownership, operation or management of a temporary overnight shelter shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect during the operation of the shelter, liability and property damage insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for general liability per occurrence, $1,000,000 for bodily injury and $2,000,000 for general aggregate from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois and subject to the approval of the City Manager. The applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance. 
D.  Not-for-Profit. No person shall own, operate or manage a temporary overnight shelter except on a not-for-profit basis and without charge to the temporary overnight shelter's occupants. 
E.  Maximum Daily Hours of Operation. No owner, operator, or manager of a shelter shall operate a shelter for more than 12 hours per 24-hour period and no occupant may remain in any temporary overnight shelter for more than 12 consecutive hours. No owner, operator or manager shall allow any person to remain in the temporary overnight shelter for a period in excess of 12 consecutive hours. 
F.  Staff Requirements. At all times that a shelter is actually serving clients, there shall be present at least 2 persons whose duty it is to assure compliance with all rules governing the operation of the shelter. If there are more than 20 clients, the shelter shall be required to have one additional staff person for each multiple of ten occupants and an additional staff person for each fraction over a multiple of ten. For example, if there are 15 clients, two staff persons are required. If there are 31 clients, four staff persons are required. Staff persons must remain awake the entire time the shelter is open. 
G.  Separation of Sleeping Areas. Each shelter shall provide separate sleeping areas: (1) for men, (2) for women; and (3) for parents with children, if applicable. 
H.  Medical Care. Medical care, nursing care or clinical services may not be offered as a regular service at any temporary overnight shelter. The prohibition in the prior sentence shall not apply to the following: (1) seasonal vaccines such as flu shots; (2) non-prescription items such as aspirin, aspirin substitutes or band-aid type dressings; (3) medical care or treatment in the event of an emergency; and (4) routine blood pressure or similar non-invasive testing. 
I.  Evacuation Diagram. In each temporary overnight shelter, a diagram shall be posted on each floor of a shelter that illustrates evacuation routes from the floor and the shelter in the event of an emergency. Such diagram shall measure no less than 20 inches square, and shall be posted in a place and manner where it will be readily visible to occupants. 
J.  Smoking Materials Prohibited. No person shall use smoking materials in any temporary overnight shelter. 
K.  Smoke Detectors. As part of the inspection required by this Chapter, the Fire Department will determine the number of smoke detectors required and the placement of such smoke detectors. All required smoke detectors must be in place and operational prior to each opening of the temporary overnight shelter. 
L.  Automatic Sprinkler Systems. A temporary overnight shelter shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Requirements, as amended, adopted and modified in Article 7, Chapter 1 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
M.  Fire Extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be installed and maintained in each temporary overnight shelter in accordance with the standards established by International Fire Code and the Life Safety Code. 
N.  Fire Alarms. Each temporary overnight shelter shall have a fire alarm as required by Article 7, Chapter 1 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
O.  Sanitary Requirements. Each temporary overnight shelter shall provide a minimum of one water closet for each 20 occupants. 
P.  Food Preparation. Only an operator of a food service establishment that has received a permit pursuant to Article 5, Chapter 3 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code may serve food at a temporary overnight shelter. This shall be accomplished in accordance with all applicable state and local codes and regulations. 
Q.  Means of Egress. Each temporary overnight shelter shall maintain adequate exits in accordance with all applicable codes. All exit routes shall remain clear, unaltered and unobstructed. 
R.  Additional Restrictions and Prohibitions: 
1.  No Licensee shall knowingly allow any occupant to bring weapons, alcohol or unprescribed drugs into the shelter. 
2.  No Licensee shall allow any occupant of the shelter to store personal belongings at the shelter during hours when the shelter is not in operation.  
12-16-5 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
A.  The Director may revoke a temporary overnight shelter license for violating any federal, state or local law, rule or regulation, or for making a false statement on the license or special use application; or for interfering with any governmental, official or other authorized City employee in the performance of his or her duties. 
B.  Prior to revocation, the Director shall notify, in writing, the licensee of the specific reasons for which the license is to be revoked and that the license shall be revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice, unless the licensee files a written request for a hearing with the Director within such ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license becomes final. 
C.  The Director may also suspend a license and close a shelter, without providing notice, whenever an inspection reveals that a shelter is in violation of any regulation and poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety. In cases of such emergency closure, notice and an opportunity for a hearing on the revocation shall be provided to the licensee after the shelter has been closed. The licensee will have ten days to file a written request for a hearing as provided in Paragraph B. If no written request is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the license becomes final. 
D.  If a written request for a hearing is filed, a hearing shall be held before the Director. The Director shall issue written factual findings and a written recommendation regarding revocation to the City Council who shall act on the recommendation within 30 days of receiving the recommendation of the Director.  
12-16-6 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 for each violation. Each day such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.  
CHAPTER 17 - GENERAL CONDITIONS[12] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
History— Ord. 2012-89, 12-3-2012. 
 
12-17-1 - APPLICATION FOR BUSINESS LICENSE 
A.  Procedure on Application. In absence of provisions to the contrary or except as may be specifically provided elsewhere in this Code, applications for all business licenses shall be made, in writing, to the Department of Community Preservation and Development on the form provided by the City. 
B.  Application Form. The application form shall require the following information: 
1.  Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation, or a limited liability corporation; 
2.  The full name, residence address, residence phone number for each individual applicant, partner, member share owner of a limited liability company, and principal officers; 
3.  Location or proposed location of the business, occupation, or activity. 
4.  Type of license desired; 
5.  Length of time for which such license is desired; 
6.  A statement as to whether licenses granted by any state, municipality or other licensing authority, have ever been suspended or revoked or whether such license issuance or renewal has ever been refused to any person required to be named in B(2) above and the reasons for any such revocation or refusal 
7.  A statement as to whether any person required to be named in B(2) above has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the nature and the penalty assessed; 
8.  Any additional information as may be required by this Code or by the Department of Community Preservation and Development.  
12-17-2 - ISSUANCE 
A.  Issuance of License. Within 30days of the receipt of any completed license application, the Department of Community Preservation and Development is authorized to grant or renew any license contemplated under Section 12-17-1 of this Chapter for any period of time not exceeding one year upon payment by the applicant of the appropriate fees and/or bond as may be required elsewhere in this Code. 
B.  Investigation. The Department of Community Preservation and Development may make or cause to be made an investigation in regard to such licenses or business inspection certificates to be granted in connection with all fire prevention, building and zoning matters. 
C.  Applicability. This Chapter shall apply to all licenses which are required for the operation of any business activity within the City. 
D.  Disqualification. The Department of Community Preservation and Development shall issue a license to operate a business establishment unless it is found that: 
1.  The establishment is in violation of any condition that would be cause for revocation of a license; 
2.  The establishment does not meet the terms and provisions of any other published rule or regulation of the City or other governmental authority; 
3.  The application contains a false, fraudulent, or misleading material statement; 
4.  The applicant has suffered a revocation or refusal to issue or renew a similar license by any state, municipality or licensing authority; or 
5.  The applicant did not pass any required inspections; 
6.  Any of the following persons have not paid any fees, fines, judgment or forfeitures due and owing the City: (a) manager, owner or beneficial owner of the building or zoning lot in or on which the establishment is to be located; (b) applicant; (c) owner of the business; (d) landlord; (e) prior license holder for the same premises; (f) any predecessor to the business interest of the applicant; or (g) the current license holder. 
7.  Any cannabis business establishment, as that term is defined by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, P.A. 101-0027, is disqualified from receiving any business license, or operating such a business, within the City of Park Ridge, except in compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program. 
E.  Signatures. Each such license contemplated in this Chapter shall bear the signature of the City Manager and the City Clerk. 
F.  Display License. All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place and visible to patrons and/or representatives of the City. 
G.  Not a Limitation. Nothing in this Article 12 shall be construed to limit the City's authority granted in any other section of the Municipal Code. 
H.  No Proration. No license shall be issued at less than the yearly fees; provided, however, that, where such license is issued on or after July 1, the fee shall be one-half of the yearly fee. A penalty of 20% of the fee set forth in Section 12-2-7 shall be added for late payment of the license. Any commercial business establishment operated by a governmental or religious institution shall be exempt from the license fee. 
I.  Records. The Department of Community Preservation and Development shall maintain a record of all commercial establishments as from time to time may be deemed necessary for the purpose of classifying, inspecting and serving all commercial establishments in the City. The City shall issue a tag or sticker or certificate or similar evidence of licensure that shall be displayed by the owner of the commercial establishment in a conspicuous place. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 1, 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-53 shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1, 2020, but not before its passage, approval and publication according to law. The Director of Community Preservation and Development is authorized and directed to enforce the terms and conditions of Article 12, Chapter 17, as amended hereby.  
12-17-3 - CONDITIONS OF LICENSE 
A.  Building and Premises: No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, occupation or activity if the premises do not fully comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and City regulations. 
B.  Change of Location: Except as otherwise provided in the Code, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed provided 30 days' notice is given, in writing, to the Department of Community Preservation and Development and that any increase in fees, as required by this Code, is paid. 
C.  Nontransferability of License: No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. 
D.  License Term: Unless otherwise specified in this Code, all annual licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter and shall terminate on December 31 following such issuance.  
12-17-4 - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL 
A.  Procedure. Any license contemplated or issued under this chapter may be suspended up to 60 days or revoked by the City, or an application for issuance or renewal of such license may be refused by the City, if it is determined that the applicant or license holder: 
1.  Has made any false, fraudulent, or misleading material statement on the application; or 
2.  Has made any false, fraudulent, or misleading material statement, or has been found guilty of perpetrating a fraud upon any person, whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the course of conducting any business in the City, or that the applicant or license holder has committed a felony; or 
3.  Has conducted any activities directly related to his or her business in the City in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or 
4.  Has suffered a revocation or refusal to issue or renew such license by any state, municipality, or licensing authority; or 
5.  Has failed to pay any taxes, fees, or fines owed to the City; or 
6.  Has created a condition or conducted or performed an act, practice, or trade that would be classified as a nuisance or would result in a nuisance; or 
7.  Has committed an act considered home repair fraud as defined in Chapter 815, Act 515, Sections 3 and 5 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (815 ILCS 515/3 and 5); or 
8.  Made false statements on any permit application; or 
9.  Failed to meet the requirements of this Article 12; or 
10.  Interfered with any City employee or official in the performance of his or her duties; or 
11.  Has been convicted of any felony as defined in Chapter 720, Act 5, Sections 2-7 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (720 ILCS 5/2-7). 
B.  Prior to revocation, suspension, or refusal to issue a license, the Department of Community Preservation and Development shall notify, in writing, the applicant or holder of the business license of the specific reasons for which the license is to be suspended, revoked or for which renewal will be denied. The notification will inform the applicant or license holder of the right to request, within ten days of receipt of the notice, a hearing before the Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer regarding the proposed action. Unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the Department of Community Preservation and Development within such ten calendar day period, the license shall be revoked and the decision of the Department of Community Preservation and Development shall be final. 
C.  The notice shall be personally served or mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant or license holder at the last known address of the license holder or applicant listed on the most recent application for a license. 
D.  The Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer, within 7 calendar days of receipt of a request for a hearing, will set a date, place, and time for the hearing and shall notify the applicant or license holder of the date, place, and time of the hearing via a notice personally delivered or sent by U.S. Mail, postage prepaid. The initial date for a hearing shall be no more than 21 calendar days after receipt of the written request for a hearing. 
E.  The applicant or license holder shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at such hearing. 
F.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision and findings of fact and shall mail the same to the applicant or license holder. The written decision shall state that the applicant or license holder may seek judicial review of the decision pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law. The decision and findings of fact shall be mailed within five (5) business days following the conclusion of the hearing or the receipt of any transcript of the hearing, whichever is the latest to occur. 
G.  24 hours before the commencement of any suspension or revocation, the City of Park Ridge Health Authority or Police Department shall post on all entrances to the licensed premises a placard entitled, "Notice of Closure." The title shall be in letters not less than one inch (1") high. In the case of a suspension, the notice of closure shall give the times of the suspension and in the case of a revocation state the exact time when the revocation goes into effect. The notice of closure shall also state the section number and title of the city code or state law which has been violated, along with the telephone number of the appropriate City department that may be called for additional information. The notice of closure shall not be removed before the suspension period or less than seven days after the posting of a revocation notice. 
H.  A court reporter will be provided by the City for all hearings held pursuant to this Chapter.  
12-17-5 - OPERATING WITHOUT A LICENSE; PENALTY 
A.  If any person operates a business or other activity without a required license or after renewal of license has been refused for any reason, that person shall be fined not less than $100.00 per day nor more than $500.00 per day. 
B.  Penalty. In addition to the revocation and suspension procedure set forth above, any person or any owner of a commercial establishment in the City violating any of the terms or provisions of this Chapter or of the Park Ridge Municipal Code, upon a finding of guilty or liable, shall be fined in an amount not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue.  
12-17-6 - TRANSFER/ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE 
No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral, or otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or display any license certificate, tag, badge, or sticker which has been improperly acquired.  
12-17-7 - PAYMENT AND RELOCATION 
The required fee for each license issued shall be collected in full at the time of the issuance. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any portion of any fee, by any reason of non-use or discontinuance of the operation of the commercial establishment. In the event a commercial establishment moves its place of operation from one location in the City to another location in the City, a new license and license fee shall be required for the new location in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER 18 - SCAVENGERS 
SECTION 
 
12-18-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of scavenger/junk hauler without having first secured a license from the City. Application for the license shall be made in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Article except that the application will be processed and issued by the Police Department. As part of the application process, the applicant shall agree to a criminal background check to be performed by the Park Ridge Police Department and shall provide information about each vehicle to be used.  
12-18-2 - REGULATIONS 
A.  Any vehicle used for scavenging and hauling shall be equipped with a cover or covers that may be securely fastened to prevent refuse from coming loose or leaking. All vehicles, boxes or containers used or leased by a scavenger shall be kept securely closed during hauling. 
B.  Each licensed scavenger must have its license when engaged in the activities of scavenging or junk hauling and shall produce the license upon request to any law enforcement officer or inspector from the City. 
C.  A license shall not be issued to any applicant who has a warrant outstanding for any criminal offense or who has been found guilty of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving theft within five years prior to application.  
ARTICLE 13 - TRAFFIC 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 
 
13-1-1 - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE; EXCEPTIONS 
A.  There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois Vehicle Code, being Illinois Compiled Statutes (1992), 625 ILCS as it presently exists and as hereafter amended, the same being a public record of the State, with the exception of certain Sections thereof hereinafter set forth. 
B.  Excluded from adoption by reference by this Section are the following sections of the aforesaid Illinois Vehicle code: 
•  Chapter 2 in its entirety, 625 ILCS 5/2 
•  Chapter 3, Article I, II, V, VI, VIII and IX. 
•  Chapter 5, 625 ILCS 5/5 
•  Chapter 7, 625 ILCS 5/7 
•  Chapter 8, 625 ILCS 5/8 
•  Chapter 9, 625 ILCS 5/9 
•  Chapter 10, 625 ILCS 5/10 
•  Chapter 13, 625 ILCS 5/13-101 to 114 
•  Chapter 15, 625 ILCS 5/15-100 To and Incl. 110 
•  Chapter 16, 625 ILCS 5/16 -101 to 107 
•  Chapter 17, 625 ILCS 5/17 
•  Chapter 18, 625 ILCS 5/18 
•  Chapter 20, 625 ILCS 5/20 
All miscellaneous laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-46, 6-5-2006)  
13-1-2 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
Whenever in this Article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Illinois Compiled Statutes (1992), 625 ILCS: 
Alley, bicycles, bus, commercial vehicle, crosswalks, driver, explosive, farm tractor, flammable liquids, improved highway, intersection, laned roadway, merging traffic, metal tires, motorcycles, motor vehicle, park, passenger car, pedestrian, pneumatic tire, recreational vehicle, right-of-way, road tractor, safety zone, school bus, semi-tractor, sidewalk, solid tire, street or highway, traffic, trailer, truck, truck tractor, urban district, vehicle and yield right-of-way.  
13-1-3 - OBEDIENCE TO POLICE 
Members of the Police Department, and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this Article or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except in case of emergency it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.  
13-1-4 - SCENE OF FIRE 
The Fire Department officer in command or any firefighter designated by him may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer, in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police.  
13-1-5 - POSTING SIGNS 
The Director of Public Works shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all through streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections.  
13-1-6 - SIGNS AND SIGNALS 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the City Council, or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting on directions of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction of the Municipal authorities shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.  
13-1-7 - ADVERTISING SIGNS 
It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the City any sign, signal, marking or device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the City Council or the Illinois State Department of 
Transportation, which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic-control device. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway any flashing or rotating beacon of light.  
CHAPTER 2 - RULES FOR DRIVING 
SECTION 
 
13-2-1 - ENTERING STREET 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or across such lines. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway.  
13-2-2 - TURNING AROUND; HAMLIN AVENUE 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to make a U-turn on Hamlin Avenue within 200 feet of the entrances to Maine South High School. For purposes of this Section, the term "U-turn" shall, in addition to its common meaning, include the driving of a vehicle into a driveway for the purpose of changing the direction of travel of such vehicle.  
13-2-3 - LEFT TURNS RESTRICTED 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left at any place designated in Chapter 5 of this Article.  
13-2-4 - THROUGH STREETS 
The streets and parts of streets of the City designated in Chapter 6 of this Article as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and yield the right-of-way to other vehicle which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic-control signal.  
13-2-5 - RESIDENTIAL STREETS—SPEED LIMIT 
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street within the City at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour except where otherwise authorized and posted by the authorities of the State of Illinois, the County of Cook or of the City, or to drive any motor vehicle in any alley at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour: 
•  On Dee Road between Devon and Talcott. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour: 
•  On Canfield Road between Belle Plaine and Talcott.  
13-2-6 - SLEDS ON STREETS 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle, to go upon any roadway other than a crosswalk.  
13-2-7 - RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board, outside step or other exterior part of any vehicle, excluding those vehicles engaged in Municipal functions.  
13-2-8 - TRUCKS PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to drive any truck on any street so designated in Section 13-5-3 of this Article and so properly sign posted except for the purpose of making a delivery and then for one block only.  
13-2-9 - LIMITED LOAD STREETS 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the City when the gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds 16,000 pounds. Where lower limits are imposed and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose.  
13-2-10 - ACCIDENTS 
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage, shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and give his true name and residence to the injured person, or any other person requesting the same on behalf of the injured person; the owner of the property damaged, and to a police officer, if one is present. A report of each such accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle concerned in it to the Police Chief within 24 hours after the accident.  
13-2-11 - SCHOOL ZONE SPEED LIMIT 
On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school. For the purpose of this Section, a school day shall begin at 7:00 a.m. and shall conclude at 4:00 p.m. 
For the purposes of this Section and 625 ILCS 5/11-605, the following areas are designated school zones: 
Street 	From - To 
Albion 	Fairview to Prospect 
Cherry 	Hamlin to 150' west of Broadway 
Clifton 	Bonita to Granville 
Cuttriss 	Elmore to Wisner 
Dee 	Manor to Habberton 
Elmore 	Cuttriss to 400' north of Cuttriss 
Fairview 	Albion to Talcott 
Granville 	Cumberland to Clifton 
Hamlin 	Elm to Cherry 
Manor 	Tyrell to Dee 
Prospect 	Albion to Talcott 
Steward 	Knight to Home 
Talcott 	Knight Avenue to Dee Road 
Western 	Garden to Stewart 
Wisner 	Cuttriss to 400' north of Cuttriss 
 
(Ord. No. 2005-67, 10-17-2005)  
13-2-12 - SEAT BELTS REQUIRED 
A.  Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this Section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Chapter 625 ILCS 5/1 et seq.: "driver," "motor vehicle," "passenger car," "motorcycle," "motorized pedalcycle," "motor driven cycle," "operator" or "roadway." 
B.  Violations, Exceptions, Penalties, Applicability. 
1.  Each driver and each passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a roadway in this City shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt; except that a child less than six years of age shall be protected as required pursuant to the Illinois Child Passenger Protection Act (625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.). Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child six years of age or more, but less than 16 years of age, in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. 
2.  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle for roadway maintenance or roadway construction, if the speed of the vehicle between stops does not exceed 15 miles per hour. 
b.  A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons to wear a safety belt. 
c.  A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or county indicating that the driver or passenger is unable for medical, physical, or other valid reasons to wear a safety belt. 
d.  A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse. 
e.  A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965. 
f.  A motorcycle, motorized pedalcycle or motor driven cycle. 
g.  A motor vehicle, which is not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law. 
3.  Violation of any provision of this Section is hereby declared to be a petty offense. Any operator of a motor vehicle convicted of a violation hereunder shall be fined up to $50.00 but not less than $25.00. Any passenger convicted of a violation hereunder shall be fined not less than $25.00. 
4.  Any police officer may stop any motor vehicle, or driver or passenger of such vehicle solely on the basis of a violation or suspected violation of this Section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any roadway within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007)  
13-2-13 - OPERATION WITHOUT A LICENSE 
No person who does not have a valid driver's license may operate any motorized vehicle of any kind or nature, including motor driven scooters, on any public property within the City of Park Ridge. Public property shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, sidewalks and streets (including private streets). 
For purposes of this Section, a motor driven scooter is defined as any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, cycle or other vehicle that does not provide the following factory installed equipment: (1) a permanent seat for the operator of the vehicle; and (2) brake lights and turn signals. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-40, 10-21-2002)  
13-2-14 - PARK ZONE STREETS AND SPEED LIMITS 
A.  On any day when children are present and within 50 feet of motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, or any lower posted speed limit, while traveling on a park zone street. 
C.  On any day when children are present and within 50 feet of motorized traffic, no person shall fail to come to a complete stop at a stop sign or red light while traveling on a park zone street or at an intersection before turning right onto a park zone street. 
D.  A first violation of this Section is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $250.00. A second or subsequent offense if a petty offense with a minimum fine of $500.00. In addition, when a fine is imposed, the person who has violated this Section will be charged an additional $50.00, to be paid to the park district for safety purposes. 
E.  For purposes of this Section and 625 ILCS 5/11-605.3, the following streets are designated park zone streets: 
Street 	From 	To 
Seminary 	Touhy 	Des Plaines 
Western 	Touhy 	Crescent 
Washington 	Granville 	Glenlake 
Granville 	east from Washington 	dead end 
Dee Road 	Manor 	Glenview 
Glenview 	Dee Road 	Northwest Hwy 
Manor 	from Dee Road 	175' west 
Western 	Poplar 	Greendale 
Poplar 	Parkside 	Western 
Parkside 	Poplar 	Glenview 
 
(Ord. No. 2007-72, 9-4-2007)  
CHAPTER 3 - PEDESTRIANS 
SECTION 
 
13-3-1 - SOLICITING RIDES 
No person shall stand in a roadway or in proximity to a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.  
CHAPTER 4 - BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS 
SECTION 
 
13-4-1 - LAW APPLICABLE 
Bicycles are hereby classed as vehicles and every person operating a bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of all State vehicle laws and all traffic ordinances except such provisions in conflict with this Article, or which by their nature can have no application.  
13-4-2 - EQUIPMENT 
A.  Light: Every bicycle used at nighttime shall be equipped with a light on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type required by state statute which must be visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector. 
B.  Sirens: A bicycle may not be equipped with nor may any person use any siren on a bicycle. This subsection B does not apply to a bicycle that is a police vehicle or fire department vehicle. 
C.  Brakes: Every bicycle must be equipped with a brake that will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle. 
D.  Reflectors: No person may sell a new bicycle that is not equipped with all of the following reflector equipment: 
1.  A reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by the state, on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet; 
2.  Side reflectors that are visible from each side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and must be essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle provided. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by reflective materials which are at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. The reflectors must conform to specifications prescribed by the state; and 
3.  A front-facing reflector that is essentially colorless. 
( Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
13-4-3 - OPERATION 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Riding on Sidewalks. Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks except where such operation is prohibited under Section 13-4-4 of this Chapter. When operating a bicycle on a sidewalk or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, the operator of a bicycle must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and give an audible signal before overtaking or passing any pedestrian. 
C.  Position of Bicycles on Roadways and Bicycle Paths: 
1.  Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing must ride as close as practicable and safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations: 
a.  When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedal cycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or 
b.  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; or 
c.  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles, motorized pedal cycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge. For purposes of this subsection, a "substandard width lane" means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane; or 
d.  When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized. 
2.  Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable. 
D.  Multiple Bicycles. No person riding bicycles upon a roadway may ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast may not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, must ride within a single lane in accordance with the restrictions contained in subsection E above. 
E.  Coming Out of Alleys, Driveways or Buildings. The operator of a bicycle coming out of any alley, driveway or building shall stop before riding on or across a sidewalk or into a roadway if the view is obscured. Such operator shall in all cases yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk, and to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
F.  Clinging to Vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.. 
G.  Extra Passengers. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his person in a back pack or sling. 
H  Carry Articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry a package, bundle or article which prevents him from keeping both hands on the handlebars, or from operating the bicycle in a proper and efficient manner. 
I.  Trick Riding. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle on the public streets to indulge in any kind of trick or unsafe riding. 
( Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
13-4-4 - PROHIBITED AREAS; BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle, skateboard or similar device upon sidewalks within the following areas of the City: 
Street 	From 	To 
Fairview 	Garden 	Main 
Main 	Prospect 	Touhy 
Northwest Hwy 	Washington 	Cedar 
Prospect 	Garden 	Northwest Hwy 
Pathway between Meacham and Morris 
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard or similar device upon sidewalks or the underground parking garage within the following areas of the City: 
Uptown (Target Area 2) bounded by Touhy Ave., Northwest Hwy and Meacham Ave. 
Library and City Commons bounded by Touhy Ave., Prospect Ave. and Summit Ave. 
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct the Director of Public Works to erect signs on any street, sidewalk, underground parking garage, or public place prohibiting the riding of bicycles, skateboards or similar devices thereon when traffic conditions make it necessary, and when such signs are in place it shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle, skateboard or similar device on such street, sidewalk, underground parking garage, or other public place. 
Upon apprehension of any person under the age of 16 years, the police may give verbal notice of the violation to the parents or guardian of the violator. Additionally, the police may refer the juvenile to an alternative, non-court program. Any person age 16 years of age or older who commits a violation may be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-91, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-49, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
13-4-5 - PARKING 
A.  A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or restricted by an official traffic-control device. 
B.  A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic. 
C.  A person may not park a bicycle on a roadway in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle. 
D.  In all other respects, bicycles parked anywhere on a highway must conform with the provisions of this Code regulating the parking of vehicles. 
No bicycle shall be operated or parked on any street, sidewalk or other public place in such manner as to unreasonably block or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to designate certain areas in any congested district where bicycles may be parked and when such areas have been so designated it shall be unlawful to park bicycles in such congested district except in such areas. Where bicycle racks are provided the racks must be used. 
( Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
13-4-6 - PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY 
The parents of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, and any parent or guardian authorizing or knowingly permitting such violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of the penalties provided for violations of other motor vehicle laws.  
13-4-7 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 17, 2018, repealed former § 13-4-7 which pertained to licenses, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-30, adopted April 2, 2007.  
13-4-8 - PENALTY 
Upon apprehension of any person under the age of 16 years, the police shall give notice of the violation to the parents or guardian of the violator. Any person over the age of 16 who commits a violation for which no specific penalty is provided herein shall be subject to the general penalties for violation of the Traffic Code.  
13-4-9 - BIKE ROUTES 
The City Council will establish bike routes from time-to-time by resolution, policy, or plan. Signs will be placed along the established bike routes to designate that where the bike route is located. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2018-52, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2018)  
CHAPTER 5 - PROHIBITIONS AGAINST TURNS AND LOADS 
SECTION 
 
13-5-1 - LEFT TURN PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a left turn within the periods specified at the following intersections: 
Brophy Avenue southbound at Higgins Road. No left turn at any time. 
Devon (eastbound) onto Cleveland (northbound) between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
Greenwood southbound to eastbound Cedar, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Greenwood. No left turn into or out of the driveway on Greenwood south of Touhy at the Greenwood/Touhy Shopping Plaza on the southeast corner of Greenwood and Touhy. 
Morris Street northwest bound at Northwest Hwy. No left turn at anytime. 
Northwest Hwy southbound onto Morris Street. No left turn at anytime. 
Northwest Hwy southbound, onto northbound Prospect; 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Northwest Hwy southbound, onto eastbound Touhy; 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Northwest Hwy northwest bound, onto westbound Touhy; 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Northwest Hwy northwest bound onto southbound Prospect; 6:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Oakton Street at Busse Highway. No left turn from westbound Oakton Street to Busse Highway at any time. 
Prairie Avenue at Main Street. No left turn from north-east bound Prairie Avenue to Main Street at any time. 
Prospect Avenue southbound at Talcott and Through Traffic to Prospect, south of Talcott, 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m., school days only, No left turn 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.to 4 p.m. on school days only. 
Prospect Avenue, southbound only, at Main Street/Vine Avenue between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
South Northwest Hwy at entrance to drive-in of 1 South Northwest Hwy. No left turn at any time. 
South Prospect Avenue spur and S. Northwest Hwy. No left turn at any time. 
Talcott Road south eastbound at Prospect. No left 8 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days only. 
Third Street to Touhy. No left turn at any time. 
Touhy Avenue at Main Street. No left turn from westbound Touhy to Main Street at any time. 
Touhy Avenue at Third Street. No left turn at any time. 
Touhy Avenue at exit from drive-in of 1 South Northwest Hwy. No left turn at any time. 
Vine Avenue. No left turn onto Vine Avenue from exit of 401 Devon. 
South Washington Avenue, northbound at exit from St. Paul of the Cross Parking Lot, school days only, 7:45 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 3 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., Monday through Friday and 2 p.m. to 2:15 p.m. on Tuesday. 
(Ord. No. 2001-36, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 2003-46, 7-21-2003; Ord. No. 2006-65, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 2015-58, 11-2-2015)  
13-5-2 - RIGHT TURN PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a right turn within the periods specified at the following intersections: 
Westbound Cedar to northbound Greenwood, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Cumberland Avenue, northbound shall not make a right turn onto Garden. 
Cumberland Avenue, southbound to westbound St. James Place, from 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Granville Avenue, no right turn on red light from eastbound Granville onto southbound Cumberland Avenue. 
Touhy Avenue, no right turn onto Third Street.  
13-5-3 - TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle other than a passenger automobile, which is licensed as a passenger automobile by the State of Illinois, or any other state of registration, on the following streets: 
Avondale, between Cedar and Cumberland. 
Brophy, from first alley north of Higgins to Peterson. 
Chester, between Touhy and Cedar. 
Clifton, between Touhy and Cedar. 
Cumberland, between Touhy and Avondale. 
Dee Road, from Northwest Hwy to Oakton. 
Fairview, from the first alley north of Higgins to Peterson. 
Grace, between Touhy and Cedar. 
Greenwood Avenue, from Busse Hwy to Peterson. 
Oriole, from Sibley to a point 2,000 feet north of north curb line of Sibley. 
Western Avenue, from Elm to Peterson. 
Provided, however, that trucks shall be permitted to travel upon said streets for a distance of not more than one block for the purpose of making a delivery.  
CHAPTER 6 - THROUGH STREETS 
SECTION 
 
13-6-1 - STOPS AND THROUGH STREETS 
The streets named in Section 13-6-2 following are designated as through streets and stop signs shall be maintained in all entrances thereto. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a through street shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection to each through street or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of the approaching traffic on the intersecting highway, before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. Provided, however, that where yield right-of-way signs are maintained in lieu of said stop signs pursuant to Chapter 8 following, every driver at a through street intersection so marked shall be governed by the requirements and provisions contained in Chapter 8 following.  
13-6-2 - THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED 
The following streets or parts thereof are designated as through streets: 
Arthur, from Courtland to Canfield. 
Albion, from Cumberland to Canfield. 
Aldine, from Sibley to Cherry. 
Arthur, from Hamlin to Talcott. 
Austin, from Greenwood to Prospect. 
Belle Plaine, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Busse, between the northerly territorial limits and Touhy. 
Canfield, between the southerly territorial limits and Belle Plaine. 
Carol, from Western to Greenwood. 
Cedar, from and including its intersection with East Avenue to and including its intersection with Washington. 
Cedar, from Hamlin to Clifton. 
Cherry, from Aldine to Western. 
Courtland, between the southerly territorial limits and Prospect. 
Crescent, from Western to Courtland. 
Cumberland, between the southerly territorial limits and Touhy. 
Dee Road, between the southerly territorial limits and Northwest Hwy and from Farrell to Northwest Hwy. 
Dempster, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Devon, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
East, from Elm to Touhy. 
Elm, from and including its intersection with East Avenue to and including its intersection with Northwest Hwy and between Northwest Hwy and Busse Hwy; and between Greenwood and Dee. 
Elmore, from and including its intersection with MichaelJohn Drive to and including its intersection with Touhy. 
Farrell, from Lundergan and Vernon. 
Florence, from Sibley to Oakton. 
Garden, from Greenwood to Prospect. 
Glenlake, from South Greenwood to South Washington. 
Glenview, from Busse Highway to Hamlin. 
Granville, from Washington Street to Cumberland. 
Greenwood, between the southerly territorial limits and northern territorial limits. 
Hamlin, from Sibley to Touhy. 
Hamlin, from Talcott to Devon. 
Higgins Road, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Lahon, from Washington to Wisner. 
Lincoln, from Touhy to Talcott. 
Luther Lane, from Dempster to Weeg Way. 
Main Street, between Prospect and Touhy. 
Manor, from Northwest Hwy to Western. 
Meacham, from Sibley to Northwest Hwy. 
Michaeljohn Drive, from and including its intersection with Elmore to and including its intersection with Oakton. 
Michaeljohn Drive, from Prospect to Elmore. 
Northwest Hwy, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Oakton, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Parkside, from Weeg Way to Manor. 
Peterson, from South Western to South Washington. 
Potter, between the northerly territorial limits and Busse Hwy. 
Prospect, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Rose, from Touhy to Stewart. 
Rosemont, from South Cumberland to Courtland. 
Sibley, from Meacham to Oriole. 
Sibley, from Riverside to Aldine. 
South Washington Avenue, from Belle Plaine to Higgins. 
Stewart, from Rose to Courtland. 
Talcott, (also known as Algonquin Road and also known as Riverside Drive) throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Thorndale, from Courtland to Canfield. 
Touhy, throughout the territory comprising the City. 
Vernon, from Dempster to Oakton. 
Vine, from Prospect to Arthur. 
Virginia, from Riverside to Dee. 
Washington, from Oakton to Belle Plaine. 
Weeg Way, from Vernon to Western. 
Western, from Dempster to Elm. 
Western, from Talcott to Peterson. 
Western, between Talcott on the south and Elm on the north. 
Wisner, from Lahon to Elm. 
(Ord. No. 2002-37, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 2004-14, 3-1-2004; Ord. No. 2005-38, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 2005-66, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007)  
CHAPTER 7 - STOP INTERSECTIONS 
SECTION 
 
13-7-1 - STOPS AT INTERSECTIONS 
In addition to stops required at intersections associated with through streets as provided in Chapter 6 of this Article, the intersections named in Section 13-7-2 following are designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be maintained at the appropriate approaches to said intersections and thereupon the driver of every vehicle approaching said stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of the approaching traffic on the intersecting highway, before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer.  
13-7-2 - STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED 
The following intersections are designated as stop intersections and traffic shall stop as indicated below: 
Traffic on the Street Listed Below 	Shall Stop For 	The Street Listed Below 
Albion 		Fairview 
Albion 		Prospect 
Albion 		Western 
Arthur 		Western 
Arthur 		Vine 
Ashland 		Peterson 
Ashland 		Thorndale 
Ashland - Northbound 		Talcott Place 
Austin 		Greenwood 
Austin 		Washington 
Austin 		Grace 
Austin 		Meacham 
Belle Plaine 		Talcott 
Belle Plaine 		Vine 
Bonita Drive 		Clifton 
Bonita Drive 		Western 
Bouterse 		Rowe 
Broadway 		Cherry 
Broadway 		Elm 
Broadway 		Sibley 
Brophy 		Glenlake 
Carol 		Greenwood 
Carol 		Western 
Cedar 		Aldine 
Cedar 		Clifton 
Cedar 		Delphia 
Cedar 		Greenwood 
Cedar 		Hamlin 
Cedar 		Home 
Cedar 		Washington 
Cedar 		Seminary 
Cedar 		Knight 
Cherry 		Aldine 
Cherry 		Hamlin 
Cherry 		Home 
Cherry 		Merrill 
Cherry 		Wisner 
Chester 		Cedar 
Chester 		Garden 
Chester 		Stewart 
Chester 		West Crescent 
Church 		Hamlin 
Church 		Western 
Clifton 		Bonita 
Clifton 		Cedar 
Clifton 		Crescent 
Clifton 		Granville 
Clifton 		Peterson 
Courtland 		West leg of Albion 
Crain 		Western 
Crescent 		Fairview 
Crescent 		Home 
Crescent 		Lincoln 
Crescent 		Peterson 
Crescent 		Rose 
Crescent 		Western 
Cumberland 		Crescent 
Cuttriss 		East Avenue 
Cuttriss 		Merrill 
Cuttriss 		Washington 
Cuttriss 		Wisner 
Cynthia 		Western 
Dee 		Manor 
Delphia 		Cedar 
Delphia 		Crescent 
Delphia 		Stewart 
Delphia 		Lahon 
Des Plaines 		Home 
Devon 		Cumberland 
East Ave. 		Elm 
East Ave. 		Cuttriss 
East Ave. 		Sibley 
Elm 		Broadway 
Elm 		Busse 
Elm 		East Avenue 
Elm 		Greenwood 
Elm 		Hamlin 
Elm 		Meacham 
Elm 		Washington 
Elmore 		Cuttriss 
Elmore 		Elm 
Elmore 		Lahon 
Elmore 		MichaelJohn Drive 
Elmore 		Sibley 
Engel 		Stewart 
Evergreen 		Mayfield 
Euclid 		Summit 
Fairview 		Albion 
Fairview 		Garden 
Fairview 		Glenlake 
Fairview 		Granville 
Florence Drive 		Irwin 
Florence Drive 		Sibley 
Florence Drive 		Virginia 
Forestview 		Sibley 
Francis Parkway 		Cumberland 
Garden 		Fairview 
Garden 		Lincoln 
Glenview 		Hamlin 
Goodwin Drive 		Sibley 
Goodwin Drive 		Virginia 
Grace 		Cedar 
Grace 		Glenlake 
Grace 		Granville 
Grace 		Peterson 
Grace 		Austin 
Granville 		Clifton 
Granville 		Grace 
Granville 		Greenwood 
Granville 		Western 
Greenwood 		Crescent 
Greenwood 		Cedar 
Greenwood 		Granville 
Greenwood 		Peterson 
Greenwood 		Stewart 
Grove Avenue 		Yost 
Habberton 		Dee Road 
Habberton 		Vernon - Hamlin 
Habberton 		Hoffman 
Hamlin 		Cherry 
Hamlin 		Albion 
Hamlin 		Church 
Hamlin 		Gillick 
Hamlin 		Glenview 
Hamlin 		Manor 
Harrison 		Arthur 
Hoffman 		Habberton 
Home 		Ballard 
Home 		Church 
Home 		Sibley 
Home 		Stewart 
Irwin 		Forestview 
Irwin 		Park Plaine 
Kathleen Drive 		Washington 
Knight 		Stewart 
Knight 		Cedar 
Lahon 		East Avenue 
Lahon 		Elmore 
Lahon 		Greenwood 
Lahon 		Oriole 
Lahon 		Washington 
Lahon 		Western 
Lahon 		Lincoln 
Lake 		Vine 
Lake 		Washington 
Laverne 		Western 
Laverne 		Lincoln 
Leonard 		Hansen 
Lincoln 		Stewart 
Linden 		Thorndale 
Lois 		Western 
Main 		Prospect 
Manor 		Dee 
Manor 		Hamlin 
Marquerite 		Vernon - Hamlin 
Meacham 		Elm 
Meacham 		Austin 
Merrill 		Cuttriss 
Michaeljohn 		Elmore 
Michaeljohn 		Washington 
Morris 		Northwest Hwy 
Morris 		Busse Hwy 
Newton 		Thorndale 
Norman 		Home 
North Terrace 		Lincoln 
Oriole 		Cuttriss 
Ottawa 		Cuttriss 
Overhill 		Cuttriss 
Overhill 		Sibley 
Ozark 		Sibley 
Park Place 		Vine 
Park Plaine 		Sibley 
Parkside 		Ballard 
Parkside 		Church 
Parkside 		Davis 
Parkside 		Manor 
Parkwood 		Sibley 
Poplar 		Western 
Prairie 		Garden 
Prairie 		Clifton 
Prospect 		Albion 
Prospect 		West Crescent 
Prospect 		Elm 
Prospect 		Gillick 
Prospect 		Glenlake 
Prospect 		Sibley 
Redfield Court 		Elm 
Redfield Court 		Sibley 
Ridge 		Summit 
Root 		Elm 
Rose 		Cherry 
Rose 		Crescent 
Rose 		Sibley 
Rosemont 		Crescent 
Sibley 		Elmore 
Sibley 		Florence 
Sibley 		Forestview 
Sibley 		Hamlin 
Sibley 		Merrill 
Sibley 		Overhill 
Sibley 		Washington 
Sibley 		Wisner 
Spring 		Vine 
Stewart 		Engel 
Stewart 		Home 
Stewart 		Clifton 
Talcott Place 		Vine 
Third 		Garden 
Thorndale 		Ashland 
Vine 		Arthur 
Vine 		Granville 
Virginia 		Forestview 
Walnut 		Dee Road 
Walnut 		Vernon - Hamlin 
Washington 		Cuttriss 
Washington 		Elm 
Washington 		Lake Avenue 
Washington Pl. 		Summit 
Washington 		Thorndale 
Washington 		Sibley 
Washington 		Michaeljohn 
Weeg Way 		Vernon 
Wesley Drive 		Sibley 
Western 		Ballard 
Western 		Bonita 
Western 		Church 
Western 		Crescent 
Western 		Normal as extended into Park Ridge 
Western 		Stewart 
Wisner 		Cherry 
Wisner 		Cuttriss 
Wisner 		Elm 
Wisner 		Sibley 
Woodland 		Dee Road 
Woodland 		Vernon - Hamlin 
Woodview 		Ballard 
Woodview 		Church 
Yost 		Grove 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-34, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001-47, 11-5-2001; Ord. No. 2002-36, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 2004-11, 2-16-2004; Ord. No. 2004-38, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 2004-47, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 2004-49, 7-19-2004; Ord. No. 2004-67, 10-4-2004; Ord. No. 2006-12, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007; Ord. 2008-67, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2016-44 , § 1, 6-16-2016)  
CHAPTER 8 - YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS 
SECTION 
 
13-8-1 - YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY 
The intersections named in Section 13-8-2 following are designated as yield right-of-way intersections. Yield right-of-way signs shall be maintained at the appropriate approaches to said intersection and thereupon the driver of every vehicle approaching said sign shall reduce the speed of the vehicle to not more than 20 miles per hour and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting highway either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on said intersecting highway as to constitute an immediate hazard; but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. If a driver is involved in a collision at such intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prime facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.  
13-8-2 - YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED 
The following intersections are designated as yield right-of-way intersections and traffic shall yield as indicated: 
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS SCHEDULE 
Traffic on the Streets Listed Below 	Shall Yield Right-of-Way for 	The Streets Listed Below 
Thorndale 		Vine 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-69, 10-4-2004)  
CHAPTER 9 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
SECTION 
 
13-9-1 - ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED 
The following streets are designated as one-way streets to permit traffic in only the direction set forth below. It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle in the opposite direction: 
Street 	From 	To 	Direction 
Cedar 	Meacham 	Prospect 	Eastbound 
Delphia 	Garden 	Touhy 	Northbound 
Des Plaines 	Seminary 	Home 	Westbound 
Grant Place 	Prospect 	Washington 	Eastbound 
Hamlin 	Busse 	Seeley 	Northbound 
Lahon 	Wisner 	Washington 	Westbound 
Main 	Touhy 	Prairie 	Southeasterly 
Parkwood 	Busse 	Edna 	Northbound 
Ridge Terrace 	Northwest Hwy 	Summit 	Southbound 
Seminary 	Touhy 	Des Plaines 	Southbound 
Washington 	Talcott 	Devon 	Northbound 
Washington Pl. 	Devon 	Talcott 	Southbound 
Wisner 	Cuttriss 	Lahon 	Northbound 
 
(Ord. No. 2005-68, 10-17-2005)  
13-9-2 - ONE-WAY ALLEYS DESIGNATED 
The following alleys are designated as one-way alleys to permit traffic in only the direction set forth below. It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle in the opposite direction: 
Alley 	From 	To 	Direction 
Lying between Canfield and Cleveland 	Devon 	Arthur 	Southbound 
  
CHAPTER 10 - PARKING 
SECTION 
 
13-10-1 - PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device: 
A.  In any intersection. 
B.  In a crosswalk. 
C.  In any subway or the approach thereto. 
D.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone. 
E.  Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side. 
F.  Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk. 
G.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
H.  At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway. 
I.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing. 
J.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within 75 feet of such entrance when properly sign posted. 
K.  On any sidewalk or parkway except that portion of a parkway properly used as a driveway and located between the public walk and edge of pavement of the street; provided, however, that any vehicle parked in this area shall only be parked perpendicular to the street. 
L.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
M.  At the places and at the times designated in Chapters 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 of this Article. 
N.  Along the entrances and exits to places of public assemblies at such places and at such times as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief and the City Manager for the general safety of those persons using said facilities. 
O.  In any posted fire lane. 
P.  On any surface not improved with concrete, asphalt, or any other material approved by the Building Official, except where a gravel driveway or any gravel off-street parking area has been determined to be in existence prior to 1975. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
13-10-2 - STREET CLEANING 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the City at any time when such street is being cleaned, providing appropriate signs have been posted the day before such cleaning takes place.  
13-10-3 - TOWING WITHOUT NOTICE 
All police officers are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle parked in any place where the location or condition of the vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, obstructs or may obstruct the efficient movement of traffic, or is parked on a snow route in a snow emergency or otherwise endangers public safety; provided that notice of such towing shall be issued to the registered owner of such vehicle at his last known address as soon as practical following the towing. Cars so towed shall be stored at the expense of the owner thereof and shall be restored to the owner after payment of any fees and costs incurred in removal and storage of the vehicle; provided however, that the owner shall have the right to appear before the Police Chief to contest the towing prior to payment of fees or charges. If the vehicle is not claimed by and restored to the owner, it may be disposed of pursuant to Section 14-3-16 of this Code.  
13-10-4 - PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY 
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking. 
Cross reference— Registration as Proof of Control, § 20-1-4.  
13-10-5 - PARKING CONFORMATION 
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.  
13-10-6 - OFFERING FOR SALE 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise or real estate is peddled or offered for sale.  
13-10-7 - LOADING ZONE 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any place designated by the Mayor and City Council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places: 
A.  At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curbs before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time. 
B.  At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except on Sunday. 
C.  Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open.  
13-10-8 - PARKING IN ALLEYS 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.  
13-10-9 - CAB AND BUS STANDS 
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab or a Municipal emergency vehicle shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cabstand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus-loading zone.  
13-10-10 - UNAUTHORIZED PARKING 
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property.  
13-10-11 - PARKING VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park on any street in any residential zoning district any vehicle of the Second Division as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-146, as amended, or any "commercial vehicle" as defined in chapter 625 ILCS 5/1-114, as amended, except not more than one properly licensed recreational vehicle under 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and not exceeding eight feet six inches in height, 20 feet in length, or seven feet six inches in width; provided that such Second Division and commercial vehicles may be parked on the street in residential districts when being loaded or unloaded or while being used by persons hired to render, and actually rendering, services to residents of immediately adjacent residences. Recreational vehicles may be parked on the street for up to 24 hours for loading or unloading purposes. 
For any violation of this section, the penalty shall be $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2003-54, 9-15-2003; Ord. No. 2019-35 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
13-10-12 - PARKING NEAR DRIVEWAYS PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or to be parked within an area of ten feet on either side of the center line of the driveway at the curb line or within the limits of the driveway at the curb line, whichever is greater. This Section shall apply to each and every driveway within the City limits.  
13-10-13 - HANDICAPPED PARKING 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in any parking space properly designated for use by handicapped persons unless that vehicle displays license plates or an identification card lawfully issued by an authorized government agency designating the vehicle as one used to transport a handicapped person. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of $350.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-84, 10-9-2006)  
13-10-14 - SIGNS POSTED 
The Police Chief or any other person authorized by the Mayor and City Council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions.  
13-10-15 - IMPOUNDMENT FOR VIOLATIONS 
A.  The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization as provided in this Section. This program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle upon the public way by placement of a restraint in such a manner as to prevent its operation or if the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of this Article concerning obstruction of traffic, access or egress from driveways, alleys, fire lanes, hydrants or stations, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or a hazard, or where it impedes City workers during such operations as snow removal, the Police Chief may cause the eligible vehicle to be towed to a City vehicle pound or relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained. 
B.  A vehicle shall be eligible for immobilization as provided herein any time after inclusion of its state registration number or previous or succeeding state registration number on an immobilization list. A vehicle's state registration number, and all other vehicles registered to the owner of said registered vehicle, shall be included on an immobilization list only if: 
1.  The registered owner of the vehicle has accumulated five or more final determinations of liability for parking, City license violation complaints, compliance citations, or automated traffic law violations in the City of Park Ridge, in any combination, on which no payment has been made or appearance filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County or before the Administrative Adjudication Division of the City of Park Ridge within the time specified by the complaints or citations; 
2.  At least 21 days prior to placing the registration plate number of the vehicle on the immobilization eligibility list, notice of impending vehicle immobilization has been sent to the registered owner via first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address of the registered owner recorded with the Secretary of State or in the case of a vehicle bearing a registration number of a state other than Illinois, at the address of the registered owner recorded in that state's registry of motor vehicles. 
C.  The notice required in subsection (B) shall state the name and address of the registered owner, the state registration number of the vehicle(s), the nature of the ordinances violated and the numbers and issue dates of the outstanding complaints. The notice shall also advise that a person may challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in person within 21 days of the date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove liability, based on the following grounds: 
1.  That the person was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violations were issued; or 
2.  That all of the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice were paid in full; or 
3.  That the registered owner has not accumulated five or more final determinations of liability for parking, City license violation complaints, or compliance citations, which were unpaid, at the time the notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued. 
D.  Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. 
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of Sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice also shall provide information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had, and how the registered owner may obtain an immobilization hearing pursuant to this Section. 
E.  Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing restraint has not been released pursuant to subsection (F) within 24 hours of its placement, the restraint may be released and the vehicle towed and impounded. 
F.  The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization and towing and storage fees, if applicable, specified in subsection I and all the fines and penalties on the outstanding complaints and citations specified in the notice of impending vehicle immobilization. 
G.  Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner of the vehicle at the address to which the notice specified in subsection B.2 was mailed. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in subsection H, and that if the car is not claimed within 30 days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with this Chapter. 
H.  The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on an immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing with the Police Chief within 14 days after issuance of the notice specified in subsection G or within 14 days of the immobilization, whichever is later. A hearing shall be conducted within two business days of a written demand for hearing unless otherwise mutually agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In event of such failure, any amount deposited pursuant to subsection F.1 shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this Section shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle. 
I.  The fee for removal of the immobilization device shall be $100.00. The fee for towing subsequent to immobilization shall be $100.00. The storage fee shall be the fee usually charged to the City by the agency providing the storage service provided that no fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous. 
J.  It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilizing device without the approval of the Police Chief. The unauthorized removal of an immobilized vehicle shall be subject to a penalty of no less than $500.00. 
K.  For purpose of this Section, the term "public way" includes any privately owned parking lot as to which the City has entered into a contractual agreement for traffic regulation pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-209. 
(Ord. No. 2005-51, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2012-24, 3-5-2012)  
13-10-16 - STORAGE AND PARKING OF TRAILERS ON PUBLIC STREETS 
A.  It shall be unlawful to store any trailer on any City street or other public way. 
B.  For purposes of this Section, "store" means to park for a period in excess of two days. Moving a trailer from one place to another on any public street or way shall not extend the number of days the trailer may be parked without violating this Section. 
C.  For purposes of this Section, "trailer" means any non-self-propelled, wheeled vehicle, designed for carrying persons or property when drawn by a motor vehicle. 
D.  No trailer shall be parked on any public street or way between sunset and sunrise unless it is marked with reflective materials so as to make it clearly visible to oncoming vehicles. 
E.  No trailer shall be parked on any public street or way unless it is properly licensed. 
F.  A complaint or notice of violation of this Section may be served by attaching or affixing it to the trailer or its cargo in any manner so as to be easily visible. 
G.  Each day a trailer is parked or stored in violation of this Section shall constitute a separate violation.  
13-10-17 - PARKING HOLIDAYS 
For the purposes of the provisions of this Chapter excepting "holidays" from the effect of parking regulations, the following are designated as parking holidays: 
New Year's Day, January 1 
Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., third Monday in January 
Washington's Birthday, third Monday in February 
Memorial Day, last Monday in May 
Independence Day, July 4 
Labor Day, first Monday in September 
Columbus Day, second Monday of October 
Veterans Day, November 11 
Thanksgiving Day, fourth Thursday in November 
Christmas Day, December 25 
(Ord. No. 2017-62 , § 1, 11-6-2017)  
13-10-18 - REGISTRATION PLATES 
A.  Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, trailer, semi-trailer or truck-tractor shall be attached to the front and rear of the vehicle. 
B.  The registration plate issued for a motorcycle, trailer or semi-trailer shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle. 
C.  The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor shall be attached to the front thereof. 
D.  Every registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at a height of not less than five inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a clearly legible condition. No registration plate shall be covered by any tinted or colored screen. 
E.  Every registration plate, temporary permit or evidence of temporary registration must bear evidence of proper registration for the current period and be displayed in the manner required by the secretary of state. Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed annual registration shall be attached to registration plates as required by the secretary of state and shall be clearly visible at all times. 
It is illegal to park a vehicle, including a motor vehicle, motorcycle, trailer, semi-trailer or truck-tractor, on any public street, highway, roadway or in a public parking facility or lot if the registration plate or other registration materials fail to comply with paragraphs (a) through (e) of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-43, 7-18-2005; Ord. 2013-50, 10-7-2013)  
13-10-19 - PARKING WITHIN LINES/BACKED INTO SPACE 
The City Manager shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb of the street or parking lot area adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are parked to the curb. Each vehicle parking within any parking meter zone shall park within the line or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across or outside any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across or outside any line or marking designating a parking space for parking spaces with or without a meter. It shall be unlawful to back the vehicle into such marked area or stall where, as in parking lots, such marked areas or stalls require diagonal or angle parking. It shall also be unlawful to back the vehicle into any marked area or stall where signs prohibit backing into the area or stall. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 3-2-2009)  
CHAPTER 11 - NO PARKING AREAS 
SECTION 
 
13-11-1 - NO PARKING AREAS 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Ashland 	East 	Elm to Cedar 
Ashland 	East 	Higgins to first alley north 
Brophy 	East 	Devon to the alley south of Devon 
Busse Hwy 	Both 	Elm St. to Greenwood Ave. 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	West curb line of Greenwood Ave to a point 375' northwest thereof 
Busse Hwy 	Southwest 	West curb line of Greenwood Ave to a point 300' northwest thereof 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	Busse Hwy to 25' northwest of entrance to 665 Busse Hwy 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	The alley between Seminary and Western to a point 50' southeast thereof 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	45' northwest to 65' southeast of the driveway between 725 and 715 N. Busse Hwy 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	20' northwest to 30' south east of the driveway between 739 and 731 N. Busse Hwy 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	20' northwest to 40' southeast of the driveway between 753 and 743 Busse Hwy 
Busse Hwy 	Both 	Bouterse to a point 300' and NW of the center line of Oakton 
Busse Hwy 	Southwest 	Potter to a point 450' east of the east curb of Potter 
Busse Hwy 	Both 	50' west of the west curb line of Hoffman to a point 250' east of the east curb line of Potter 
Busse Hwy 	Southwest 	Driveway between 700 and 720 Busse Hwy to a point 35' northwest Canfield west the north line of Devon to a point 150' north thereof 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	Park District driveway to a point 107' southeast thereof 
Canfield 	West 	Devon to a point 150' north of Devon 
Canfield 	West 	Talcott to a point 135' north of Talcott 
Canfield 	West 	Devon to a point 225' north 
Cedar 	South 	Clifton west to first alley 
Cedar 	North 	Ashland to 100' west 
Cedar 	South 	Prospect to the first alley east of Prospect 
Cedar 	North 	Prospect to Meacham 
Cedar 	South 	Meacham to 30' east 
Chester 	East 	Touhy to Avondale 
Chester 	West 	Touhy to south Alley 
Church 	South 	West City limits to Parkside 
Clifton 	East 	Touhy to Cedar 
Clifton 	Both 	Devon to south line of fire station 
Clifton 	West 	Devon to Kent 
Clifton 	West 	A distance of 20' in front of entrance to 100 N. Clifton for a distance of 20' in front of entrance of 110 N. Clifton 
Clifton 	West 	Grant to Cedar 
Courtland 	East 	Crescent to first driveway south of Crescent 
Courtland 	West 	Butler, to 137' south of Butler 
Courtland 	West 	Park Place to Crescent 
Courtland 	East 	Devon to 200' north of north curb of Devon Ave. 
Courtland 	East 	Park Place to 80' north of north curb line of Crescent 
Crescent 	East 	Higgins Road to first alley north 
Crescent 	North 	Knight to Greenwood 
Crescent 	North 	Fairview to Cumberland 
Crescent 	South 	Lincoln to Knight 
Crescent 	South 	Prospect to Courtland 
Crescent 	East 	Talcott Pl. to Talcott Rd. 
Crescent 	North 	333 Crescent to Courtland 
Crescent 	South 	20' on either side of center line of the two alleys between Cumberland and Prospect 
Cumberland 	East 	Devon to Talcott 
Cumberland 	East 	Prairie to Garden 
Cumberland 	Both 	Touhy to first alley south of Touhy 
Cumberland 	Both 	Higgins to Peterson 
Cumberland 	Both 	Peterson to Devon (except Sat., Sun., & Holidays) 
Cumberland 	West 	Talcott to Devon 
Cumberland 	West 	Touhy to Avondale 
Cumberland 	East 	The north curb line of Touhy to a point 100' north thereof 
Cumberland 	Both 	A point 1,000' south of Devon to 250' north of Touhy 
Dee Road 	Both 	Mary Jane Lane to Oakton 
Delphia 	Both 	Crescent to 150' north 
Dempster 	Both 	All areas within the City limits 
Devon 	North 	Cumberland to Chester 
Devon 	South 	Cumberland to Clifton 
Devon 	North 	Rose to Dee 
Devon 	South 	Dee to Western 
Devon 	North 	Brophy to Cumberland 
Devon 	North 	Prospect to a point 30' west thereof (loading zone for taxicabs and taxi standing only permitted) 
Devon 	Both 	Courtland to Crescent 
Devon 	Both 	Chester to Delphia 
Edgemont Lane 	North 	Riverside Drive to the dead end 
Elm 	South 	Northwest Hwy to a point 100' east of Northwest Hwy 
Elm 	South 	Busse Hwy To a point approximately 320' west of Northwest Hwy 
Elm 	South 	350' west of the west curb line of Northwest Hwy To Northwest Hwy 
Elm 	North 	130' east of the east curb line of Northwest Hwy to Northwest Hwy 
Elm 	North 	The east curb line of Busse Hwy to a point approximately 170' east of Busse 
Elm 	North 	Northwest Hwy to 280' west 
Elm 	North 	Greenwood to Delphia 
Elm 	Both 	Greenwood to Western 
Euclid 	Northwest 	Northwest Hwy to Summit 
Fairview 	East 	A point 226' south of the center line of Garden to a point 150' north of the center line of Crescent 
Fairview 	East 	Devon to 50' south of Devon 
Fairview 	West 	Garden to Crescent 
Farrell 	North 	Potter to Vernon 
Fortuna 	West 	Northwest Hwy to the north line of the second residential property north thereof 
Fortuna 	East 	From the intersection of Northwest Hwy to a point 130' south 
Garden 	Northeast 	Fairview to a point approximately 90' east thereof 
Garden 	South 	Cumberland to Prospect 
Grace 	East 	Touhy to Avondale 
Grace 	East 	Oakton to 130' south of Oakton 
Grand 	West 	Cedar to Elm 
Grant Place 	North 	Prospect to Washington 
Grant Place 	South 	A distance of 44' immediately in front of the rear entrance of the Methodist Church 
Granville 	Both 	East curb line of Cumberland to a point 70' east thereof and west curb line of Cumberland to a point 70' west thereof 
Greenwood 	East 	Touhy to Elm 
Greenwood 	Both 	150' north of Talcott to 150' south of Talcott 
Greenwood 	Both 	Busse Hwy to Dempster 
Greenwood 	West 	Touhy to 105' north of Touhy 
Greenwood 	Both 	Devon to 100' north and south of Devon 
Hamlin 	East 	Busse Hwy north to the alley 
Hamlin 	West 	Busse to Seeley 
Hamlin 	East 	Oakton, 125' north of Oakton 
Hamlin 	West 	Cherry to Elm 
Hansen Place 	South 	Northwest Hwy to Leonard St. 
Higgins 	North 	Dee Road to Prospect 
Home 	East 	Touhy to Cedar 
Lahon 	North 	Wisner to Washington 
Leonard 	Both 	Northwest Hwy to Hansen 
Lincoln 	East 	Touhy to Elm 
Luther Lane 	Both 	Dempster to Weeg Way 
Main 	Southwest 	Touhy to Prairie 
Manor Lane 	South 	Approximately 60' in front of west entrance to school 
Marvin Parkway 	Median Sides 	Wilkinson Pkwy To Seminary 
Meacham 	West 	Northwest Highway to a point 120' south of Northwest Highway 
Meacham cul de sac 	Both 	
Merrill 	Both 	Touhy to a point 70' north Touhy 
Morris 	West 	Busse to 100' north 
N.W. Hwy 	Northeast 	Driveway east to driveway west of 123 N. Northwest Hwy 
N.W. Hwy 	Northeast 	Summit to Touhy 
N. N.W. Hwy 	Northeast 	Meacham to first alley northwest of Meacham 
N. N.W. Hwy 	Northeast 	160' southeast of the south curb line of Elm to 180' northwest of the north curb line of Elm 
N. N.W. Hwy 	Northeast 	East curb line of Meacham to 65' southeast thereof 
N. N.W. Hwy 	Southwest 	Greenwood to Meacham 
N. N.W. Hwy 	Southwest 	Euclid to 80' northwest 
S. N.W. Hwy 	Southwest 	Prospect to a point 90' southeast of Prospect 
S. N.W. Hwy 	Southwest 	Washington to a point 105' northwest of Washington 
S. N.W. Hwy 	Both 	Greenwood to I-294 
N. Oak 	East 	Vine to Crescent 
Oakton 	Both 	Easterly City limits to westerly City limits 
Park Place 	Both 	Prospect to Courtland 
Parkside 	West 	Ballard Road N. to Davis St. 
Parkside 	East 	In front of walk leading to Maine Township Jewish Congregation Synagogue 8800 Ballard Rd. 
Peterson 	Both 	1411 Peterson to Western 
Peterson 	South 	A distance of 30' directly opposite Greenwood 
Potter Rd. 	East 	Farrell to Dempster 
Potter Rd. 	Both 	Busse to Dempster 
Prairie 	Northwest 	Garden to Cumberland 
Prospect 	West 	Talcott to a point 75' North 
Prospect 	East 	Crescent to Park Place 
Prospect 	East 	Northwest Hwy south 55' 
Prospect 	East 	Grant to Cedar, except Sundays 
Prospect 	East 	Devon south to first alley 
Prospect 	Both 	Cedar Street to 100' north 
Ridge Terrace 	West 	In front of 222 Ridge Terrace 
Ridge Terrace 	West 	North line of parking lot north of alley to south line of parking lot south of same alley 
Riverside Dr. a/k/a Talcott a/k/a Algonquin 	Both 	From a Point 200' north of Oakton to a point 200' south of Oakton 
Root 	West 	Hansen Pl. to Hastings St. 
Rose 	Both 	West Crescent, north approximately 185 feet 
Rose 	Both 	West Crescent, south approximately 120 feet 
Seeley 	West 	Busse to 100' north 
Seeley 	East 	Hamlin to 100' south 
Seminary 	Both 	Busse to Marvin Pkwy. 
Seminary 	East 	Touhy to Des Plaines 
Sibley 	North 	Broadway to 100' west 
Sibley 	South 	Forestview to a point approximately 100' west thereof 
Sibley 	South 	Elmore to a point 65' west thereof 
Summit 	Both 	Touhy to Northwest Hwy 
Summit 	North 	Prospect to Touhy 
Summit 	Northeast 	Euclid to a point 40' northwest of Euclid 
Summit 	Northeast 	Prospect to a point 345' northwest of Prospect 
Summit 	Northwest 	Prospect to a point 101' southeast Prospect 
Summit 	South 	Touhy to Prospect (See § 10-8-11 for exceptions for taxicabs) 
Talcott 	Both 	Cumberland to appoint 250' southeast of Cumberland 
Talcott 	Both 	Dee to Oakton 
Talcott 	Southwest 	Prospect to approximately 450' northwest thereof 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Prospect Avenue to a point 165' northwest thereof 
Talcott 	Both 	Delphia to a point 250' southeast of Greenwood 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Devon to Crescent 
Talcott 	Both 	Sidley to Murphy Lake Lane 
Talcott 	Both 	Touhy to Western 
Third 	West 	Garden to Touhy 
Touhy 	North 	Grace to a point 345' east of the east curb of Prospect 
Touhy 	North 	Wisner to a point 570' east of the east curb of Prospect 
Touhy 	South 	Wisner to Grace 
Touhy 	South 	Seminary to Western 
Touhy 	Both 	West City limits to Rose 
Tyrell 	East 	Northwest Hwy to Glenview 
Tyrell 	East 	Northwest Hwy to first driveway north of Northwest Hwy 
Vernon 	West 	Northwest Hwy to 75' north 
Vernon 	East 	Dempster to Farrell 
Vine 	Southwest 	Prospect to a point 50' southeast of Prospect 
Vine 	Northeast 	Prospect to a point 85' southeast of Prospect 
Vine 	East 	From Number 200 to 323 
Vine 	West 	From Number 200 to 226 
Vine 	East 	Talcott south to the first alley 
Vine 	West 	Talcott to Devon 
Washington 	East 	Grant to Cedar 
Washington 	Southeast 	Northwest Hwy to Summit 
Washington 	West 	Talcott to Devon 
Washington 	West 	Touhy to Northwest Hwy 
Washington 	West 	Touhy to first drive north 
Washington 	East 	Grant to Cedar 
Washington 	East 	Touhy to Grant 
Washington 	East 	Touhy to 65' south of Touhy, 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. Monday -Friday 
Washington Place 	East 	Talcott to Devon 
Weeg Way 	North 	Vernon to Luther Lane 
Western 	East 	Dempster to 190' south 
Western 	West 	Dempster 300' south 
Western 	West 	Garden to Crescent 
Woodland 	North 	Parkwood to Potter 
 
(Ord. No. 2002-17, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 2006-64, 8-21-2006; Ord. 2007-89, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 2008-61, 08-18-2008; Ord. No. 2008-68, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2013-54, 12-2-2013; Ord. No. 2015-05, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-66, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2017-40 , § 1, 7-17-2017)  
13-11-2 - PARKING IN LIBRARY DRIVE PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the Park Ridge Library or a library patron, to park a motor vehicle along the west side of the library at any time.  
13-11-3 - ALLEYS WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or be parked in any of the following alleys: 
•  The alley running southeasterly and northwesterly behind the south side of Main Street from Prairie to Prospect. 
•  The alley between Prairie Avenue and Garden Street south of Main Street; provided, however, that such alley shall be designated a loading zone wherein attended vehicles may be allowed to stand for not more than 15 minutes for loading and unloading.  
13-11-4 - PASSENGER PICKUP ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any of the following areas except that attended vehicles may stop in such areas for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers. 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Cherry 	South 	150' west of Broadway to Hamlin, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Clifton 	Both 	Bonita to Granville, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Cuttriss 	North 	Elmore to Wisner, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Dee 	West 	Manor to Habberton 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Elmore 	West 	Cuttriss to 400' north of Cuttriss, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Elm 	North 	150' west of Broadway to 100' west of Hamlin, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Lincoln 	West 	West Crescent north to the Lincoln School property limit; 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Manor 	South 	Tyrell to Dee, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Prospect 	West 	Albion to a point 175' north of north line of Talcott, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Fairview 	East 	Albion to Talcott, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Stewart 	North 	Western to Warren, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Western 	West 	Stewart to Crescent, 8 a.m. - 4 p.m. on school days 
Wisner 	East 	Cuttriss to 400' north of Cuttriss (except the area of the existing bus-loading zone), 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
  
CHAPTER 12 - RESTRICTED PARKING 
SECTION 
 
13-12-1 - RESTRICTED PARKING, LIBRARY PARKING LOT 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a handicapped person or a person transporting a handicapped person requiring special equipment, to park a motor vehicle in that portion of the parking lot posted "No Parking Except Handicapped Persons." Four such parking spots shall be provided for this purpose and shall be properly posted, "Handicapped Parking Only." Further, there shall be 18 parking spots posted "Parking for Library Personnel Only" and parking in said spots shall be restricted to motor vehicles bearing a library employee sticker issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009)  
13-12-2 - RESTRICTED PARKING IN CITY HALL LOT 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a City employee or an elected official to park a motor vehicle in any space except a space marked "Visitor" or "Handicapped" in the City Hall parking lots, being the lot adjacent to City Hall and the south half of the joint City Hall/Park Ridge Community Church parking lot on the west side of Courtland Avenue and the south side of Butler Place during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. During such hours it shall be unlawful for any person to park in such "Visitor" or "Handicapped" parking space except when such person is transacting business at the City Hall.  
13-12-3 - DIAGONAL PARKING PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a diagonal position at any time at any of the following locations: 
•  North side of Higgins Road from Cumberland Avenue to Newton Avenue within the City. 
•  Both sides of Busse Highway between Elm Street and I-294.  
13-12-4 - PARKING PROHIBITED WITHIN CERTAIN HOURS 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or be parked in any of the following places or zones at any time within the time periods designated: 
Parking Prohibited Within Certain Hours 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 	Restricted Hours 
Bouterse 	North 	Rowe to 100' west thereof 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Busse 	Southwest 	Potter to Oakton 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Busse 	Both sides 	Bouterse to Seeley 	7 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Canfield 	West 	Belle Plaine to Imperial 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Crescent 	North 	Prospect to Fairview 	At all times except Sundays 
Crescent 	South 	Western to Knight 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days, Sundays and holidays 
Crescent 	South 	Greenwood to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Cumberland 	East 	From 100' north of Touhy to Avondale 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Cuttriss 	North 	Elmore to Wisner 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Dee Road 	Both sides 	A point 250' north of Touhy to Mary Jane 	7 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	North 	Crescent to Cleveland 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	North 	Rose to Chester 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	South 	Canfield to Grove 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	South 	Crescent to Grove 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	South 	Western to Clifton 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Elm 	North 	Hamlin to western school property line 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Granville 	South 	Lincoln to Western 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Lincoln 	West 	Granville to Francis 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Lincoln 	West 	Crescent, north 300' 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Mayfield 	Both sides 	Potter to Good 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Milton 	South 	Dee Road to Babetta 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Southwest 	Meacham to 86' east of Meacham 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Southwest 	50' west of Prospect to Summit 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Southwest 	65' west of Summit to 153' west of Summit 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - S. 	Southwest 	Prospect to Ridge Terrace 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Northeast 	Greenwood to a point 330' southeast of Greenwood 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Northeast 	Southeast property line of 423 N. Northwest Hwy Greenwood 	8 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Northeast 	Meacham to a point 150' east of the east curb line of Meacham 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - N. 	Southwest 	Meacham to a point 90' east of the east curb line of Meacham 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - S. 	Southwest 	Ridge Terrace to a point 105' northwest of Washington 	7 a.m. to 6 p.m. 
N.W. Hwy - S. 	Both 	Washington to South City Limits 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Peterson 	South 	West property line of 1411 Peterson to a point 585' east 	7 a.m. to 9:30 a.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Prospect 	West 	Northwest Hwy to first alley north of same 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. 
Prospect 	West 	A point 100' north of Devon to a point 120' north of Devon 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Prospect 	East 	Talcott to Albion 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Prospect 	East 	Touhy to Grant Pl. 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m., Monday through Friday 
Ridge Ter. 	East 	N.W. Hwy to 100' south 	7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
Rosemont 	North 	Courtland to Prospect 	9 a.m. to 12 Noon, Sundays only 
Stewart 	North 	Western to west school line 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Stewart 	South 	Knight to Engle 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
Talcott 	Southwest 	Vine to Crescent 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Canfield to Vine 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Vine to Crescent 	4:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Southwest 	Prospect to Crescent 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Prospect to Devon 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Both sides 	Western to Delphia 	4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Talcott 	Both sides 	A point 250' south-east of Greenwood to Cumberland 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Touhy 	Both sides 	East City limits to Wisner, Rose to Grace 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday through Friday 
Touhy 	North 	An area of approximately 45' directly in front of 330 W. Touhy Ave 	6 p.m. to 2 a.m., Monday through Saturday and all day Sunday 
Washington 	Northwest 	N.W. Hwy to Summit 	Sunday 7 a.m. to 1 p.m. 
Washington 	West 	150' south of Grant to Cedar 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Weeg Way 	South 	Luther Lane to Vernon 	At all times, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Western 	West 	Crescent to Stewart 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Wisner 	East 	Cuttriss to 400' north thereof 	8 a.m. M. to 4 p.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 2008-68, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-59, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 2010-60, 7-19-2010; Ord. No. 2013-54, 12-21-2013; Ord. No. 2017-47 , § 2, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 2017-58 , § 1, 10-16-2017)  
13-12-5 - PARKING PROHIBITED WITHIN CERTAIN HOURS, TOW ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or be parked in any of the following tow zone areas at any time within the time periods designated: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From 	To 	Restricted Hours 
Busse Hwy 	Both sides 	Touhy 	Elm 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	A point 375' NW of Greenwood 	Western 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Busse Hwy 	Southwest 	A point 300' NW of Greenwood 	Bouterse 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Busse Hwy 	Southwest 	A point 240' NW of Parkwood 	Tyrell 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	A point 240' NW of Parkwood 	A point 150' NW of Tyrell 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Courtland 	Both sides 	Prospect 	Park Place 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Devon 	North 	Talcott Rd. 	Brophy 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Devon 	South 	Talcott Rd. 	Prospect 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Devon 	South 	Prospect 	Cumberland 	2 a.m. to 6 a.m. 
Fairview 	Both sides 	Main St. 	Garden 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Garden 	Northeast 	Prospect 	1st alley NW of Prairie 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Main St. 	Northeast 	Touhy 	Prospect 	2 a.m. to 6 a.m. 
Main St. 	Southwest 	Prairie 	Prospect 	2 a.m. to 6 a.m. 
Northwest Hwy 	Northeast 	Touhy 	Meacham 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	Meacham 	Prospect 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Prospect 	Both sides 	Garden 	Main 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Prospect 	Both sides 	Summit 	Northwest Hwy 	2 a.m. to 6 a.m. 
Summit 	Northeast 	Prospect 	Washington 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Talcott Rd. 	Southwest 	Crescent 	Courtland to Devon 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Vine 	Both sides 	Prospect 	Park Place 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
Washington 	Northwest 	Northwest Hwy 	Summit 	12 Midnight to 6 a.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-89, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2016-15 , § 1, 3-7-2016; Ord. No. 2016-21 , § 1, 4-4-2016)  
13-12-6 - SPECIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
The following parking areas shall be subject to the special parking restrictions set forth herein and it shall be unlawful for any person to park in violation of such restrictions when the same are set forth in a notice posted at the designated location. 
Designated Area 	Side of Street 	Restrictions 
200 South Lincoln, one parking space on West Crescent side 	North 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Albion 	South, Prospect to Fairview 	Bus Parking Only 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., school days 
Dee Road 	East, from Woodland to Glenview 	No Stopping, Standing or Parking Mon - Fri 4 p.m. to 9 p.m., Sat - Sun 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. March 15 to November 15 
Elm 	North, Hamlin to 100' west of Hamlin 	Bus Parking Only 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., school days 
Fairview, one parking space at Devon 	East 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Grant, one parking space at Prospect 	Southeast 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Higgins Road 	North, from Courtland to Vine 	No Bus, Livery or Truck Parking except for loading and unloading 
Higgins Road 	North, from Washington east to Canfield 	No Bus, Livery or Truck Parking except for loading and unloading. 
Main, one parking space at Fairview 	Southwest 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Main, one parking space at Prospect 	Southwest 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Prospect, one parking space from a point 82' southwest of curb line of S. Northwest Hwy to 98' southwest of curb line in front of Pickwick Theater 	Southeast 	Handicapped Parking Only 
Prospect, one parking space in front of 132 S. Prospect 		Handicapped Parking Only, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Saturday, Sunday & holidays 
Prospect 	West 	Valet Parking Only, 4 p.m. to 12 a.m., 189 feet north of the curbline of Garden to 239 feet north of the curbline (50 feet, entire property frontage at 130 South Prospect) 
Summit 	North, from Washington to Ridge Terrace 	Bus Parking Only, 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Mon—Fri 
West Crescent, from a point 45' east of Western Avenuefor 350' east 	North 	Bus Parking Only 8 a.m. to4 p.m., school days 
Western 	East, from Greendale to North Terrace 	No stopping, standing or parking Mon—Fri 4 p.m. to 9 p.m.; Sat-Sun 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., March 15 - November 15 
Yost, one parking space at Canfield 	North 	Handicapped Parking Only 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-40, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 2005-41, 7-18-2005; Ord. No. 2007-15, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 2008-94, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-59, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 2009-76, 10-19-2009; Ord. No. 2011-32, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 2013-02, 1-21-2013; Ord. No. 2016-58 , § 1, 8-15-2016; Ord. No. 2017-58 , § 2, 10-16-2017)  
13-12-6.1 - SPECIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
(No zones designated) 			
 
(Ord. No. 2007-78, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 2017-39 , § 1, 7-17-2017)  
13-12-7 - SPECIAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS—UPTOWN PARKING GARAGE—SURFACE LOT 
The parking of any vehicle bearing a Class F or heavier State of Illinois license plate, as such classes are defined in Section 3-815 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-815, or having a gross weight capacity (including vehicle and maximum load) in excess of 12,000 pounds, shall be prohibited in the Uptown Parking Garage - Surface Lot. 
(Ord. No. 2011-21, 4-6-2011)  
CHAPTER 13 - PERMIT PARKING 
SECTION 
 
13-13-1 - PERMIT ONLY 
A.  TOUHY-SUMMIT PARKING LOT: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the parking lot at the southwest corner of Touhy and Summit unless the motor vehicle parked therein displays a parking permit issued by the City for said lot. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk for a term of six months upon payment of $350.00 in advance. Said permits shall be sold only to Park Ridge residents and shall be limited to one permit per dwelling unit. Further, no such permit shall be sold for any vehicle for which a Park Ridge vehicle sticker has not been purchased, or for which any parking ticket issued by the Park Ridge Police Department remains unpaid as of the date the permit is applied for. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $58.33 per month. 
B.  UPTOWN PARKING COURT: Within the Uptown Parking Court there are hereby designated 17 parking spaces which shall be restricted to parking by permit only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in a space so restricted unless the vehicle displays a parking permit issued by the City for said lot. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk valid for a term of six months upon payment of $200.00 in advance. Further, no such permit shall be sold for any vehicle for which any parking ticket issued by the Park Ridge Police Department remains unpaid as of the date the permit is applied for. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $33.33 per month. 
C.  CENTRAL PARKING LOT: Within the Central Lot there are hereby designated 18 parking spaces which shall be restricted to motor vehicles displaying a parking permit issued by the City for said lot. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk for a term of six months upon payment of $350.00 in advance. Said permits shall be sold only to Park Ridge residents and shall be limited to one permit per dwelling. Further, no such permit shall be sold for any vehicle for which a Park Ridge vehicle sticker has not been purchased, or for which any parking ticket issued by the Park Ridge Police Department remains unpaid as of the date the permit is applied for. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $58.33 per month. 
D.  MAIN STREET PERMIT PARKING AREA: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the street on the northeast side of Main Street, from Touhy to Prairie, in the designated nine parking spaces unless the motor vehicle parked therein displays a parking permit issued by the City for said street. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk for a term of six months upon payment of $350.00 in advance. Said permits shall be sold only to Park Ridge residents and shall be limited to one permit per dwelling. Further, no such permit shall be sold for any vehicle for which a Park Ridge vehicle sticker has not been purchased, or for which any parking ticket issued by the Park Ridge Police Department remains unpaid as of the date the permit is applied for. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $58.33 per month. 
E.  SUMMIT STREET PERMIT PARKING AREA: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the street on the north side of Summit Avenue, from Ridge Terrace to Euclid Avenue, in the designated ten parking spaces unless the motor vehicle parked therein displays a parking permit issued by the City for said street. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk for a term of six months upon payment of $200.00 in advance. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $33.33 per month. 
F.  GARDEN STREET PERMIT PARKING AREA: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in the street on the north side of Garden Street, from Fairview Avenue to 1 st alley northwest of Prairie Avenue, in the designated 13 parking spaces unless the motor vehicle parked therein displays a parking permit issued by the City for said street. Said parking permit shall be sold by the City Clerk for a term of six months upon payment of $250.00 in advance. Said permits shall be sold only to Park Ridge residents and shall be limited to one permit per dwelling. Further, no such permit shall be sold for any vehicle for which a Park Ridge vehicle sticker has not been purchased, or for which any parking ticket issued by the Park Ridge Police Department remains unpaid as of the date the permit is applied for. Renewals of said parking permits shall be provided first to those who are in possession of a permit for the previous period up to a deadline to be announced by the City. After said deadline, said permits shall be sold on a first come, first served basis. Any permit sold after the commencement of the permit period shall be pro-rated at a cost of $41.67 per month. 
G.  All permit parking restrictions described in this section, 13-13-1, shall be waived for any vehicles that first park in such parking spaces after 11:00 a.m. each day in the Touhy-Summit Parking Lot, Central Parking Lot, Main Street Permit Parking Area, Garden Street Permit Parking Area, and the Summit Street Permit Parking Area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-79 , § 1, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 1, 1-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-32 , § 1, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2017-47 , § 1, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 2, 4-16-2018; Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 1, 6-4-2018)  
13-13-2 - PARKING PROHIBITED WITHIN CERTAIN HOURS; RESIDENT PERMITS EXCEPTED 
A.  There are hereby established the following colored parking zones within the City of Park Ridge: 
Color Zone 	Boundaries 
Brown Zone 	Church St. east to City Limits west to City Limits and Glenview Ave. 
Red Zone 	Glenview Ave., Greenwood, Elm, and West City Limits 
Yellow Zone 	Niles City Limits, East City Limits, Chicago & Northwestern Railroad and Greenwood. 
Blue Zone 	Elm St., Chicago & Northwestern Railroad, Canfield, Devon and West City Limits, excluding all areas included in the Magenta Zone 
Orange Zone 	Devon, Cumberland, Higgins, West City Limits 
Green Zone 	Devon, Canfield, Higgins, Cumberland 
Magenta Zone 	Albion, from 133' west of Hamlin to Western; Aldine, from Devon north to dead end; Gillick, from Hamlin to Seminary; Hamlin, from Talcott to Arthur; Home, from Talcott to Devon; and Seminary, from Talcott to Devon 
 
B.  It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to be parked in any of the colored parking zones at any time specified in paragraph C hereof, unless that vehicle displays a valid colored resident parking permit corresponding to that colored parking zone and block. All colored resident parking permits are valid only on the block corresponding to the address where the vehicle is registered with the City. For the purpose of this Chapter, a "block" shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 16.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Parking Prohibited Within Certain Hours Restricted Hours: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 	Restricted Hours, Sat, Sun, Holidays Excepted, Unless Otherwise Stated 	Zone 
Albion 	Both 	133' west of Hamlin to Western 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Aldine 	Both 	Devon North to dead end 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Arthur 	Both 	Dead end west of Hamlin to Seminary 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Ashland 	West 	Cedar to Elm 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Ashland 	West 	Higgins to first alley north of Higgins 	At all times, Saturday, Sunday and holidays included 	Orange 
Avondale 	Both 	Park Plaine to dead end 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Belle Plaine 	Both 	Engel to Greenwood 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Belle Plaine 	Both 	Talcott Rd. to Engel 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Brophy 	Both 	Alley south of Devon to Rosemont 	In excess of 2 hours 	Green 
Brophy 	Both 	Glenlake to Granville 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Green 
Brophy 	Both 	Peterson to alley north of Higgins 	In excess of 2 hours 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Sunday 	Green 
Burton 	Both 	Vernon to Parkside 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Carol 	South 	Western to Greenwood. 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Carol 	North 	Western to a point approx. 780' east of Western 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Carolyn Lane 	Both 	Mary Jane Lane northwest to the end of Carolyn Ln. 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Cedar 	South 	30' east of Meacham to Prospect 	In excess of 2 hours at any time 	Yellow 
Cedar 	South 	First alley east of Prospect to Washington 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Cedar 	North 	Ashland to Washington 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Clifton 	Both 	Peterson to Glenlake 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Clifton 	West 	Garden to alley north of Garden 	At all times 	Blue 
Clifton 	West 	Granville to Bonnie 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Clinton 	East 	Grant Place to Cedar 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Courtland 	Both 	Higgins to Glenlake 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Green 
Courtland 	Both 	West Crescent to Stewart 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Crain 	Both 	Western to Carol 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Crescent 	Both 	Alley north of Higgins to Thorndale 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Green 
Crescent 	South 	Fairview to 50' east of Fairview 	In excess of 90 minutes 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. 	Blue 
Crescent 	South 	Fairview to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
W. Crescent 	Both 	Rose to Home 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Dee Road 	Both 	Oakton to N.W. Hwy 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Delphia 	Both 	80' north of Touhy to Cedar 	4 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. 	Blue 
Delphia 	Both 	Northwest Highway to vacated Rabe 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Red 
Dee Road 	Both 	Manor to Farrell 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Edna Ave 	Both 	Dee Road to Parkwood 	8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. 	Red 
Engel 	Both 	Talcott Rd. to Stewart 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Elmore 	East 	Cuttriss to 500' north of Cuttriss 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. School Days only, with resident permit excepted 	Yellow 
Evergreen Ln 	Both 	Mayfield to Potter Road 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Fairview 	East 	A point 63' north of center line of Crescent to a point 150' north of center line of Crescent 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Blue 
Fairview 	East 	A point 80' south of center line of Garden to a point 226' south of center line of Garden 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Blue 
Fairview 	Both 	Crescent to Stewart 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Fairview 	Both 	Alley south of Devon to Rosemont 	Not more than two hours as provided in 13-15-5 	Green 
Fairview 	Both 	1900 Fairview to Glenlake 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Green 
Farrell 	Both 	Potter to Good 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Farrell 	South 	Potter to Dee 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Farrell 	South 	Dee to Vernon 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Fenton 	Both 	Vernon to Parkside 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Frances 	Both 	Lincoln to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Garden 	North 	Cumberland to Clifton 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Garden 	South 	Cumberland to Clifton 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Garden 	Northeast 	First alley west of Prairie to 44' northwest 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Gillick 	Both 	Hamlin to Seminary 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Glenlake 	Both 	Lincoln to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Glenlake 	Both 	Cumberland to Prospect 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Green 
Grace 	Both 	Peterson to Granville 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Grand Blvd. 	East 	Cedar to Elm 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Granville 	South 	Grace to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Granville 	South 	Cumberland to Clifton 	1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	Orange 
Grant Place 	South 	Washington to 385' west 
with permits available to all residences on Grant Place 	At all times 	Yellow 
Greendale 	Both 	Vernon to Hamlin 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Red 
Greenwood 	Both 	Peterson to Granville 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Hallberg Ln 	Both 	Lincoln to Dead End 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Hamlin 	Both 	Arthur to Devon 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Hamlin 	Both 	Talcott to Arthur 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Hamlin Ct. 	Both 	Talcott to dead end 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Higgins Road 	North 	Ashland to Vine 	At all times, Saturday, Sunday, & holidays included 	Orange 
Home 	Both 	Albion to Arthur 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Home 	Both 	Arthur to Devon 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Home 	Both 	Stewart to W. Crescent 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Home 	Both 	Talcott to Albion 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Home 	Both 	Talcott to Stewart 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Hoffman 	Both 	Manor to dead end 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Lincoln 	Both 	Crain to Hallberg Ln 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Lincoln 	West 	Garden to 300' north of W. Crescent 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Lois 	Both 	Western to Grace 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Marcus Ct. 	Both 	Farrell to Farrell 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Mary Jane 	Both 	Dee Road to Carolyn Ln 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Merrill 	Both 	N.W. Hwy to Owen in Chicago 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Merrill 	West 	Touhy to Owen in Chicago 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Yellow 
Newton 	Both 	Higgins to first alley north of Higgins 	6 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Green 
Newton 	Both 	Alley north of Higgins to Thorndale 	2 p.m. to 4 p.m. on Sunday; 8 p.m. to 12 Midnight on Wednesday 	Green 
Norman 	Both 	Rose to Home 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
North Cumberland 	West 	60 feet north of Oakton to 200 feet north of Oakton 	At all times 	Yellow 
Oak Tree Lane 	Both 	Tyrell to Dee 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Park Plaine 	Both 	Oakton to Lahon 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Parkside Dr 	Both 	Dempster to Ballard 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Parkside 	Both 	Weeg Way to Burton 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Parkwood 	Both 	Virginia to 800 Parkwood 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Parkwood 	Both 	Busse to N.W. Hwy 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Parkwood 	Both 	Irwin to Virginia 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Peterson 	Both 	Greenwood to Cumberland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Peterson 	Both 	Cumberland to Crescent 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Orange 
Peterson 	Both 	Western to Greenwood 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Orange 
Prairie 	Both 	Cumberland to Clifton 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Prairie 	Both 	Rose to Hamlin 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Prospect 	Both 	Alley north of Higgins to Glenlake 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Green 
Prospect 	East 	Alley south of Devon to Rosemont 	In excess of 2 hours at any time 	Green 
Prospect 	East 	Crescent to Stewart 	In excess of 3 hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., resident permits excepted 	Blue 
Prospect 	West 	From a point 210' south of Crescent to Stewart 	In excess of 3 hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., resident permits excepted 	Blue 
Redfield 	Both 	Talcott to dead end 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Ridge Terrace 	Both 	Summit to a point 230' NW of Summit on NW side & Summit to a point 400' NE of Summit on the SE side 	In excess of 2 hours at any time 	Yellow 
Rose 	Both 	Devon, north 200' 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Rose 	Both 	W. Crescent to Prairie 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Rose 	East 	Prairie to Garden 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Rose 	Both 	Talcott to W. Crescent 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Rose 	East 	Touhy to Garden 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Rowe 	Both 	Busse to first alley SW of N.W. Hwy 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Ruth 	Both 	Dee to Parkwood 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Seeley 	East 	Oakton to Northwest Hwy 	In excess of 2 hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Mon-Sat 	Red 
Seminary 	Both 	Albion to Arthur 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Seminary 	Both 	Marvin Pkwy to N.W. Hwy 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Red 
Seminary 	Both 	Talcott to Albion 	8 a.m. to 2 p.m. 	Magenta 
Seminary 	East 	Busse to Marvin Pkwy. 	At all times, Saturday, Sunday & holidays included 	Red 
Seminary 	West 	Touhy to Des Plaines 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Shibley 	Both 	Busse to first alley SW of N.W. Hwy 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Stewart 	Both 	Prospect to Courtland 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Stewart 	Both 	Rose to Home 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Stewart 	Both 	Western to Greenwood 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Third St. 	Southeast 	Garden to Touhy 	In excess of 2 hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Blue 
Thorndale 	Both 	Courtland to Vine 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Green 
Tyrell 	Both 	Busse Hwy to Woodland 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Red 
Tyrell 	Both 	Manor to Farrell 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Brown 
Vernon 	Both 	Farrell to DeCook 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Vernon 	Both 	Greendale to a point 125' north of N.W. Hwy 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Red 
Vine 	West 	First alley north of Higgins to Thorndale 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Green 
Vine 	East 	Higgins to Thorndale 	9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Green 
Vine 	West 	250' SE of Park Pl. to Oak 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Blue 
Virginia 	Both 	Dee to Sylviawood 	8 a.m. to 10 a.m. 	Red 
Warren 	Both 	Belle Plaine to Stewart 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Weeg Way 	Both 	Luther Lane to Western 	8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 	Brown 
Western 	East 	A point 190' south of Dempster to a point 150' south of Weeg Way 	8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and holidays included 	Brown 
Western 	West 	A point 710' south of Dempster to a point 150' south of Weeg Way 	8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays included 	Brown 
Western 	Both 	Stewart to Devon 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Western 	East 	Touhy to 1 st alley south of Garden 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Western 	East 	W. Crescent to Stewart 	7 a.m. to 9 a.m. 	Blue 
Wilkinson 	Both 	Busse to northeast property line of apartment property on the NE side of Busse 	2 a.m. to 6 a.m. 	Red 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-48, 8-18-2003; Ord. No. 2006-64, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2007-85, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 2008-15, 3-3-2008; Ord. No. 2009-71, 10-5-2009; Ord. No. 2010-61, 7-19-2010; Ord. 2010-78, 11-02-2010; Ord. No. 2012-23, 3-5-2012; Ord. 2015-01, 1-19-2015; Ord. No. 2015-70; 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1, 2-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-14 , § 1, 3-17-2016; Ord. No. 2016-22 , § 1, 4-4-2016; Ord. No. 2016-71 , § 1, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 2016-78 , § 1, 12-5-1016; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 1, 2-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-38 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-57 , § 1, 10-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06 , §§ 1, 2, 2-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-38 , § 1, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 2019-18 , § 1, 3-18-2019)  
13-13-3 - PERMIT 
A.  A color-coded resident parking permit may be issued for any vehicle: 
1.  Bearing a Park Ridge vehicle sticker; and 
2.  Registered to an address within a restricted parking area listed in Section 2C of this Chapter; 
3.  Owned or leased by a person residing at such address. 
B.  For purposes of this section, in the case of a multiple dwelling unit building or townhouse or condominium development, any part of which has an address within a restricted parking area listed in Section 2C of this Chapter, all dwelling units within such building or development shall be considered to be within that restricted parking area.  
13-13-4 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any term or provision of this Chapter shall be fined in the amount of $50.00 in the event that said fine is paid within the initial period set forth on the notice to appear within which to pay the fine. In the event that the fine is not so paid within said time, then the increasing fine schedule as set forth in Article 20, Chapter 1 of this Code shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 2015-79 , § 2, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 2, 1-18-2016)  
CHAPTER 14 - SNOW PARKING 
SECTION 
 
13-14-1 - SNOW ROUTES 
The following streets shall be designated as "Tow Zone." It is unlawful to park any vehicle after two inches of snow has fallen until 24 hours after snow stops on the following streets: 
Street 	Side 	From 	To 
Belle Plaine 	Both sides 	Talcott 	Canfield 
Busse Hwy 	Both sides 	Hoffman 	Northwest City Limits 
Courtland 	Both sides 	Prospect 	Park Place 
Courtland 	West 	West Crescent 	Higgins 
Courtland 	East 	A point 80' north of north curb line of Crescent 	Higgins 
Cumberland 	West 	First alley south of Touhy 	Peterson 
Cumberland 	East 	First alley south of Touhy 	Talcott 
Cumberland 	East 	Devon 	Peterson 
Dee Road 	Both sides 	Oakton 	Northwest Hwy 
Devon 	Both sides 	Canfield 	Crescent 
Devon 	South 	Clifton 	Western 
Devon 	North 	Chester 	Rose 
Elm 	North 	Elmore 	Busse Hwy 
Elm 	South 	Northwest Hwy 	400' west of Northwest Hwy 
Elm 	South 	Elmore 	Root 
Elm 	Both sides 	Greenwood 	Dee 
Elmore 	Both sides 	Touhy 	Michaeljohn 
Florence 	Both sides 	Sibley 	Oakton 
Garden 	Northeast 	First alley northwest of Prairie 	A point 50' northwest thereof 
Granville 	Both sides 	Western 	Washington 
Greenwood 	West 	Elm 	Peterson 
Greenwood 	East 	Touhy 	Peterson 
Hamlin 	Both sides 	Oakton 	Manor Lane 
Hamlin 	East 	Elm 	Sibley 
Hamlin 	West 	Cherry 	Sibley 
Manor 	Both sides 	Potter Road 	Hamlin/Vernon 
Michaeljohn 	Both sides 	Elmore 	Oakton 
Northwest Hwy 	Northeast 	Elm 	Greenwood 
Park Place 	Entire Street 		
Prairie 	Northwest 	Main 	Garden 
Prospect 	Both sides 	Grant Place 	Oakton 
Prospect 	Both sides 	Garden 	Albion 
Prospect 	East 	Albion 	Talcott Road 
Prospect 	Both sides 	First alley south of Devon 	Higgins 
Sibley 	Both sides 	Prospect 	East City Limits 
Sibley 	Both sides 	Talcott/Riverside 	Hamlin 
Talcott 	Both sides 	Canfield 	Crescent 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Fairview 	Western 
Talcott 	Southwest 	Cumberland 	Western 
Touhy 	Both sides 	East City Limits 	Wisner 
Touhy 	South 	Grace 	Western 
Touhy 	South 	Seminary 	Dee 
Touhy 	North 	A point 345' east of the east curb of Prospect 	A point 570' east of the east curb of Prospect 
Touhy 	North 	Grace 	Dee 
Vernon 	West 	Dempster 	Farrell 
Washington 	West 	Oakton 	First drive north of Touhy 
Washington 	East 	Oakton 	Grant 
Western 	Both sides 	Elm 	Garden 
Western 	East 	Garden 	Granville 
Western 	West 	West Crescent 	Granville 
  
13-14-2 - PARKING PROHIBITED DURING SNOWFALL 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or to be parked in any of the following places or zones after two inches of snow has fallen until 24 hours after the snow stops: 
Street 	Side Of Street 	From 	To 
Albion 	North 	Canfield 	Cumberland 
Albion 	North 	Delphia 	150' west of Hamlin 
Aldine 	West 	Avondale 	Touhy 
Aldine 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Albion 	Devon 
Arthur 	North 	Canfield 	Courtland 
Arthur 	North 	Clifton 	150' west of Hamlin 
Ashland 	West 	Talcott 	Higgins 
Austin 	North 	Michaeljohn 	Brookline 
Austin 	North 	Prospect 	Greenwood 
Avondale 	Northeast 	Belle Plaine 	Lake 
Avondale 	Northeast 	Cumberland 	Cedar 
Avondale 	Northeast 	Park Plaine 	Dead end southeast of Park Plaine 
Ballard 	North 	½ block west of Western 	Woodview 
Babetta 	West 	Milton 	Irwin 
Birch 	North 	Parkside 	Dee 
Bonita 	North 	Clifton 	Western 
Bonnie 	North 	Clifton 	Chester 
Bouterse 	North 	Rowe 	Busse 
Broadway 	West 	Milton 	Cherry 
Broadway 	West 	Elm 	Touhy 
Brookline 	West 	Kathleen 	Michaeljohn 
Brophy 	West 	Alley south of Devon 	Glenlake 
Brophy 	West 	Peterson 	Higgins 
Carolyn 	West 	Mary Jane 	Cul-de-sac north thereof 
Castle 	North 	Greenwood 	Bonita 
Cedar 	North 	East Avenue 	First alley east of Prospect 
Cedar 	North 	Clifton 	Shoreline 
Cherry 	North 	East Avenue 	Prospect 
Cherry 	North 	Knight 	Cul-de-sac west of Parkwood 
Chester 	West 	Touhy 	Bonita 
Cleveland 	West 	Albion 	Devon 
Clifton 	West 	North City limits 	Oakton 
Clifton 	West 	Alley north of Garden 	Arthur 
Clifton 	West 	Kent 	Granville 
Clifton 	West 	Glenlake 	Peterson 
Columbia 	North 	Canfield 	Washington 
Crain 	North 	Carol 	Western 
Crescent 	North 	Prospect 	Fairview 
West Crescent 	South 	Cumberland 	Greenwood 
West Crescent 	North 	Dead-end east of Home 	Rose 
South Crescent 	West 	Courtland 	Higgins 
Cuttriss 	North 	Oriole 	Prospect 
Cynthia 	North 	Lincoln 	Western 
Davis 	North 	Western 	Woodview 
DeCook 	North 	Potter 	Good 
DeCook 	South 	Potter 	Hoffman 
Dee 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Manor 
Delphia 	West 	North Terrace 	Oakton 
Delphia 	West 	Lahon 	Northwest Hwy 
Delphia 	West 	Avondale 	Castle 
Delphia 	Northwest 	Northwest Highway 	Vacated Rabe Court 
Delphia 	Southeast 	Northwest Highway 	Vacated Rabe Court 
Des Plaines 	North 	Seminary 	Rose 
East Avenue 	West 	Ottawa 	Dead end south of Cedar 
Edgemont 	North 	Washington 	Michaeljohn 
Edgemont 	North 	Ottawa 	East Avenue 
Edgemont 	South 	Riverside Drive 	Dead end 
Edna 	North 	Dee 	Parkwood 
Elliott 	West 	Dempster 	Mayfield 
Elliott 	West 	Farrell 	Northwest Hwy 
Elliott 	West 	Manor 	Busse 
Elm 	North 	East Avenue 	Elmore 
Engel 	West 	Stewart 	Talcott 
Evergreen 	West 	Potter 	Mayfield 
Fairview 	West 	Crescent 	Albion 
Fairview 	East 	Albion 	Talcott 
Fairview 	West 	Alley south of Devon 	Peterson 
Farrell 	North 	Potter 	Lundergan 
Forestview 	West 	Oakton 	Sibley 
Fortuna 	West 	Woodland 	Oakton 
Francis 	North 	Cumberland 	Lincoln 
Garden 	North 	Cumberland 	Greenwood 
Garden 	North 	Delphia 	Western 
Garden 	North 	Hamlin 	Rose 
Gillick 	North 	Canfield 	Cumberland 
Gillick 	North 	Cumberland 	Greenwood 
Gillick 	North 	Greenwood 	Lincoln 
Gillick 	North 	Seminary 	Hamlin 
Glenlake 	North 	Canfield 	Grove 
Glenlake 	North 	Washington 	Brophy 
Glenlake 	North 	Cumberland 	Lincoln 
Glenview 	North 	Parkside 	Busse 
Good 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Mayfield 	Northwest Hwy 
Good 	West 	Manor 	Busse 
Goodwin 	West 	Oakton 	Sibley 
Grace 	West 	Oakton 	Dead end south of Austin 
Grace 	West 	Granville 	Peterson 
Grand 	West 	Sibley 	Elm 
Granville 	North 	Washington 	Lincoln 
Granville 	South 	Lincoln 	Western 
Greendale 	North 	Dead end east of Delphia 	Vernon 
Grove 	West 	Devon 	Glenlake 
Habberton 	North 	Parkside 	Dee 
Habberton 	North 	Potter 	Lundergan 
Halien 	West 	Scottlynne 	Cherry 
Hamlin 	West 	Manor 	Oakton 
Hamlin 	West 	Avondale 	Sibley 
Hamlin 	West 	Elm 	Crescent 
Hamlin 	West 	Talcott 	Devon 
Hamlin 	East 	First alley north of Busse Hwy 	Seeley 
Hamlin 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Talcott 	Talcott 
Hansen 	North 	Meacham 	Northwest Hwy 
Harrison 	West 	Belle Plaine 	Devon 
Hastings 	North 	Meacham 	Cul-de-sac west of Leonard 
Helen 	West 	Glenview 	Woodland 
Hoffman 	West 	Dead end north of Farrell 	Manor 
Hoffman 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Busse 
Home 	West 	Church 	Ballard 
Home 	West 	Avondale 	Cedar 
Home 	West 	Touhy 	Talcott 
Home 	West 	Talcott 	Devon 
Imperial 	North 	Canfield 	Washington 
Irwin 	North 	Broadway 	Dee 
Irwin 	North 	Dee 	Riverside 
Joyce 	North 	Overhill 	East Avenue 
Kathleen 	North 	Michaeljohn 	Brookline 
Kent 	North 	Clifton 	Chester 
Knight 	West 	North Terrace 	Laverne 
Knight 	West 	Avondale 	Touhy 
Knight 	West 	Crescent 	Castle 
Lahon 	North 	Oriole 	Wisner 
Lahon 	North 	Greenwood 	Western 
Lahon 	North 	Park Plaine 	Wesley 
Lake 	North 	Avondale 	Stewart 
Laverne 	North 	Greenwood 	Tomawadee 
Leonard 	West 	Hastings 	Hansen 
Lincoln 	West 	Crain 	Dead end south of Crain 
Lincoln 	West 	North Terrace 	Northwest Hwy 
Lincoln 	West 	Avondale 	Elm 
Lincoln 	West 	Touhy 	Park Ridge Blvd. 
Lincoln 	West 	Granville 	Glenlake 
Linden 	West 	Devon 	Granville 
Linden 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Peterson 	Alley north of Higgins 
Lois 	North 	Grace 	Western 
Lois Court 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Lois 	Lois 
Lundergan 	West 	Farrell 	Northwest Hwy 
Lundergan 	West 	Manor 	Busse 
Manor 	North 	Potter 	Northwest Hwy 
Marguerite 	North 	Western 	Hamlin 
Marlowe 	North 	Dead end east of Home 	Home 
Marvin 	North 	Divided pavement west of Wilkinson 	Wilkinson 
Mary Jane 	North 	Cul-de-sac east of Dee 	Dee 
Mayfield 	North 	Potter 	Elliott 
Meacham 	West 	Oakton 	Edgemont 
Meacham 	West 	Sibley 	Elm 
Merrill 	East 	Lahon 	Ottawa 
Merrill 	West 	Ottawa 	Touhy 
Michaeljohn 	North 	Kathleen 	Prospect 
Milton 	North 	Broadway 	Dee 
Newton 	West 	Dead-end north of Thorndale 	Alley north of Higgins 
Norman 	North 	Dead end east of Home 	Rose 
Oriole 	West 	Oakton 	Sibley 
Ottawa 	West 	Kathleen 	Edgemont 
Ottawa 	West 	Lahon 	Sibley 
Overhill 	West 	Lahon 	Sibley 
Park Plaine 	West 	Oakton 	Dead end south of Sibley 
Parkside 	West 	Church 	Davis 
Parkside 	West 	Ballard 	Dempster 
Parkside 	West 	Manor 	Glenview 
Parkwood 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Busse Hwy 
Parkwood 	West 	Virginia 	Cherry 
Peale 	West 	Albion 	Devon 
Peterson 	North 	Linden 	Western 
Poplar 	North 	Western 	Parkside 
Prairie 	North 	Cumberland 	Greenwood 
Prairie 	North 	Hamlin 	Rose 
Redfield 	West 	Sibley 	Cul-de-sac south of Elm 
Redfield 	West 	Crescent 	Dead end south of Crescent 
Redfield 	West 	Dead end north of Talcott 	Talcott 
Root 	West 	Hansen 	Elm 
Rose 	West 	Sibley 	Cul-de-sac south of Elm 
Rose 	West 	Touhy 	Talcott 
Rosemont 	North 	Vine 	Cumberland 
Rowe 	West 	Busse 	Northwest Hwy 
Ruth 	North 	Dee 	Parkwood 
St. James 	North 	Cumberland 	Chester 
Scottlynne 	North 	Sibley 	Sibley 
Seeley 	West 	Busse 	Oakton 
Seminary 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Marvin 
Seminary 	West 	Avondale 	Touhy 
Shibley 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Busse 
Shoreline 	West 	Dead end north of Cedar 	Dead end south of Cedar 
Sibley 	North 	Oriole 	Meacham 
Sibley 	North 	Aldine 	Hamlin 
Spring 	North 	Vine 	Crescent 
Stanley 	North 	Avondale 	Washington 
Stewart 	North 	Belle Plaine 	Rose 
Summit 	Southwest 	East City limits 	Washington 
Sylviawood 	West 	Oakton 	Dead end south of Sibley 
Talcott Pl. 	Northeast 	Washington 	Crescent 
Thorndale 	North 	Canfield 	Courtland 
Tomawadee 	West 	Cul-de-sac north of Laverne 	Northwest Hwy 
Tyrell 	West 	Dead end north of Northwest Hwy 	Northwest Hwy 
Tyrell 	West 	Glenview 	Busse Hwy 
Vernon 	West 	Greendale 	Northwest Hwy 
Vine 	East 	319 S. Vine 	Belle Plaine 
Vine 	West 	Belle Plaine 	Devon 
Vine 	West 	Talcott 	Alley north of Higgins 
Virginia 	North 	Dee 	Riverside 
Virginia 	South 	Dee 	Riverside 
Walnut 	North 	Parkside 	Dee 
Warren 	West 	Stewart 	Belle Plaine 
Washington 	West 	Lake 	Devon 
Washington 	West 	Talcott Place 	Higgins 
Weeg Way 	North 	Western Ave. 	Luther Lane 
Wesley 	West 	Lahon 	Sibley 
Western 	West 	Northwest Hwy 	Poplar 
Wilma 	North 	Overhill 	East Avenue 
Wisner 	West 	Lahon 	Touhy 
Woodland 	North 	Dead end east of Hamlin 	Dee 
Woodview 	West 	Church 	Ballard 
Yost 	North 	Canfield 	Washington 
 
(Ord. No. 2016-78 , § 2, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2019-18 , § 2, 3-18-2019)  
13-14-3 - NO PARKING AREAS DURING CERTAIN HOURS AFTER SNOWFALL 
The following areas shall be designated as "Tow Zones." It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or to be parked in any of the following places or zones for a period of 24 hours after two inches (2") of snow has fallen but only during the time periods designated: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From 	To 	Restricted Hours 
Busse Hwy 	Northeast 	Western 	Shibley 	10 p.m. to 6 a.m. 
Prospect 	West 	Devon 	First alley south of Devon 	10 p.m. to 6 a.m. 
Talcott 	Southwest 	Devon/Prospect 	Courtland 	10 p.m. to 6 a.m. 
Talcott 	Northeast 	Devon/Fairview 	Courtland 	10 p.m. to 6 a.m. 
  
13-14-4 - CONFLICTING PROVISIONS 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article to the contrary, this Chapter shall have a preemptory right of enforcement over any and all conflicting provisions of this Article.  
CHAPTER 15 - LIMITED TIME PARKING AREAS 
SECTION 
 
13-15-1 - FIFTEEN-MINUTE LOADING ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than 15 minutes: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Fairview 	West 	40-foot "15 Minute Parking Zone", from property line to property line of 26 and 28 South Fairview 
Higgins 	North 	20-foot "15 Minute Parking Zone", in front of 510 Higgins, from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
Main 	South Side 	Two spaces, from 10 feet to 35 feet east of the crosswalk at South Fairview 
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	74-foot "15 Minute Loading Zone" from 86' east of Meacham to 160' east of Meacham 
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	70-foot "15 Minute Loading Zone" from 100' northwest of Touhy to a point 170' northwest of Touhy 
Prospect 	East Side 	Two spaces north of center crosswalk adjacent to handicap parking area 
Rowe 		Northwest Hwy to the first alley southwest of Northwest Hwy 
Summit 	Northeast 	From a point 100' southeast of Prospect to a point 140' southeast of Prospect 
Summit 	East 	65-foot "15 Minute Loading Zone" from 75' north of Touhy to a point 140' north of Touhy 
 
Parking Lots 	No. of Spaces 
Dee Road Lot - west side of Dee 	3 
 
(Ord. No. 97-47, 7-21-1997; Ord. No. 2006-17, 2-20-2006; Ord. No. 2006-122,12-18-2006; Ord. No. 2008-69, 9-15-2008; Ord. No. 2008-89, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2016-70 , §§ 1, 2, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 2017-41 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-42 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-34 , § 1, 9-17-2018)  
13-15-1.1 - FIFTEEN-MINUTE EMERGENCY PARKING ZONE 
Street 	Side of Street 	Description 	From-To 	Restricted Hours 
Albion 	South 	20-foot Emergency Parking Zone 	Located approximately 195' west of Prospect 	8 a.m to 4 p.m. School Days only 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-65, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 2019-59 , § 1, 11-4-2019)  
13-15-2 - THIRTY-MINUTE ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than 30 minutes: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Brophy 	East 	Higgins to first alley north 
Butler Place 	South 	Courtland to Vine 
Northwest Hwy 	Northeast 	One (1) spot southeast of the curb extension at 137 North Northwest Hwy, and one (1) spot northwest of the curb extension at 143 North Northwest Hwy 
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	From 76' southwest of the corner of Prospect to 66' north of the alley 
 
Parking Lot 	No. of Spaces 
 
(No zones designated) 
(Ord. No. 2004-55, 8-16-2004; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 2014-14, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 2015-66, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 2019-41 , § 2, 6-17-2019)  
13-15-3 - ONE-HOUR ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than one hour: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 	Restricted Hours 
Crescent, West 	North 	350' east of Western to 380' east 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m., School Days Only 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-58 , § 3, 10-16-2017)  
13-15-4 - NINETY-MINUTE ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than 90 minutes: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Canfield 	West 	Talcott to Yost 
Courtland 	West 	Devon, south 100' 
Crescent 	South 	330 Crescent to Courtland 
Crescent 	South 	Fairview to the alley east of Fairview between the hours of 7 a.m. and 6 p.m., Mon.—Fri. 
Cumberland 	West 	Garden to Prairie 
Fortuna 	West 	Oakton to Northwest Hwy 
Fortuna 	East 	100' north of Oakton to 130' south of Northwest Hwy 
Prairie 	Southwest 	Garden to Cumberland 
Prospect 	West 	Grant Pl. to Cedar 
Yost 	North 	Canfield to 75' west thereof 
 
PARKING LOTS 
Parking Lots 	No. Of Spaces 	Hours Of Operation 
Meacham Parking Lot 	70 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m., Sunday through Saturday 
Uptown Parking Garage—Surface Lot 	43 	
Uptown Parking Court 	92 	
 
(Ord. No. 2003-59, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 2006-93, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 2009-15, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 2016-66, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2017-43 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
13-15-5 - TWO-HOUR ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than two hours: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 
Busse 	Northeast 	Approximately 375' northwest of the west curbline of Greenwood to 1,010' northwest of Greenwood 
Busse 	Southwest 	Approximately 300' west of Greenwood to approximately 730' northwest of Greenwood 
Crescent 	West 	Talcott to the first alley south of Talcott 
Cumberland 	East 	Third to 100' north 
Cumberland 	West 	Garden to 100' north 
Devon 	North 	Canfield to Cleveland 
Devon 	South 	Canfield to Grove 
Devon 	South 	Courtland to Cumberland, except Sundays and holidays 
Devon 	North 	Courtland to Prospect, except Sundays and holidays 
Fairview 	Both sides 	Alley south of Devon to Rosemont; resident permits excepted as provided in 13-13-2 
Fairview 	Both sides 	Higgins to 200' north of the first alley north of Higgins, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 
Fairview 	East 	Devon to first alley south of Devon 
Linden 	East 	Higgins Rd. to First Alley North of Higgins, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., except Sundays and holidays 
Meacham 	East 	Cedar to Elm 
Meacham 	West 	A point 325' north of Cedar to Elm) 
Prospect 	Both sides 	Devon to Talcott 
Vine 	West 	Talcott south to first driveway south of Talcott 
Weeg Way 	South 	Vernon to Luther Lane 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-61, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-64, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 2007-78, 10-15-2007; Ord. No. 2008-121, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 2014-14, 4-7-2014)  
13-15-6 - THREE-HOUR ZONE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than three hours: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 	Special Times 
Designated 
Courtland 	Both Sides 	Butler Place to Prospect 	
Fairview 	Both Sides 	Main to Garden 	
Garden 	Northeast 	Prospect to first alley northwest of Prospect 	
Grant Place 	South 	403 to 325 Grant Place 	
Grant Place 	South 	Prospect to a point approximately 220' east of Prospect 	
Main 	Both Sides 	Prospect to Prairie 	
Main 	NE 	Touhy to Prairie, designated permit spaces 	3-Hour Free for cars first parked there after 11 a.m. 
Meacham 	West 	South of property line of 200 Meacham to a point 325' north 	
Meacham 	Both Sides 	Touhy to Northwest Hwy 	3-Hour Parking, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Mon—Sun 
Morris 	East 	50' south of Northwest Hwy to 188' south of Northwest Hwy 	3-Hour Parking, 9 a.m. to 10 p.m., Mon—Sun 
Morris 	West 	81' south of Northwest Hwy to 176' south of Northwest Hwy 	3-Hour Parking, 9 a.m. to 10 p.m., Mon—Sun 
Northwest Hwy 	North 	From 229 N. Northwest Hwy to Elm Street 	
Northwest Hwy 	Northeast 	From 127 North Northwest Hwy to 137 North Northwest Hwy, and from 143 North Northwest Hwy to Meacham 	
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	Prospect to Ridge Terrace 	
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	50' west of Prospect to Summit 	
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	65' west of Summit to 153' west of Summit 	
Northwest Hwy 	Southwest 	Meacham to 86' east of Meacham 	
Prairie 	Both Sides 	Main to first alley sough of Main 	
Prospect 	Both Sides 	Garden to Grant 	
Prospect 	West 	Garden to 100' south of Crescent 	
Ridge Terrace 	West 	Northwest Hwy south to the first drive 	
Summit 	North 	Ridge to Euclid, designated permit spaces 	3-Hour Free for cars first parked there after 11 a.m. 
Summit 	Northeast 	From a point 140' southeast of Prospect to Euclid 	
Summit 	Southwest 	Prospect southeast 250' 	
Touhy 	North 	From a point 345' east of the curb line of Prospect to a point 570' east of the east curb line of Prospect 	
Vine 	Northeast 	85' southeast of Prospect to Butler Place 	
Vine 	West 	Prospect to a point 105' southeast of Butler Place 	
 
Parking Lots 	No. of Spaces 	Special Times Designated 
Central Lot 	133 	
Summit Parking Lot 	118 	
Summit Parking Lot North 	61 	
Morris Parking Lot 	28 	
Uptown Parking Garage 	197 	
Central Parking Lot, designated permit spaces 	18 	3-Hour Free for cars first parked there after 11 a.m. 
Touhy-Summit Parking Lot 		3-Hour Free for cars first parked there after 11 a.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-63, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-68, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2008-121, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 2009-15, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 2015-66, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-38 , § 1, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 2017-43 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-39 , § 2, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-44 , § 2, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-47 , § 4, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 2019-41 , § 1, 6-17-2019)  
13-15-7 - ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING TIMES 
All regulations within this Chapter that prescribe time limits for 90-Minute, Two-Hour, and Three-Hour Parking Zones shall only be enforceable from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. 2017-49 , § 1, 9-5-2017)  
13-15-8 - REPEATED VIOLATIONS 
Permitting a vehicle to be parked in excess of any multiple of the time period specified in this Chapter shall constitute a subsequent or repeated violation and not a continuing violation.  
13-15-9 - FOUR HOUR-ZONES 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than four hours: 
Street 	Side of Street 	From - To 	Hours 
Manor Lane 	North 	Tyrell to Dee 	8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on school days 
  
CHAPTER 16 - PARKING METERS AND METERED PARKING 
SECTION 
 
13-16-1 - METERED PARKING RULES 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit any vehicle to remain parked in any parking meter zone for a period longer than designated on such meter, during the hours and days designated thereon or to park a vehicle in any such zone without paying the fee hereinafter designated, or to permit a vehicle to remain parked longer in any such zone than for a period of time for which the required fee was paid.  
13-16-2 - PRAIRIE AVENUE LOT RESTRICTION 
It shall be unlawful for any person or employer, servant or agent to park or cause to be parked any vehicle in the public parking lot commonly known as the "Prairie Avenue Lot" unless such vehicle has been registered under the terms and provisions of Chapter 19 of this Article and has displayed hereon a current vehicle sticker issued by the City. Exceptions from the vehicle sticker requirement apply on Saturday, Sunday, & holidays, or when parked there for the first time after 11 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2019-32 , § 1, 5-20-2019)  
13-16-3 - PLACING METERS 
Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones as established and provided for in this Chapter, and shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display a signal whether or not the parking space adjacent to such meter is legally in use.  
13-16-4 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 3-2-2009)  
13-16-5 - PLACING COINS IN METERS 
Any person desiring to park any vehicle within such parking meter space shall deposit the proper coins for the time desired as follows, consistent with the markings and restrictions on the meter servicing said space: 
A.  Five Hour Meters: 
$0.50 per hour 
B.  Twelve Hour Meters: 
$0.50 per hour 
C.  Parking Lot Coin Deposit Boxes: 
$2.00 for each 12 hours or any fraction thereof at any deposit box other than Prairie Avenue Coin Deposit Box. 
$2.00 for each 12 hours or any fraction thereof for the Prairie Avenue Coin Deposit Box. 
(Ord. No. 2009-40, 5-18-2009; Ord. No. 2009-68, 9-21-2009; Ord. No. 2009-82, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 2016-32 , § 2, 4-18-2016; Ord. No. 2016-54 , § 1, 7-18-2016)  
13-16-6 - TAMPERING WITH METER 
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City Council to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this Chapter.  
13-16-7 - SLUGS PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful to deposit any slug, metallic device or other substitute for a coin in any parking meter.  
13-16-8 - ZONES DESIGNATED 
Parking meter zones are hereby created on the following streets and in the following parking lots, and hours of operation of meters therein are established as follows: 
Parking Meter Zones 
Street 	Side of Street 	Boundaries 	No. of Spaces 	Time Limits Hours 	Hours of Operation 
Brophy 	W 	Devon to 1 st alley south 	3 	5 	9 a.m.—6 p.m. except Thur., 9 a.m.—9 p.m. except Sun. & holidays 
Busse 	NE 	Morris to approximately 1,200 feet northwest of Morris 	40 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays, coin box only, there is no charge for vehicles which are parked there for the first time after 11 a.m. 
Busse 	SW 	Elm to 200 SE Touhy 	16 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays 
Busse 	SW 	Touhy to 200 SE Elm 	54 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays, coin box only, there is no charge for vehicles which are parked there for the first time after 11 a.m. 
Butler Pl. 	N 	Courtland to Vine 	7 	5 	9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Thur., 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., except Sun. & holidays 
Fairview 	W 	Devon to 1 st alley south 	3 	5 	9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Thur., 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., except Sun. & holidays 
Garden 	NE 	First alley NW of Prospect to Fairview 	6 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays 
Prairie 	NW 	First alley SW of Main to Garden 	12 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays 
Prairie 	SE 	First alley SW of Main to Garden 	13 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holiday 
Prospect 	W 	Devon to first alley south 	4 	5 	9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Thur., 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., except Sun. & holidays 
Ridge Terrace 	NW 	Summit northeast to the first drive 	5 	12 	6 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays 
Summit 	N 	Washington to a point 250 feet east 	11 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holiday 
Washington 	E 	Northwest Hwy to the first drive south of Touhy 	13 	5 	9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays 
Washington 	W 	Northwest Hwy to Summit, unless otherwise specified 	10 	5 	9 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holiday 
 
Parking Lots 
Parking Lots 	No. of Spaces 	Time Limit Hours 	Hours of Operation 
Dee Road Lot 
Coin box only—west of Dee Road 	140 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat, Sun & holidays 
Dee Road Lot 
Coin box only—east side Dee Rd 	35 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat, Sun & of holidays 
Uptown Parking Court 	50 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat, Sun & holidays 
Prairie Avenue Lot Coin Box 	58 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat., Sun. & holidays, there is no charge for vehicles which are parked there for the first time after 11 a.m. 
Summit Avenue Lot 
(RR) meters 
Prospect to Euclid 	12 	12 	8 a.m. to 6 p.m., except Sat, Sun & holidays 
Summit Avenue Lot (RR) 
Euclid to Washington coin box 	123 	12 	7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except Sat, Sun & holidays, there is no charge for vehicles which are parked there for the first time after 11 a.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-60, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003-62, 11-3-2003; Ord. No. 2006-63, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2006-122, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 2008-28, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 2008-121, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 2009-48, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2015-66, § 6 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-51 , §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 2016-69 , § 1, 11-21-2016; Ord. No. 2017-44 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-47 , § 3, 8-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 1, 4-16-2018)  
13-16-9 - HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES 
The following parking lots shall have spaces designated for handicapped parking: 
Parking Lot 	No. of Spaces 
Central Lot 	4 
Uptown Parking Court 	3 
Prairie Avenue Lot 	1 
Library Lot 	1 
City Hall 	2 
Summit Parking Lot 	5 
Meacham Parking Lot 	3 
Dee Road Lot—West Side of Dee Road 	6 
Summit Parking Lot North 	1 
Morris Parking Lot 	2 
Uptown Parking Garage 	7 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-63, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2008-68, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2006-93, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 2006-122, 12-18-2006; Ord. No. 2007-40, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2009-28, 4-8-2009)  
13-16-10 - PARKING METER ZONE FOR UPTOWN PARKING GARAGE 
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or remain parked in any of the following places or zones for more than five hours. 
Parking Lots 
Parking Lots 	No. of Spaces 	Time Limit Hours 	Hours of Operation 
Uptown Parking Garage 	39 	5 	7 a.m. to 10 p.m., except Sun. & holidays 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, 3-2-2009)  
CHAPTER 17 - STORAGE OF TOWED VEHICLES 
SECTION 
 
13-17-1 - NOTIFICATION TO OWNER 
Whenever it becomes necessary to deposit a towed vehicle on City property, the Police Department shall immediately thereafter notify the registered owner of such motor vehicle to remove said vehicle within 24 hours after receipt of said notice.  
13-17-2 - STORAGE CHARGE 
Any person who fails to remove a towed vehicle from City property within 24 hours after receipt of notice served upon him by the City to so remove said vehicle, shall pay to the City a storage charge in the sum and amount of $3.00 per day. No such vehicle shall be released to an owner until said storage charges are paid.  
CHAPTER 18 - CONDITION OF VEHICLES 
SECTION 
 
13-18-1 - NOISE 
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. This includes but is not limited to mufflers or squeaking of tires.  
13-18-2 - SMOKE AND FUMES 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke as to be dangerous to the health or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles or to limit visibility.  
13-18-3 - BLUE LIGHTS 
Emergency vehicles operated by the Police and Fire Departments of Park Ridge may be equipped with oscillating, rotating or flashing lights which may be blue in color.  
CHAPTER 19 - LICENSE AND LICENSE INSIGNIA 
SECTION 
 
13-19-1 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle which is registered as required by the Illinois Vehicle Code to an address within the City shall pay to the City each year, a tax or license fee for each such vehicle used or located within the City. No license shall be required for any vehicle owned by any public school district, park district, or by this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2012-34, 6-4-2012)  
13-19-2 - APPLICATION 
Any person desiring a license for any such vehicle shall file an application with the City Clerk, upon a form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired, the place where such vehicle is to be kept when not in use, and such other information as may be prescribed; and upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee hereinafter provided, to the City Clerk, the Mayor shall issue, or cause to be issued, a license which shall be attested by the City Clerk authorizing the use of such vehicle within the City, until the expiration of such license.  
13-19-3 - FEES 
The license fees to be paid annually to the City Clerk shall be as follows: 
Motor bicycles or motorcycles ..... 30.00 
Motor vehicles except motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles, motor vehicles which are used for public hire, and any vehicle which is registered and licensed with the Secretary of State of Illinois as an antique vehicle ..... 45.00 
Motor trucks, motor coaches, motor buses and motor-driven truck trailers of a weight not exceeding 8,000 pounds including weight of vehicle and maximum load ..... 60.00 
Motor trucks, motor coaches, motor buses and motor-driven truck trailers of a weight not exceeding 12,000 pounds but more than 8,000 pounds including weight of vehicle and maximum load ..... 85.00 
Motor trucks, motor coaches, motor buses and motor-driven truck trailers of a weight not exceeding 16,000 pounds but more than 12,000 pounds including weight of vehicle and maximum load ..... 105.00 
Motor driven vehicles of more than 35 horsepower, used for commercial purposes, other than those hereinbefore specified ..... 125.00 
Recreational vehicles ..... 60.00 
Dealer license plates, per plate ..... 30.00 
Transfer Fee ..... 5.00 
(Ord. No. 2002-09, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 206-29, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2010-42, 4-19-2010)  
13-19-4 - LICENSE STICKER OR INSIGNIA 
Upon payment of the above license fee and the issuance of said license, the City Clerk shall issue a sticker or a tag. For a passenger vehicle displaying a current Illinois "Ex-Prisoner of War" license plate, payment of the above fee shall be waived, provided that no more than one such fee shall be waived for any applicant. In addition, for a passenger vehicle that is owned by a consular officer, employee or family member forming part of such officer's or employee's households, payment of the above fee shall be waived in accordance with federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-34, 6-4-2012)  
13-19-5 - DISPLAYING INSIGNIA 
The tag or sticker evidencing the license issued hereunder by the City Clerk shall be issued in the following manner: 
Passenger Vehicles, Trucks and Recreational Vehicles: The sticker shall be securely and permanently affixed to the lower right-hand corner of the windshield. 
Dealer's Vehicles: Metal tag shall be securely affixed to the front State license plate in such a manner that the same can be clearly read while not obstructing the readability of the State plate. 
Motorcycles and Mopeds: Metal tag shall be securely affixed to the rear State license plate in such a manner that the same can be clearly read while not obstructing the readability of the State plate.  
13-19-6 - DUE DATE, EXPIRATION AND TERM 
The License Year shall run from the third Saturday in June through the third Friday in June of the following year. The license fee shall be reduced by 50% in the event that the applicant became the owner of the vehicle or became a resident of the City after December 15th of any License Year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, 1-20-2014; Ord. No. 2015-79 , § 3, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-04 , § 3, 1-18-2016)  
13-19-7 - USE OF FUNDS 
All revenue derived from wheel tax licenses shall be used solely for the repair, paving or maintenance of street and alley pavements.  
13-19-8 - PENALTY 
Any person who shall fail to purchase the applicable license on or before the required date shall pay an additional $25.00 for the purchase of such license if the purchase is made after the third Friday in June, but before the third Friday in September; and an additional $50.00 if the purchase is made after the third Friday in September. However, that additional purchase price shall not apply to any person who provides the City Clerk with proof in the form of a bill of sale in the proper legal form evidencing purchase of the motor vehicle within 30 days prior to the application for and purchase of said license insignia. Provided, further, that such additional fee shall not apply to any person who at the time of purchase of the license provides satisfactory evidence that he or she became a resident of the City during the License Year. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense except that for the failure to display a license after purchase, the fine shall be not less than $25.00; a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day when a violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, 1-20-2014)  
CHAPTER 20 - PENALTIES[1] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Payment schedule of some fines under this Article, Art. 20, Ch. 1. 
 
13-20-1 - GENERAL FINE 
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense except that the fine for any parking violation shall be not more than $200.00 and except that any conviction of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall be punished as provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007)  
13-20-2 - PROOF 
The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of the person shall be considered prime facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation.  
13-20-3 - LICENSE SUSPENSION FOR UNPAID PARKING OR AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW TICKETS 
A.  In any case in which a person has failed, after exhaustion of judicial review procedures, to pay any fine or penalty imposed for ten or more parking violations or to pay any fine or penalty imposed for five or more automated traffic law violations, the City Clerk shall send notice to that person, that if the person fails to pay the fine or penalty owing within 45 days, the City will notify the Secretary of State that the person's driver's license is eligible for suspension, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. The notice shall state that the person may obtain a photocopy of an original ticket or computer generated record by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the Clerk with a request for a copy. The notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State. 
B.  If the person owing the fine or penalty, as set forth above, fails to satisfy the fine or penalty within 45 days of the sending of the notice specified, the City Clerk shall make a certified report to the Secretary of State, notifying the Secretary of State that the person's driver's license is eligible for suspension pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. A copy of the certified report shall be sent to the person named therein. 
C.  Any person as to whom the City Clerk has made a certified report to the Secretary of State of eligibility for driver's license suspension, as provided above, may challenge the accuracy of that report on the grounds that either (1) the person named is not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten or more parking violation notices or five or more automated traffic law violations on the date or dates such notices were issued, or (2) the person has already paid the fine or penalty for the ten or more parking violations or five or more automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report. Such challenge shall be made in writing to the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the certified report, shall state the grounds for the challenge and shall include evidence supporting the grounds for the challenge. 
D.  Upon payment of the reported fine or penalty, or upon determination that the report to the Secretary of State was in error, the City Clerk shall so notify the Secretary of State in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State and shall provide a copy of the notice to the person named therein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
13-20-4 - COMPLIANCE CITATIONS 
A.  Any person charged with violating any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Park Ridge Municipal Code set forth below may settle and compromise the charge by: 
1.  Paying to the City of Park Ridge within 14 days of the date of the violation the sum of $50.00; and 
2.  Presenting proof of correction of the condition charged. 
If payment and proof of correction are not received within 14 days of the date of the violation, the amount payable shall be $75.00. If payment and proof of correction are not received within 30 days of the date of the violation, the offer of settlement and compromise stated herein is withdrawn and the violation shall thereupon be charged in a complaint filed with the Circuit Court of Cook County or before the Administrative Hearing Officer in accordance with Section 20-6-11 of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. If a complaint is filed with the Circuit Court of Cook County or before the Administrative Hearing Officer or if a hearing is requested by the person charged with the violation, the penalty may be reduced by 50% if the person presents proof of correction of the condition charged. 
B.  The following violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge shall be subject to the procedures described herein: 
625/5 	
3-112 (b) 	Failure to transfer title within five days 
3-401 (a) 	No valid registration - never applied 
3-404 	No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record 
3-411 	Failure to carry registration card 
3-413 (a, b) 	Improper display of license plate 
3-413 (f) 	Operating vehicle with expired registration 
3-416 	Failure to notify Secretary of State of name/address change 
3-417(a) 	Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration card, plate or sticker 
3-701 (1) 	No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained 
3-701 (2) 	No valid registration reciprocity, prorate or appointment 
5-201 (h) 	No in-house plates 
5-202 (e) 	Failure to display three tow truck plates 
11-1419.01 	Failure to display Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Identification Card 
11-1419.02 	Failure to display external Illinois motor fuel tax identification device 
11-1507 (a) 	Operating bicycle without lamp and reflector 
11-1507.1 	Operating of motorized pedacycle without lamp and reflector 
12-101 (a) 	Operating vehicle with unsafe equipment 
12-201 (a) 	Operating motorcycle without lighted head lamp 
12-201 (b) 	Driving vehicle without two lighted head lamps and tail lamps when required 
12-201 (c) 	No white rear registration light 
12-202 (a, b) 	Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors - second division vehicle 
12-203 (a) 	Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on highway 
12-204 	Improper lamp or flag on projecting load 
12-205 	Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles 
12-207 (a) 	Improper use of more than one spot lamp 
12-207 (b) 	Improper use of more than three auxiliary driving lamps 
12-208 (a) 	No stop signal lamp or device 
12-209 (c) 	Defective backup lights 
12-210 (a) 	Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 500 feet on approach of vehicle 
12-211 (a) 	Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only one head lamp 
12-211 (b) 	Improper use of more than four lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps 
12-212 (a) 	Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle 
12-212 (b) 	Unlawful use of flashing lights 
12-215 	Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights 
12-301 	Use of defective brakes 
12-401 	Unlawful use of metal studded tire 
12-405 (d) 	Use of unsafe tire 
12-501 (a) 	Operation of vehicle without windshield 
12-502 	Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror 
12-503 (a) 	Obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to driver 
12-503 (b) 	Unlawful application of tinted film to windshield or window(s) adjacent to driver - All vehicles manufactured after 12/31/81 
12-503 (c) 	Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended object(s) 
12-503 (d) 	Operation of vehicle without windshield clearing device; operation of vehicle with view obstructed by snow, ice or moisture 
12-503 (e) 	Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any window 
12-601 (a) 	Operation of vehicle with defective horn 
12-601 (b) 	Unlawful possession or use of a siren 
12-602 	Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system loud or no muffler 
12-603.1 	Operation of vehicle without two front seat safety belts - vehicles of 1961 or later model years 
12-604(a) 	Operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to driver 
12-606 	Operation of tow truck 
12-606 (a) 	Identifying sign attached on each side 
12-606 (b) 	Required equipment - one broom, shovel, trash can and fire extinguisher 
12-606 (c) 	Removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/grease deposits 
12-606 (d) 	Insurance policy in cab 
12-607 (a) 	Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle suspension system - body lifted in excess of three inches from chassis 
12-607.1 (a) 	Operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess of 22 inches above ground 
12-608 (a) 	Operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 9,000 pounds or less or a recreational vehicle without two bumpers 
12-608 (b) 	Operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height 
12-610 (a) 	Operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver 
12-702 (a) 	Operation of second division vehicle without carrying flares/warning devices 
12-702 (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) 	Failure to use flares/warning devices when second division vehicle is disabled 
12-704 (a) 	Failure to placard vehicle transporting explosives 
12-704 (b) 	Failure to carry two fire extinguisher within vehicle transporting explosives 
12-707 	Overloaded school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used for hire 
12-711 	Operation of garbage trucks, roll-off hoist or roll-on container without audible backing warning system 
12-806 	Failure to cover school bus sign 
12-808 	Operating school bus without fire extinguisher 
12-809 	Operating school bus without first aid kit 
12-810 	Transporting handicapped passenger(s) without restraining device 
13-111 	Operating without certificate of valid safety test attached to windshield - second division vehicle 
13-A-104 (c) 	Failure to display valid unexpired emission inspection sticker (affected Illinois counties only) 
15-105 	Load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders or six inches beyond right fenders of first division vehicle 
15-106 	Failure to fasten loose projecting member 
15-108 	Failure to plank edge of pavement of any vehicle in excess of 8,000 pounds 
15-109 (a) 	Spilling load on highway 
15-109 (b) 	Operating loaded vehicle without securely fastened covering 
15-109.1 	Operating second division vehicle with load falling, blowing or dropping to highway 
15-114 	Unlawful pushing of disabled vehicle 
18C-4104 (a) 	Operating without registration - intrastate or interstate 
18C-4604 (1) 	Operation without current cab card and Illinois identifier stamp 
18C-4604 (3) 	Use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp issued to another carrier 
18C-4604 (4) 	Failure to display or present a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp 
18C-4701 (1) 	Operating without trade name, license and registration number of carrier painted or affixed to both doors of power unit 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-45, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 2010-30, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014)  
CHAPTER 21 - OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2004-45, 6-21-2004. 
Editor's note— Sections 13-21-8—13-21-12 were deleted by Ord. No. 2015-67, adopted December 7, 2015. 
 
13-21-1 - DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
A.  A "one-way or single trip movement" means one move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for five consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the Park Ridge Police Department. 
B.  "Round-trip movement" means a trip from point of origin to the point of destination and back to point of origin over the same route. Round-trip permits are effective for ten consecutive days from the date of issuance. 
C.  Limited continuous use movements of oversized and overweight vehicles are valid for a period of either 90 or 365 days, as set forth in the approved permit. A limited continuous permit may be issued for unlimited trips during the allowed time period. 
(Ord. No. 2015-67, 12-7-2015)  
13-21-2 - PERMITS 
A.  A permit issued by the Park Ridge Police Department shall be required for the movement of any vehicle, which is non-divisible or carrying a load which is non-divisible, on a roadway or bridge within the jurisdiction of the City which exceeds the following limits: 
1.  Maximum gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds; 
2.  Maximum gross length of 42 feet for single vehicles, 55 feet for tractor-semitrailer combinations, and more than 60 feet for all other combinations; 
3.  Maximum gross width of more than eight feet, six inches; 
4.  Maximum gross height of more than 13 feet, six inches; 
5.  Maximum axle weight of more than 20,000 pounds; 
6.  Maximum axle tandem weight of more than 34,000 pounds. 
This shall apply to any single vehicle or series of vehicles pulled by a single tractor. With respect to those roadways and bridges under construction, road closures with or without signage do not exempt overweight and/or over-sized movements from permit requirements when any traffic is allowed through construction zone(s) and when the movement is made by applicant(s) not performing construction on the roadway closed. In an emergency declared by resolution of the City Council, the requirements to obtain permits may be waived. 
Exempt from permits are the following: 
1.  Fire department vehicles; 
2.  Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration; 
3.  City owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair; 
4.  Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or operated by any governmental body. 
B.  Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement. 
C.  Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and over-sized are valid only one half-hour before sunrise until one half-hour after sunset, on any day for which the permit would be considered valid by the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
D.  Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee. 
E.  The City may issue revisions to permits: 
1.  To correct an error attributed to the City; 
2.  To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before the move; 
3.  To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit, before the move is made; 
4.  Any revisions made at the request of the permittee for purposes of changing weights, dimensions, routes or load description shall be made before any move is made at a cost of $100.00 per permit. 
F.  The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the permittee and the City that the move described in the application will take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the City's Police Department Traffic Section any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the City or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms. Oversize and overweight permits may be processed by the Police Department electronically, through a contractual relationship with a service provider. 
G.  The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of City roads, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the driver's possession in either paper or electronic form at all times unless otherwise directed in writing by the Park Ridge Police Department and presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the purpose of inspection. 
H.  If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridges or highways analyses performed and completed in advance of any permit movement. 
I.  All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable federal, State and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
J.  The Police Department shall maintain a list of reasonable provisions to accompany every permit. The Police Chief or designee may amend this document from time to time at his or her discretion. The provisions may not be more restrictive than those established by the Illinois Department of Transportation or the most current phase of interstate harmonization policies issued by the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials, except in extreme cases. Permit provisions must accompany every permit. 
K.  All single-trip or round-trip permits are limited to movements on assigned routes only. 
L.  All quarterly or annual permits are restricted to the following maximum limitations and routing: 
1.  The vehicle may not exceed 12 feet in width, 13 feet, six inches in height, and 115 feet in length. 
2.  The vehicle may not move across bridges or structures that are posted or listed as such on the City truck route map. 
3.  The vehicle may not move on a "no-truck" route that is posted or listed as such on the City truck route map, without prior written permission from the Police Department. 
4.  The vehicle may not use any City street as a cut-through to avoid using a state, county, or township highway. 
These permits are subject to all standards of application set forth in Section 13-21-4.B of this code, except that the load may be interchanged provided none of the above listed maximum weight and size dimensions are exceeded. Quarterly and annual permits must list the registration number and state for the power unit, and vehicle identification number (VIN). The serial number of the power unit, and/or owner applied number must also be listed, if applicable. 
M.  Permits are void if altered by the permittee. The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a privilege by the City and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the City may deem related to its governmental interests including, but not limited to: 
1.  A permittee's knowingly providing incorrect information in an application for a permit; 
2.  A permittee, its agents, or employees acting on a permit which has been altered for purposes of deception; 
3.  Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal, State, or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods; 
4.  Moving on City streets without a valid permit as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-67, 12-7-2015)  
13-21-3 - APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT 
A.  Permits may be granted only pursuant to a completed application. Permits for proposed moves may be issued only if the Park Ridge Police Department is satisfied that: 
1.  The City roadways and bridges will not be damaged; and 
2.  The safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected. 
B.  Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight vehicle and/or load must be made to the Traffic Section of the City of Park Ridge's Police Department. The following information shall be included on the permit: 
1.  Company name; 
2.  Address of Company; 
3.  Fax and telephone number of applicant; 
4.  Name of person making application; 
5.  Description of hauling vehicle; 
6.  Description of load to be moved; 
7.  Overall dimensions of vehicle and axle weight information; 
8.  City roadways to be traveled; 
9.  Any special conditions; 
10.  Permit type with corresponding fee due to the City of Park Ridge; 
11.  Date permit issued and expiration date; 
12.  Time permit issued and by whom; 
13.  Category of permit. 
C.  Requests for permit moves shall be made no less than 24 hours prior to the move.  
13-21-4 - POLICE ESCORTS 
Police escorts shall be required for certain vehicles and loads as determined by the Park Ridge Police Department. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the Park Ridge Police Department. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to any permit fees. 
Fees for the escort shall be imposed on a per officer basis, and calculated based on the minimum overtime wage in effect at that time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-67, 12-7-2015)  
13-21-5 - BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE 
A.  The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to streets, bridges, City owned appurtenances and private or public property while engaged in a move. The measure of liability shall be the actual cost for all repairs or replacement of property damaged by the permittee. 
B.  The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City from any costs, judgments or settlements, including attorney's fees, arising from physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by permittee, its officers, agents, or employees pursuant to the permit. 
C.  Upon application for a permit(s) each applicant shall provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy for protection against personal injury or property damage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. Such coverage shall be placed with a responsible company acceptable to the City, licensed to do business in the State of Illinois, and with a minimum insurance rating of A:VII as found in the current edition of A M Best's Key Rating Guide. Each policy shall bear an endorsement precluding the cancellation or reduction of said policies without providing the City of Park Ridge at least 30 days prior notice thereof in writing. All required insurance shall be maintained by the contractor in full force and effect during the life of the move.  
13-21-6 - SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT 
A.  Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time determined appropriate by the Park Ridge Police Department. Reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the Department and payment of all outstanding fees. 
B.  In addition to any other fees and costs pursuant to (A) above, there shall be a reinstatement fee of $50.00. 
C.  The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall administer and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall have the right to appeal the action to the Chief of Police or his or her designee.  
13-21-7 - PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES 
A.  The City, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, shall collect a fee as set forth in C for the issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s) and/or loads. 
B.  Fee schedule. 
1.  The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows: 
Category 	Axles 	Max Weights 	Axles 	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Quarterly 	Annual 
1A 	2 	48,000 
  
25,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 	$45.00 	$55.00 	$115.00 	$370.00 
2A 	2 	54,000 
  
28,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 	$50.00 	$65.00 	$130.00 	$430.00 
3A 	3+ 	60,000 
  
21,000 
40,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$55.00 	$75.00 	$145.00 	$490.00 
4A 	3+ 	68,000 
  
25,000 
48,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$60.00 	$85.00 	$160.00 	$550.00 
5A 	3+ 	72,000 
  
25,000 
48,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$90.00 	$145.00 	$3000.00 	$1,100.00 
6A 	3+ 	80,000 
  
27,000 
54,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$100.00 	$165.00 	$315.00 	$1,170.00 
7A 	4+ 	72,000 
  
21,000 
40,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$65.00 	$95.00 	$175.00 	$610.00 
8A 	4+ 	76,000 
  
23,000 
44,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 	$70.00 	$105.00 	$190.00 	$670.00 
9A 	4+ 	80,000 
  
27,000 
54,000 
  
60,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE 
AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 
3 OR 4 
AXLE 
GROUP 	$90.00 	$130.00 	$255.00 	$930.00 
 
2.  The fee schedule for combination vehicles shall be as follows: 
Category 	Axles 	Max Weights 	Axles 	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Quarterly 	Annual 
1B 	5+ 	88,000 
23,000 
44,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM or 3 OR 4 AXLE GROUP 	$60.00 	$85.00 	$220.00 	$790.00 
2B 	5+ 	100,000 
25,000 
48,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM or 3 OR 4 AXLE GROUP 	$70.00 	$105.00 	$250.00 	$910.00 
3B 	6+ 	110,000 
23,000 
44,000 
54,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 
3 or 4 AXLE GROUP 	$75.00 	$115.00 	$265.00 	$970.00 
4B 	6+ 	120,000 
25,000 
48,000 
60,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 
3 or 4 AXLE GROUP 	$80.00 	$125.00 	$280.00 	$1,030.00 
5B 	6+ 	143,000 
27,000 
54,000 
78,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 
3 or 4 AXLE GROUP 	$90.00 	$145.00 	$355.00 	$1,330.00 
6B 	7+ 	162,000 
25,000 
50,000 
75,000 
100,000 	GROSS 
ANY SINGLE AXLE 
2 AXLE TANDEM 
3 AXLE GROUP 
4 AXLE GROUP 	$100.00 	$165.00 	$430.00 	$1,630.00 
7B 	8+ 	187,000 	GROSS 
**SAME AXLE WEIGHTS AS 6B** 	$110.00 	$185.00 	$530.00 	$2,030.00 
 
Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set forth in this Chapter 21 are subject to special assessment and investigation to determine appropriate fees for the above table. 
3.  The fee schedule for oversized vehicles shall be as follows; 
Category 	Max Size 	Escort 	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Quarterly 	Annual 
1C 	WIDTH: 10' 
HEIGHT: 13'6" 
LENGTH: 115' 	NO 	$45.00 	$65.00 	$105.00 	$330.00 
2C 	WIDTH: 12' 
HEIGHT: 13'6" 
LENGTH: 115' 	NO 	$50.00 	$70.00 	$150.00 	$510.00 
3C 	WIDTH: 14' 
HEIGHT: 13'6" 
LENGTH: 115' 	NO 	$60.00 	$85.00 	$195.00 	$690.00 
4C 	WIDTH: 18' 
HEIGHT: 16' 
LENGTH: 135' 	YES 	$80.00 	$115.00 	X 	X 
5C 	WIDTH: >18' 
HEIGHT: >16' 
LENGTH: >135' 	YES 	$130.00 	$225.00 	X 	X 
 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-67, adopted December 7, 2015, repealed §§ 13-21-8, "Fines and Bonds," 13-21-9, "Bonds and Bond Forfeiture," 13-21-10, "Authority of Administrative Adjudication Officer, 13-21-11, "Penalties for Overweight Truck Violations of Illinois Vehicle Code," and 13-21-12, "Weight Limitations on Specific Highways," in their entirety.  
CHAPTER 22 - SHUTTLE BUS PROVISIONS[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-40, 5-1-2006. 
 
13-22-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter: 
A.  A "shuttle bus" is defined as a motor vehicle owned by a commercial establishment, designed for carrying more than 20 persons, which, as its primary purpose, transports passengers to or from a commercial establishment. 
B.  This definition shall not include the following: 
1.  Any ambulance, authorized emergency vehicle, charitable vehicle, limousine, medical carrier or school bus, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.; 
2.  Any municipal or state owned vehicle or any vehicle employed by a municipality or the state; 
3.  Any vehicle approved by the City as a waste hauler; or 
4.  Any passenger bus operated by CTA or Pace.  
13-22-2 - RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL 
No shuttle bus shall be operated on any of the following streets, all of which are located within a residential zoning district of the City: 
Newton 	Ashland 	Courtland 
Linden 	Vine 	Prospect 
Washington 	Crescent 	Fairview 
Brophy 	Thorndale 	
  
CHAPTER 23 - TOWING OF VEHICLES[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-49, 6-4-2007. 
 
13-23-1 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Business Day: Any day in which the office of the City Clerk of the City of Park Ridge is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours. 
B.  Owner of Record: The record title holder(s) of the vehicle.  
13-23-2 - DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE; IMPOUNDMENT 
A.  A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, and/or intoxicating compounds as provided in Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section. In addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle shall be liable to the City for an administrative penalty of $500.00 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This Section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered. 
B.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the City or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and the owner of record's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to Section 20-6-7 of this Code. 
C.  The provisions of Section 20-6-7 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this Section.  
13-23-3 - DRIVING ON A SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT 
A.  A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of driving on a suspended or revoked license in violation of Section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section. In addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle shall be liable to the City for an administrative penalty of $500.00 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This Section shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; (2) if the suspension was imposed due to a violation of Section 13B-55 or 13C-55 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/13B-55, 5/13C-55); or (3) if the suspension was imposed pursuant to Section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-306.5) and/or Section 13-20-3 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
B.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the City or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and the owner of record's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to Section 20-6-7 of this Code. 
C.  The provisions of Section 20-6-7 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this Section.  
13-23-4 - DRAG RACING; IMPOUNDMENT 
A.  A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of drag racing as provided in Section 11-504 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-504) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section. In addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle shall be liable to the City for an administrative penalty of $500.00 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This Section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered. 
B.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this Section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the City or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and the owner of record's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to Section 20-6-7 of this Code. 
C.  The provisions of Section 20-6-7 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this Section.  
13-23-5 - VEHICLE CONFISCATION HEARINGS 
A.  Within five business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to Sections 13-23-2 through 13-23-4 of this Code, the City shall notify by certified mail the owner of record of the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle, the penalty assessed, and of his or her right to request a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer, or his or her designee, in accordance with the City's Administrative Adjudication System to challenge whether a violation of this Code for which seizure and impoundment applies has occurred pursuant to this Chapter. The notice shall state the penalties that may be imposed if a hearing is not requested, including that a vehicle not released by cash bond and remaining in the City pound may be sold or disposed of by the City in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for a hearing with the Administrative Hearing Officer no later than ten business days after the notice was mailed to the owner of record. The date of the hearing must not be more than 15 days after a request for a hearing has been filed or at another agreed-upon date. Hearings are to be conducted in accordance with Sections 20-6-1, et seq. of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. To the extent that there is a conflict between Sections 20-6-1, et seq. and this Chapter, this Chapter shall prevail. 
C.  If, after the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in the violation of any applicable provision of this Chapter, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record civilly liable to the City for the amount of the administrative penalty of $500.00. If, after a hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was not used in the violation of this City Code, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner of record and for the return of the vehicle or cash bond. 
D.  If a request for a hearing is not made within ten business days of the notice being mailed to the owner of record, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles. The vehicle shall not be released to the owner of record until the penalty of $500.00 is paid to the City, and only after the applicable towing and storage fees have been paid to the towing agent. 
E.  If the owner of record requests a hearing, but fails to appear at the hearing or fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and the Administrative Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the City in the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed for the violation, plus towing and storage fees. However, if the owner of record pays such penalty and the vehicle is returned to the owner of record, no default order need be entered if the owner of record is informed of his or her right to a hearing and signs a written waiver. Once the waiver is signed and the penalty and any applicable towing and storage fees are paid, the seized vehicle will be released. 
F.  If a bond in the amount of $500.00 is posted with the Police Department, the impounded vehicle shall be released to the owner of record. If a $500.00 penalty is imposed under this Section, the $500.00 bond shall be forfeited to the City; however, in the event a violation is not proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the $500.00 bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this Section shall be held by the City until the Administrative Hearing Officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until the circuit court issues its decision. 
G.  An administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, imposed pursuant to this section shall constitute a debt due to the City, which may be enforced pursuant to 20-6-1, et seq. or in any other manner provided by law. Any cash bond posted pursuant to this Section shall be applied to the penalty. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until (1) the administrative penalty, plus any applicable towing and storage fees, is paid to the City, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, or (2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. 
H.  Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the City's action under this section, or, if judicial review is sought, the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the City, or the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law; provided that, however, that where proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the vehicle may not be disposed of by the City except as consistent with those proceedings. 
I.  Fees for towing and storage of vehicles under this Chapter shall be the same as those charged for other Police Department tows.  
ARTICLE 14 - CONDUCT AND OFFENSES 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - NUISANCES DEFINED AND ABATEMENT 
SECTION 
 
14-1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following conduct, acts and conditions are hereby declared and defined to be a nuisance, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any person within the territorial limits of the City, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited, which nuisances so declared and defined, are the following: 
A.  The obstruction or encroachment upon any public highway, public street, public sidewalk or alley, or public grounds. 
B.  Any act which endangers public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. 
C.  Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of the land, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the Statutes of the State of Illinois. 
D.  A dwelling unfit for human habitation when it is dangerous or detrimental to life or health because of lack of repair, defects in the plumbing system or lighting or ventilation, the existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause sickness among persons residing in said premises or residing in proximity thereof. 
E.  The acts or omissions described in and declared to be unlawful, in each and every Chapter of this Article.  
14-1-2 - SIGHT DISTANCE AT UNCONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS 
The act of allowing bushes, shrubs or other plant material other than trees to grow in areas as hereinafter defined is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. No person shall allow bushes, shrubs or other plant material other than trees to grow to a height in excess of 24 inches above the elevation of the centerlines of intersecting, uncontrolled streets within a 60-foot radius of the intersecting centerlines of said uncontrolled streets. Trees may be maintained within said areas as long as there is no foliage within 48 inches as measured from the ground to the lowest foliage. Any person violating the terms of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and such act shall be punishable in accordance with the terms of this Article. Further, the provisions of Section 14-1-4 and 14-1-6 of this Chapter shall be applicable to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, 1-17-2011)  
14-1-3 - UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF SNOW UPON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to remove snow from private property and deposit the same upon any public right-of-way within the territorial limits of the City. Any person violating the above provisions shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-1-4 - MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY TO ABATE NUISANCES 
All of the acts and operations or failures to act or omissions enumerated in the immediately preceding Sections of this Chapter are hereby declared to be nuisances; and the Municipal authorities and law-enforcing officers of the City are hereby authorized and empowered to abate any such nuisance existing in the City, whether the said nuisance is one specifically recognized by ordinance or not. The Environmental Health Officer specifically authorized to do all things necessary which will correct, minimize or abate any nuisance or violation which he may find to exist within the City and which might affect the health and safety of any persons within the City. To that end the Environmental Health Officer may declare a condition to be a public nuisance and order it to be removed, abated, altered, improved or purified.  
14-1-5 - UNLAWFUL TO PERMIT NUISANCES 
It is unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance upon property or premises under his control.  
14-1-6 - ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
It is hereby made the duty of the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Environmental Health Officer or the Building Administrator to serve a notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be the owner or cause of any nuisance, requiring them, or either of them, to abate the same within a specified time in such manner as such officer shall direct; provided that it shall not be necessary in any case for the officer to specify in such notice the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated unless he shall deem it advisable so to do. If the person so notified shall refuse or neglect to comply with such order within the time and in the manner specified, the above officials or one of them shall cause the summary abatement of such nuisance at the expense of the person responsible for, or permitting the same, and such person shall be subject to the penalties provided for violations of the provisions of this Article; provided further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession, charge or control of premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, is unknown or cannot be found, the said official shall proceed to abate the nuisance without notice; and in either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued or suffered such nuisance to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
CHAPTER 2 - IMMORAL AND DISHONEST CONDUCT 
SECTION 
 
14-2-1 - GAMBLING 
Article 28 of the Gambling and Related Offenses of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, is hereby incorporated by reference into this Article 14, except that any action brought pursuant to this Section 14-2-1 shall be punishable as a Class A Misdemeanor only. 
(Ord. No. 2009-109, 12-21-2009)  
14-2-2 - VIDEO GAMING 
Video gaming, as set forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-109, 12-21-2009)  
14-2-3 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2009-109, 12-21-2009)  
14-2-4 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2009-109, 12-21-2009)  
14-2-5 - RAFFLES 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle within the City of Park Ridge without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this Section. 
B.  A license to conduct a raffle may be issued only to (i) a bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans organization that operates without profit to its members and which has been in existence continuously for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding making application for such license; or to (ii) a non-profit fund-raising organization that the City Clerk determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified person or group of people suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of illness, disability, accident or disaster. A single license may be issued to a parent organization for the benefit of affiliated organizations, provided that each affiliate is otherwise qualified. 
C.  Application for a raffle license shall be made to the City Clerk on forms provided not less than 15 days prior to the date of the first drawing or other determination of the winning chance. The application shall specify (i) the name and address of the organization sponsoring, administering or promoting the raffle; (ii) the name and home address of the natural person who is the chief officer or administrator of the organization; (iii) how long the organization has been in existence; (iv) the type of organization, i.e., religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, veterans or non-profit fund-raising and, if the latter, the person(s) receiving financial assistance; (v) the method to be used to determine the winning chance (e.g. drawing). 
D.  For purposes of this Section, the terms raffle, chance, non-profit, religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, veterans, and educational shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in the Illinois Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq. 
E.  A raffle license shall continue in effect for so long as the organization and each covered affiliate continues to meet qualifications of paragraph B hereof. The fee for a raffle license shall be $15.00.  
14-2-6 - UNLAWFUL BUSINESS 
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the City; and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice. 
(Ord. of 12-1999)  
14-2-7 - FALSE PRETENSES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain possession of any goods, property or thing of value by any false proceedings or by cheating or by fraud of any kind.  
14-2-8 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2011-56, 1-3-2011)  
14-2-9 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, 4-18-2005)  
14-2-10 - PROSTITUTION 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice prostitution in the City.  
14-2-11 - PIMPING 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any street, alley or public place in the City for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in prostitution or any unlawful sexual intercourse of any kind.  
14-2-12 - FREQUENTING HOUSE OF ILL FAME 
It shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or patronize any house of ill fame or house of prostitution in the City.  
14-2-13 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2007-44, 5-21-2007)  
14-2-14 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2007-44, 5-21-2007)  
14-2-15 - ALTERING OR FORGING CITY PERMITS, LICENSES OR OTHER OFFICIAL CITY DOCUMENT; PENALTY 
It shall be unlawful to alter, forge or counterfeit any City Permit, License or Other Official document issued or required to be issued pursuant to this Municipal Code, or to hold or use such an altered, forged, or counterfeit permit, license or other official document knowing it to have been altered, forged or counterfeited. Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-76, 11-1-2004)  
CHAPTER 3 - DANGEROUS CONDITIONS AND CONDUCT 
SECTION 
 
14-3-1 - FALSE ALARM 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false alarm in the City.  
14-3-2 - ASSAULT AND BATTERY 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or battery within the territorial limits of the City. 
A.  A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
B.  A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means: 
1.  Causes bodily harm to an individual; or 
2.  Makes a physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.  
14-3-3 - TACKS, GLASS ON STREET 
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley or public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk or alley in the City.  
14-3-4 - CONCEALED WEAPONS 
It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the City without first having a license to carry such concealed weapons duly issued under the laws of the State of Illinois.  
14-3-5 - STORING GUNPOWDER AND TNT 
It shall be unlawful to store any gunpowder or black powder in any place in the City. It shall be unlawful to store any TNT or nitroglycerin in the City except that nitroglycerin may be stored for medicinal purposes.  
14-3-6 - STORING FIREARMS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or store or to permit to be kept or stored in any place readily accessible to a person under the age of 18 any firearm unless the firearm is secured by a trigger lock or placed within a locked container. 
(Ord. No. 2004-57, 9-7-2004)  
14-3-7 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2004-57, 9-7-2004)  
14-3-8 - STORAGE OF GASOLINE, FLAMMABLES 
All tanks or containers used for the storage of such liquids must be properly constructed and kept free from leaks. It shall be unlawful to smoke or permit any open flame in any room or enclosure used for the storage of such flammable liquids. 
(Ord. No. 2019-44 , § 1B, 7-15-2019)  
14-3-9 - FIREARMS 
The use and discharge of firearms is prohibited within the City except for justifiable use of force pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 2004-57, 9-7-2004)  
14-3-10 - ESTABLISHMENT OF CEMETERY PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery within the City limits.  
14-3-11 - DANGEROUS BUILDING 
It is unlawful to maintain any building or structure which is in an unsanitary condition, or in an unsafe or dangerous condition or which in any manner endangers the health or safety of any person.  
14-3-12 - BOWS AND ARROWS 
No person shall at any time use or knowingly aid and abet the use of any bow and arrow in any manner which threatens to cause or causes the arrow to enter, fall upon or cross over any public or private property (unless the occupant of the private property has consented thereto). This Section shall not be construed to prevent the use of toy bows and arrows, the arrows of which have blunt rubber tips and the bows of which are less than 24 inches long.  
14-3-13 - STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES 
The placing or keeping of inoperable motor vehicles, machinery, implements or mechanical equipment on any private property for a period in excess of ten days is hereby declared to be a nuisance; provided, however, that no more than one inoperable motor vehicle may be stored upon a lot if said vehicle is kept within a structure enclosed on all four sides. Provided, further, that within an appropriate zoning district a legal land use engaged in the repair of such vehicles or equipment may store it for a period not exceeding 90 days while it is undergoing repairs. 
As used in this Section, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle, machinery, implements or mechanical equipment which is incapable of moving under its own power, or has one or more flat tires, or lacks any structural or mechanical component necessary to normal operation, or lacks valid State or local registration or licensing, or is raised on blocks.  
14-3-14 - ABATEMENT 
Upon written notice from the Police Department, the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant (hereinafter "owner") of any lot upon which said nuisance exists shall abate such nuisance by the prompt removal of said vehicle or equipment into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage or otherwise remove it from the City.  
14-3-15 - PENALTY 
If said owners allow such nuisance to exist or fail to abate said nuisance, they, and each of them, upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance is permitted to exist.  
14-3-16 - ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful to abandon a motor vehicle on any street, highway or other public way in the City. 
B.  For purposes of this section: 
1.  "Abandon" means to cause or permit a motor vehicle to remain in any public way for a period of seven days or more when the vehicle is in inoperable condition; an "abandoned vehicle" is such a vehicle. 
2.  "Inoperable condition" means the vehicle: 
a.  Is incapable of moving under its own power; or 
b.  Has one or more flat tires; or 
c.  Has any defective, non-functional or missing component necessary to normal operation; or 
d.  Lacks valid state or local registration or licensing; or 
e.  Is uninsured. 
3.  Any motor vehicle which has remained in any public way without apparent operation or use for a period of seven days is presumed to be inoperable. The presumption may be overcome by the owner of the motor vehicle with such information which demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle does not meet any of the criteria described herein. 
C.  The person in whose name any abandoned vehicle is or was last registered is presumed to be the person to have abandoned the vehicle. 
D.  Any motor vehicle found abandoned on any public property is declared to be a nuisance which may be abated in any manner authorized by law. 
E.  Any abandoned motor vehicle may be towed or otherwise removed from a public way and impounded at the direction of the Police Chief or his designee after notice and an opportunity for hearing in accordance with the following: 
1.  Upon determining that a vehicle is abandoned in a public way, a law enforcement officer shall post a notice on the vehicle directing that it be removed within seven days, indicating the date, warning that if not so removed the vehicle will be towed, advising that the owner is entitled to a hearing prior to towing, upon request; and giving information about how to obtain further information and schedule a hearing. 
2.  A law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort, using normal law enforcement information systems, to identify the registered owner of the vehicle and, if that owner can be identified, the Police Department shall mail to the owner a notice containing the same information described in sub-paragraph 1 above. If the owner is not identifiable through normal means no such mail notice need be attempted. 
3.  If the owner fails to respond to the notice within seven days and the vehicle is not removed a law enforcement officer shall issue a citation for violation of this section and shall proceed to remove the vehicle. 
4.  If the registered owner or an authorized representative appears to request a hearing on the pending towing of the vehicle, the owner shall be scheduled for the next available hearing before the City's Hearing Officer in the manner described in Article 20, Chapter 6. The owner shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. The vehicle shall not be towed while a hearing is pending. 
5.  At the hearing, a law enforcement officer shall explain why the vehicle is determined to be abandoned. The owner may present evidence (including an examination of the vehicle) that the vehicle is not abandoned or otherwise should not be towed. If the Hearing Officer finds that the vehicle is not abandoned, it shall not be towed and any notice of violation of this Section shall be rescinded. Otherwise, the motor vehicle will be towed no earlier than the owner shall have 24 hours following the hearing to remove the vehicle. 
F.  Any vehicle towed and impounded in accordance with this Section shall be subject to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/4-205 through 5/4-213 and may be disposed of by the Chief in accordance with those procedures. 
G.  This Section shall not apply to any motor vehicle which is obstructing or impeding traffic or which otherwise constitutes a present hazard. Any such vehicle may be removed summarily at the direction of any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 1-1999; Ord. No. 2002-39, 10-21-2002; Ord. No. 2017-17 , § 2, 3-20-2017)  
CHAPTER 4 - OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS AND CONDUCT 
SECTION 
 
14-4-1 - OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES 
It shall be unlawful to permit any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment to be operated within the territorial limits of the City and within a distance of one mile beyond said territorial limits, and all offensive or unwholesome businesses or establishments are hereby prohibited within the City and within the distance of one mile of the Municipal limits thereof.  
14-4-2 - DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY 
Whoever shall intentionally, knowingly or recklessly, or whoever shall, while operating or causing to be operated, parking or causing to be parked, any motor vehicle in any improper manner, cause damage or injury to any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant, or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any public way or public park, or any pavement, side or crosswalk, or any part thereof, or any other City property shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section and shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007)  
14-4-3 - CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act described in the following subsections: 
A.  Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or 
B.  Recklessly, by means of fire or explosives, damage property of another; or 
C.  Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or 
D.  Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his consent; or 
E.  Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stinkbomb or any offensive-smelling compound, thereby intending to interfere with the use by another of the land or building. 
The aforesaid acts are hereby declared to be misdemeanors and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-4-4 - PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY 
A.  Definitions. As used in this Section, unless the context other requires, the terms specified have the following meanings: 
Legal Guardian: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of the State, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act. (705 ILCS 405/1-1) The term "legal guardian" does not include guardian ad litem. 
Minor: A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18 years old. 
B.  Illegal Acts. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this Section, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections B.1, B.2 and B.3 below: 
1.  An unemancipated minor residing with a parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or Statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or Statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and 
2.  Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the Police Department of the City following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and 
3.  If at any time within two years following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection B.2 above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or Statute as described in B.1 above, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or Statute as described in subsection B.1 above. 
C.  Penalty. Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.  
CHAPTER 5 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND OBSCENITY 
SECTION 
 
14-5-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Incite a Riot: Shall mean, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written (1) advocacy of ideas, or (2) expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion to the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act or acts. 
Public Place: Any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
Riot: A public disturbance involving (1) an act or acts of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual, or (2) a threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of violence by one or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual.  
14-5-2 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he willfully does any of the following acts in a public place or in any place where a breach of the public peace occurs: 
A.  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his life, limb or health; 
B.  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
C.  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
D.  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence; 
E.  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the City police or other lawful authority known to be such; 
F.  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by City police or any other authorized official of the City, when known to be such an official; 
G.  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot; 
H.  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition; 
I.  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed; 
J.  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened; 
K.  Acts with intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues; 
L.  Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such a fire exists; 
M.  Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing a bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; 
N.  Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; 
O.  Enters upon the property of another for a lewd or unlawful purpose or, while trespassing, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or opening in it. 
(Ord. No. 2011-56, 10-3-2011)  
14-5-3 - EXEMPTIONS 
This Chapter shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws.  
14-5-4 - PENALTIES 
Any person convicted of violating Section 14-5-2, entitled "Disorderly Conduct Prohibited," of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.  
14-5-5 - PUBLIC STREETS, ALLEYS 
It shall be unlawful conduct for any person to appear in or on any street, alley or other public place in the City, manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs to the degree that he or she (i) may endanger himself/herself or other persons or property and fails to cooperate with a police officer or other intermediary person in being assisted to his/her home, a treatment facility or other health facility, or (ii) annoys or disturbs other persons in his/her vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-56, 10-3-2011)  
14-5-6 - INDECENT EXPOSURE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place or in any such place to make any indecent exposure of his or her person or private parts thereof or the private parts of another or to conduct himself in a lewd or lascivious manner or to appear in any such place in a dress not belonging to his sex.  
14-5-7 - OBSCENE MATERIAL 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement, circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play image, instrument, statue, drawing or other article which is obscene.  
14-5-8 - DEFINITION, OBSCENE 
Material shall be deemed "obscene" for the purpose of this Chapter when to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests.  
14-5-9 - AUDIENCE 
Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible audience if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such an audience.  
14-5-10 - PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE 
Any person shall be presumed to have "knowingly" engaged in the exhibition, sale, printing, offering to sell, giving away, circulating, publishing or distribution of material, if not less than ten days prior to the service of summons or arrest for violation of this Chapter, the Police Chief or his duly authorized deputy shall have notified such person in writing that certain named materials in his possession or control is obscene, and that he will be prosecuted, if he persists in such activity, and such person thereafter persists in such activity. Such notification shall, however, not be a condition precedent for prosecution under the terms of this Chapter.  
14-5-11 - INDECENT SHOW 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit or conduct any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public amusement or show.  
14-5-12 - DRINKING ON THE PUBLIC WAY 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or to possess any alcoholic liquor in an open container on any street, alley or other public place within the City. 
B.  The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to the drinking or possession of alcoholic liquor at such public places licensed to sell alcoholic liquor by the City or at block parties pursuant to a permit issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-56, 10-3-2011)  
CHAPTER 6 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
SECTION 
 
14-6-1 - TRESPASS TO RESIDENTIAL LAND 
Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another without having been invited to so do or remains upon the land of another after being requested to leave by the owner or occupant is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person violating the terms and provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.  
14-6-2 - TRESPASS 
A.  Trespasses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the City upon either public or private property. 
B.  Specifically Enumerated Trespasses; Suppression: Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection A above, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said subsection A above, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation of this Section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included: 
1.  An entry upon the premises or any part thereof of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance of said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant; provided however, that no such posted notice shall be on a sign less than two inches by two inches; or 
2.  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a public notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
3.  A failure or refusal to depart from the premise of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave, by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
4.  An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right. 
C.  Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00.  
CHAPTER 7 - PUBLIC GATHERINGS AND CROWDS 
SECTION 
 
14-7-1 - CONDUCT IN PUBLIC LIBRARY 
It shall be unlawful for any person using the Park Ridge Public Library or its facilities to: 
A.  Disturb the peace in said library building. 
B.  Cause disturbing speech or noise within the reading rooms. 
C.  Damage property of the library including buildings, furniture, fixtures or grounds. This subsection shall apply whether or not the person doing such damage is using the Park Ridge Public Library at the time of doing such damage. 
D.  Fail to return books or other loaned material within the grace period provided by the rules and regulations of said library. 
E.  Disobey or violate any rules or regulations established by the Board of Directors of said library, providing said rules and regulations have been posted in a conspicuous place within said library building.  
14-7-2 - ORDER IN THEATERS 
The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.  
14-7-3 - CROWDING IN THEATERS 
It shall be unlawful to allow in theaters or opera houses more persons than can be accommodated by the seating capacity thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to remain standing or to permit any person to remain standing at any time during the performance of an amusement which is conducted or displayed in a building or hall.  
14-7-4 - INCITING RIOTS 
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or public disturbance.  
14-7-5 - UNLAWFUL GATHERINGS 
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered together for an unlawful purpose.  
14-7-6 - DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the City.  
14-7-7 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED 
Any charitable organization registered with the Attorney General in the manner provided by law may stand upon the streets or highways within the City, at any intersection where all traffic is required to come to a full stop, for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle as part of a Statewide fund-raising activity. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be at least 18 years of age and shall wear a high-visibility vest. Any charitable organization wishing to engage in such solicitation for contributions shall apply to the City Clerk for a permit. The application shall state the following facts along with such other facts as may be required by the Clerk: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the organization. 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of a local representative of the organization or of the person making the application. 
C.  An affidavit from the organization stating that the organization is registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by "An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefor," approved July 26, 1963, and as amended. 
D.  An affidavit that the organization is engaged in Statewide fund-raising activity. 
E.  A certificate of insurance verifying that the organization has in effect at the time of said application an indemnity agreement in excess of $1,000,000.00 indemnifying and holding the City harmless against any and all liability and expenses whatsoever, for bodily injury or death, including without limitation, injury or death to agents, employees, servants or volunteers of the organization which may be causally related to any act of ordinary negligence, intentional, willful or wanton misconduct of the soliciting agent acting on behalf of said organization. The certificate of insurance shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
F.  The location or locations at which approval to solicit is being sought. 
G.  The days and times of days at which such solicitation is proposed to take place next. 
H.  The number of persons proposed to solicit at each location.  
14-7-8 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
The City Clerk shall issue a permit for such solicitation if he finds that the applicant has complied with all of the terms and provisions of State law regarding such solicitation and the provisions of this Chapter. The Clerk must also find that the location, times and duration of the proposed solicitation and number of proposed solicitors shall not result in an interference with the flow of vehicular traffic.  
14-7-9 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
The City Clerk is authorized to revoke instantly the permit of any organization in the event he determines that the actions or conduct of the representatives of the soliciting organization have violated any of the terms and provisions of this Chapter, or in the event it is determined by the Clerk that such actions have resulted in an interference with the flow of vehicular traffic.  
14-7-10 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; PENALTY 
Any person, corporation, unincorporated association or other entity violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, upon a judicial finding of such violation, be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such separate offense.  
14-7-11 - CAMPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp on any public street, sidewalk, in a public park, building or on any public property.  
14-7-12 - IMPAIR TRAFFIC, PUBLIC 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or upon any public place or property in such a manner as to impair traffic, free use by the public or the conduct of business in or upon said public place or property.  
CHAPTER 8 - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES 
SECTION 
 
14-8-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Area of Use: Any public street, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place within the sphere of influence of the conduct of a parade. 
City: The City of Park Ridge. 
City Manager: The City Comptroller-Manager of the City. 
Parade: Any parade, picket, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, demonstration or procession of any kind or any similar display with more than ten participants in or upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place within the territorial limits of the City. 
Parade Permit: A permit as required by this Chapter. 
Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Public Place: Any place within the City which is open to free use by the general public.  
14-8-2 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the City Manager (or other appropriate official or body under the terms of this Chapter). 
Exceptions: This Chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Funeral processions or weddings; 
B.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
C.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.  
14-8-3 - APPLICATIONS 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the City Manager on forms provided by such officer. 
A.  Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the City Manager not less than two days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
B.  Contents: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
2.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be responsible for its conduct; 
4.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
5.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
6.  The approximate number of persons who, and the equipment which, will constitute such parade; the type and description of the vehicles and equipment; 
7.  The hours when such parade shall start and terminate; 
8.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places proposed to be traversed or used; 
9.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
10.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
11.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
12.  Any additional information which the City Manager shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether permit should be issued. 
C.  Late Applications: The City Manager, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than two days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted; provided however, that any person filing application less than ten days prior to the day on which the parade is to be held waives the right to appeal as provided in this Chapter.  
14-8-4 - STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE 
The City Manager shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area of use and contiguous areas; 
B.  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the area of use and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the City; 
C.  The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
D.  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
E.  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or incite a riot; 
F.  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute; 
G.  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with use of any street, sidewalk, parkway, park or public place by the public in general.  
14-8-5 - NOTICE OF REJECTION 
The City Manager shall act promptly upon the application for a parade permit. If the City Manager disapproves the application, he shall give prompt notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.  
14-8-6 - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The City Council shall act upon the appeal at the regular meeting of the City Council after receipt of the notice of appeal.  
14-8-7 - ALTERNATIVE PERMIT 
The City Manager, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within three days after notice of the action of the City Manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the City Manager. An alternative parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this Chapter.  
14-8-8 - NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the City Manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
The Mayor; 
The City Attorney; 
The Fire Chief; 
The Police Chief; 
The Director of Public Works.  
14-8-9 - CONTENTS OF PERMIT 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
A.  Starting time; 
B.  Minimum duration; 
C.  Maximum duration; 
D.  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
E.  The portions of the streets, sidewalks or public places to be traversed or that may be occupied by the parade; 
F.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
G.  Such other reasonable directions and conditions as the City Manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this Chapter; 
H.  Approximate number of participants.  
14-8-10 - DUTIES OF PERMITTEE 
A.  Compliance Required: A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances of the City. 
B.  Possession of Permit: The parade chairman or other person heading or leading the parade shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.  
14-8-11 - PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES 
A.  Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or equipment participating or used in a parade. 
B.  Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
C.  Parking on Parade Route: The Police Chief shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Police Chief shall post signs to such effect and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on an unposted street in violation of this Chapter.  
14-8-12 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
The City Manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon violation of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.  
14-8-13 - PENALTIES 
Any person who violates any of the terms of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-30, 4-2-2007)  
14-8-14 - RESIDENTIAL PICKETING PROHIBITED 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code it shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to engage in picketing directed at the residence or dwelling of any person in the City of Park Ridge. For purposes of this Section, "picketing" means posting, standing, walking, marching, gathering or demonstrating on streets, sidewalks or other public places.  
CHAPTER 9 - NOISE 
SECTION 
 
14-9-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Chapter shall be construed as herein defined: 
Holidays: The following days are designated as holidays for purposes of this Chapter: New Year's Day, January 1; Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, the first Monday in September; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; and Christmas Day, December 25. 
Noise Disturbance: Any sound which endangers Public Health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. 
Real Property Boundary: A line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, including intra-building real property divisions. 
Sound: An oscillation in pressure in air. 
Sound Level: The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4 - 1971), or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound Level Meter: An instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.41971 or most recent revision therefore for Type 1 to Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 2-6-2006)  
14-9-2 - PREMISES CREATING NOISE 
No person owning, or in possession, charge or control of any building or premises shall use the same, or permit the use of the same, or rent the same to be used for any business or employment, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, from its noise or its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or premises are situated, or create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary, and such use is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
14-9-3 - CONSTRUCTION HOURS 
It shall be unlawful to conduct any construction operation, including the delivery of equipment, supplies or materials, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. It shall be unlawful to conduct any construction operation, including the delivery of equipment, supplies or materials, at any time on Sundays or holidays on any lot where a Building Permit has been issued for demolition, new construction, room addition or other project where fencing is required to be installed around the entire perimeter of the construction site or around the perimeter of the construction areas, unless the construction operation is necessary to prevent property damage and prior written approval is given by a Building Official or his/her designee. Construction work that does not require fencing around the construction site or the construction area may be performed on Sundays and holidays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. This Section shall not apply to any construction operation by any governmental agency or governmental contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 2-6-2006)  
14-9-4 - MACHINE OR DEVICE NOISE 
It shall be unlawful to operate any machine, device or apparatus including but not limited to lawn mowing equipment, leaf blowers, flying insect electrocution devices, instruments, power tools and powered toy models so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. The following operations or uses of machines, devices and apparatus are not included within the aforesaid prohibition: 
A.  Private snow removal operations. 
B.  Governmental operations and governmental contractors. 
C.  The operation of heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment or emergency electrical generators, which are in sound and satisfactory working condition and were installed in conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City. 
D.  The operation or the use of a machine, device or apparatus with the approval of the Police Department or Health Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2005-14, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 2009-57, 8-17-2009)  
14-9-5 - SOUND SYSTEM NOISE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or instruments to intensify or to amplify or to reproduce the human voice, or any other sound, on any public street within the City. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be operated, any such mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus or instrument, whether involving amplification or not, that emits or causes any noise, in any building or on any premises in the City, whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the public streets or across any real property boundary or which is so placed or operated that the sounds therefrom cause a noise disturbance. Governmental operations are not included within the aforesaid prohibition.  
14-9-6 - MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private property any continuous, predictable or recurring source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network at or within the property boundary of the receiving property which exceeds; 35 decibels (dbA) in intensity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or which exceeds 50 decibels (dbA) in intensity between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  
14-9-7 - SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES 
The Health Authority shall use procedures for the measurement of sound that conform with the standards and recommended practices established by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), or the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE).  
14-9-8 - OFFENSE 
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation shall continue. Where the act charged to be a violation or the act which is the causation of the violation is committed in whole or part by a person acting as an employee, representative, agent or officer of the owner or operator of the vehicle, machine or device, the operation or maintenance of which the causation of said violation, then and in that event such employee, representative, agent or officer as well as such owner or operator shall be held liable for such violation. In addition, an employee, representative, agent or officer of the general contractor or any subcontractor may be held liable for a violation of Section 14-9-3. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 2-6-2006)  
14-9-9 - EXEMPTIONS 
Noise produced by transportation vehicles such as airplanes, motor vehicles, rail carrier vehicles and noise emanating from sources outside the City of Park Ridge are not included under the provisions of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER 11 - REGULATION OF LIGHTING 
SECTION 
 
14-11-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Chapter shall be construed as herein defined: 
Flood Light: A luminare designed so that 90% of the emitted light is within an angle of 30 degrees to the center line of the light beam. 
Foot Candle: One foot candle is the amount of illumination provided by a light source of one international candle at a distance of one foot from the light source. 
Foot Lambert: One foot lambert is the brightness of a perfectly diffusing surface uniformity emitting or reflecting one lumen per square foot of surface. 
International Candle or Candle Power: One international candle is the unit of luminous intensity as established by standard light sources as maintained by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. This is called more commonly one candle power. 
Lumen: One lumen is that quantity of luminous energy included in one steradian unit solid angle from a uniform point source of one candle power. It is also defined as the luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one square foot, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle power. 
Luminare: A device or fixture containing a light source and means for directing and controlling the distribution of light emitted therefrom.  
14-11-2 - REGULATIONS ON INTENSITY OF LIGHT 
Regulations on intensity of light permitted shall be as follows: 
A.  No lighting source shall cause more than 0.1 foot candle of illumination to fall on adjoining R1A, R1, R2 residentially zoned property. 
B.  No lighting source shall cause more than 0.2 foot candle of illumination to fall on adjoining R3 or R4 residential or O office zoned property. 
C.  No lighting source shall cause more than 2.0 foot candles of illumination to fall on any adjoining commercially zoned property. 
D.  No lighting source shall cause more than 5.0 foot candles of illumination to fall on any public way in commercial areas.  
14-11-3 - REGULATIONS ON GLARE 
Regulations on glare shall be as follows: 
A.  No floodlight shall be mounted higher than 25 feet above the ground nor shall any part of its beam strike the ground at an angle of more than 45 degrees from vertical. 
B.  No light source shall present a surface brightness when viewed between horizontal and an angle of 45 degrees above horizontal from adjoining property in accordance with the following: 
750 foot lamberts from R1A, R1 and R2 zoned property; 
1,500 foot lamberts from R3 and R4 zoned property; 
2,200 foot lamberts from any commercially zoned property; 
10,000 foot lamberts from any public way.  
14-11-4 - STANDARDS OF MEASUREMENT 
Light intensity shall be measured in foot candles with a direct reading portable low range light meter having a range of zero to 20 foot candles; said meter shall be tested by an independent commercial photometric laboratory to obtain a certificate of calibration. Values set forth in this Chapter are maximum values measured at 90 degrees to the incidence of light from the source: Measurement methods and techniques shall be those recommended by the illuminating Engineering Society in their "Standard Methods for Measuring and Reporting Horizontal Foot Candle." 
Brightness measurement based on the foot lambert must be governed by the definition of the foot lambert and lumen. Because of the practical difficulties of measurement, calculated values for source brightness can be used with an accuracy comparable to measurements. Calculations should be in accordance with the following: 
A.  Spherical Bare Sources (Incandescent Lamps): The brightness shall be calculated as total lumens divided by 1/10 the square of the diameter of the source measured in inches. 
B.  Cylindrical Bare Sources (Fluorescent Lamps): The brightness shall be calculated as total lumens divided by 1/50 the product of length and diameter of the source in inches. 
C.  Floodlight Sources: The brightness of floodlight sources shall be calculated as the 1/8 of the total lumens divided by the area of the face of the floodlight in square feet. If the light source is mounted in a diffuse luminare, 7/10 of the above values shall be issued. 
The values of lumens to be used shall be based on the following efficiencies: 
Incandescent Filament Lamps 	Gaseous Discharge Lamps 
25 watt - 250 lumens 	40 watts - 1,200 lumens 
40 watt - 500 lumens 	100 watts - 3,000 lumens 
60 watt - 800 lumens 	250 watts - 11,000 lumens 
100 watt - 1,600 lumens 	400 watts - 5,000 lumens 
200 watt - 3,300 lumens 	1,000 watts - 65,000 lumens 
300 watt - 5,000 lumens 	
500 watt - 9,000 lumens 	
1,000 watt - 20,000 lumens 	
  
14-11-5 - NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS 
Where, after inspection by the City Building Inspector and after written notice to the violator, an existing lighting condition is determined to be a nuisance or in violation of the aforesaid provisions, the violator shall have 60 days in which to correct such violations so that the requirements of this Chapter are complied with.  
14-11-6 - HEARING ON VARIATIONS 
Where practical difficulties or particular hardship prevents carrying out the strict letter of any of the provisions herein contained, the City Council may, on petition, determine and vary the requirement of this Chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent. However, no such variation shall be made by the City Council as specified without a hearing before the City Council or Building Board of Review, of which hearing there shall be at least ten days notice of the time and place of the hearing given by United States certified or registered mail addressed to the person or entity seeking a variation from the requirements of this Chapter.  
14-11-7 - PENALTY 
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that such violation shall continue.  
CHAPTER 12 - CURFEW[1] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2004-33, 4-19-2004. 
 
14-12-1 - CURFEW 
A.  General Curfew. 
1.  It is unlawful for a person less than 18 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times set forth in this Chapter 12: 
•  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday; and 
•  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and 
•  Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
2.  Exceptions: 
a.  The curfew set forth in subsection A does not apply to a child who is: 
i.  Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian or custodian; 
ii.  Accompanied by a person at least 21 years of age approved by the child's parent, guardian or custodian; 
iii.  Participating in, going to, or returning from: 
1.  An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; 
2.  An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article I, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both, such as freedoms of religion and speech and the right of assembly, to include, but not be limited to: 
•  A religious event, including, but not limited to, prayer and vigil services; or 
•  A political event, including, but not limited to observing or influencing a legislative session and attending a political rally or event. 
3.  An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision of one or more adults; or 
4.  A business or occupation which the laws of this State authorize a person less than 18 years of age to perform. 
3.  Reasonable Inquiry. Prior to arresting or citing a child for curfew under this Section, the Police Officer must make reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the exceptions contained in this section apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth in A of this Section. A Police Officer shall issue a citation or make an arrest for curfew only if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the child has violated this Section and that no exceptions apply. 
B.  Pickwick Plaza Curfew. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for a person less than 18 years of age to be present in the Pickwick Plaza, being the public pedestrian plaza between Northwest Highway and Summit Avenue on the east side of buildings fronting on Prospect Avenue, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such person is: 
a.  accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; or 
b.  exiting business premises adjoining the plaza and proceeding directly out of the plaza; or 
c.  lawfully engaged in a business or occupation involving work within the plaza; or 
d.  attending a supervised and organized entertainment or recreational event within the plaza; or 
e.  a political event, including, but not limited to observing or influencing a legislative session and attending a political rally or event. 
2.  Reasonable Inquiry. Prior to arresting or citing a child for curfew under this Section, the Police Officer must make reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the exceptions contained in section A apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth in section A of this Section. A Police Officer shall issue a citation or make an arrest for curfew only if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the child has violated this Section and that no exceptions apply. 
C.  School Curfew. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial school to be present in any public place, building, street, or assembly in the City of Park Ridge other than school, during any hours when school is in session during the regular school term, unless he or she is 
a.  Traveling to or from school by the most direct route, or 
b.  Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or school official; or 
c.  Engaged in school-related activities with written approval of school authorities; or 
d.  Engaged in personal business, including but not limited to, employment, medical care and religious activities, with prior notice from a parent or legal guardian to school authorities. 
2.  A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer reasonably suspects to be violating this section for not to exceed 15 minutes for the purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall immediately inform the person of the reason for the detention and that he or she will be released upon verification of authorization to be absent from school. The person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory detention unless he or she refuses to provide the officer with the necessary information. 
3.  A person violating this section shall, if practical, be taken to school authorities or a parent or legal guardian, and may be issued a notice to appear in the Municipal Court. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person having custody or control of any person subject to this section to knowingly permit such person to violate this section.  
14-12-2 - PARENT PERMITTING VIOLATION 
It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate any Section of this Chapter.  
14-12-3 - PENALTY 
Any person found guilty of violating this Chapter 12 shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00.  
CHAPTER 13 - PENALTIES 
SECTION 
 
14-13-1 - PENALTIES 
A.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any residential property owner/occupier violating, resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the terms or provisions of this Article shall be fined not less than $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for each subsequent offense but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. For purposes of this paragraph A, residential property owner/occupier shall mean a person who occupies or dwells in a residential dwelling unit of which the same person is the legal or beneficial owner or the owner of residential property that is not offered to tenants for occupancy. 
B.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any contractor, commercial property owner, firm or corporation violating, resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the terms or provisions of this Article, shall be fined not less than $200.00 for the first offense, $400.00 for the second offense, and $1,000.00 for each subsequent offense but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. For purposes of this paragraph B, commercial property owner shall include the landlord of a residential dwelling unit that is tenant occupied or offered to tenants for occupancy. 
C.  Where the violation is committed in whole or in part by a person acting as an employee, representative, salesperson or agent of the owner or operator of the premises, the operation or maintenance which is the causation of the violation, or is the owner or operator of a business or enterprise causing the violation, then and in that event the owner or operator of the business or enterprise, as well as such employee, representative, salesperson or agent of the owner or operator of the business or enterprise, shall be held liable for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-29, 3-15-2010)  
CHAPTER 14 - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-61, 8-21-2006 - Entire re-write. 
 
14-14-1 - POLICY 
A.  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City and the purposes of this Chapter that all persons shall be assured full and equal opportunity to obtain fair housing for themselves and their families within the City, and to secure to all persons an equal opportunity to view, purchase, lease, rent or occupy real estate in the City without discrimination because of their race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, military discharge, source of income, housing, or parental status. 
B.  It is the clear purpose and intent of this Chapter to impose absolute liability for the conduct described and that the burden of proving any violation of this Chapter be by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2008-60, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-2 - CONSTRUCTION 
This Chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms and shall be construed to further the purposes and policy as stated and the special purpose and the particular provision involved. 
(Ord. No. 2008-60, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-3 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter: 
Disabled person: Any person having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (or more) major life activities or having a record of physical or mental impairment or being perceived by another as an individual with a physical or mental impairment. 
Discriminatory housing practice: An act that is unlawful under Sections 14-14-4, 14-14-5 or 14-14-6 of this Chapter. 
Dwelling: Any building, structure or portion of a structure which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of any such building or structure. 
Family: Includes single individual. 
Gender expression: The gender with which a person may choose to identify or express himself or herself, irrespective of the person's birth gender. 
Housing status: The type of housing in which an individual resides, whether publicly or privately owned; an individual's ownership status with respect to the individual's residence; or the status of having or not having a fixed residence. 
Marital status: The status of being single, married, divorced, separated or widowed. 
Military discharge status: The fact of having been discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States, their Reserve components or any National Guard or Naval Militia. 
National origin: The place in which an individual or one of his or her ancestors was born. 
Parental status: The status of living with one or more dependent minors or disabled children. 
Person: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
Religion: All aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, non-belief, or the actual identification with or perceived identification with a religion. 
Sexual orientation: The status or expression, whether actual or perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. 
Source of income: Means any lawful income, subsidy, or benefit with which an individual supports himself or herself and his or her dependents, including but not limited to, child support, maintenance, and any federal, state or local public assistance, medical assistance, or rental assistance program, provided that: 
Nothing in this Chapter prevents an owner or agent acting in good faith from taking into consideration factors other than lawful sources of income such as credit history, criminal history or references. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall require or prevent any person whose property fails to meet federal housing quality standards in connection with the federal Housing Choice Voucher (also known as Section 8) program (42 U.S.C. 1437f) to lease or rent a unit to a prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance contribution, or voucher for payment of part or all of the rent for such unit. 
In addition, during such time as a landlord is waiting for an inspection or other agency response relative to a Section 8 participant's application for rental of the landlord's housing unit, this Chapter shall not prohibit such landlord from choosing to rent such unit to another applicant who may or may not be a Section 8 participant. 
To rent: Includes to lease, sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-4 - SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING 
It shall be unlawful: 
To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. 
To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or provision of services or facilities. 
To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination. 
To represent to any person because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact available to others. 
To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. 
To discriminate against any disabled person by: 
Refusing to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of an existing dwelling unit occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; a person with disabilities may make reasonable modifications to the interior or exterior public and common use areas of a building as well as to his and her individual dwelling unit. 
Refusing to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-5 - FINANCE OF HOUSING 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance or other corporation, association, firm or business enterprise to deny a loan or other financial assistance which is sought for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. Nothing in this provision should be deemed to interfere with actions, which would occur within the ordinary course of business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-6 - BROKERAGE SERVICES 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker' s organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against a person in the terms and conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender expression, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-7 - EXEMPTIONS 
Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit: 
A.  A religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin; 
B.  The rental, lease, or occupancy of a room in an owner occupied single-family dwelling having not more than two roomers living independently exclusive of salaried household employees living on such premises; 
C.  A private club, the membership of which is not open to the public, which as incident to its primary purpose(s), provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from giving preference to its members; 
D.  The operation of housing units designed and offered predominately for the use and occupancy by person 55 years of age or older; 
E.  The operation of housing units designed and offered predominately for use and occupancy by persons with disabilities; 
F.  Any charitable or educational organization from limiting, to persons of the same sex the rental of living accommodations and facilities primarily for single room occupancy; 
G.  An initial condominium declaration limiting ownership, rental, or occupancy of a condominium unit to a person 55 years of age or older, provided that the person or immediate family of a person owning, renting, or lawfully occupying such unit prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of such age restriction as long as the person continues to own or reside in such housing accommodation; 
H.  The application of any local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling; 
I.  Restrictions on the rental or sale of a unit to any person found guilty of illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance; 
J.  Restrictions on the rental or sale of a unit to any person found guilty of: (i) child pornography, (ii) criminal sexual assault, (iii) aggravated criminal sexual assault, (iv) criminal sexual abuse, (v) aggravated criminal sexual abuse as set forth in Illinois Compiled Statutes (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1, 5/12-13, 5/12-14, 5/12-15, and 5/12-16 or any successor statute thereto). A finding of guilt for any offense of federal law or the law of another state that is substantially equivalent to any offense listed in this Chapter shall constitute a finding of guilt for purposes of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-60, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-8 - ENFORCEMENT 
A.  Referral to Appropriate Agency or Organization. Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this Chapter will be referred to the appropriate agency or organization for investigation and enforcement of applicable fair housing laws and policies. 
B.  Court Action by Complainant or other Aggrieved Person. Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this Chapter may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation, including: 
1.  An order compelling compliance with this Chapter. 
2.  An order prohibiting any such person found by the court to have violated any provision of this Chapter from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of the real property in question during the pendency of the case. 
3.  Compensatory damages. 
4.  Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court for the enforcement of this Chapter and the elimination of violations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-60, 8-18-2008; Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016)  
14-14-9 - INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 16, 2016, amended § 14-14-9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-14-9 pertained to administration and enforcement; fair housing commission and derived from Ord. No. 2008-60, adopted Aug. 18, 2008.  
14-14-10 - SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS 
If any provision of this Chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter and the application of the provisions to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 16, 2016, amended § 14-14-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-14-10 pertained to processing of complaints, conciliation, hearing procedure and commission report and derived from Ord. No. 2008-60, adopted Aug. 18, 2008.  
14-14-11 - PENALTY 
Any person who violates any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) for each offense, in addition to payment of all costs incurred by the City. Each day a violation continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-16-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 16, 2016, amended § 14-14-11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-14-11 pertained to interference, coercion or intimidation.  
14-14-12 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 14-14-12, which pertained to severability of provisions.  
14-14-13 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-39 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 16, 2016, repealed § 14-14-13, which pertained to penalty.  
CHAPTER 15 - CRIMINAL CODE 
SECTION 
 
14-15-1 - SHORT TITLE 
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Criminal Code of the City of Park Ridge.  
14-15-2 - GENERAL PURPOSES 
The provisions of this Chapter shall be construed in accordance with the general purposes hereof, to: 
A.  Forbid and prevent the commission of offenses: 
B.  Prescribe penalties which are proportionate to the seriousness of offenses: 
C.  Prevent arbitrary or oppressive treatment of persons accused or convicted of offenses.  
14-15-3 - STATE CRIMINAL REMEDIES PRESERVED 
This Criminal Code does not bar, suspend or otherwise effect any right or liability to damages, penalty, forfeiture or other remedy authorized by law to be recovered or enforced in a civil action or a prosecution by the State of Illinois; provided however, that in the event that the State's Attorney of Cook County elects to prosecute an offender for a violation of this Code under the State Criminal Code, as heretofore amended, the offender shall not be prosecuted under this Code.  
14-15-4 - JURISDICTION 
A person is subject to prosecution in the City for an offense which he commits, by his own conduct or that of another for which he is legally accountable, if the offense is committed wholly within the territorial limits of the City.  
14-15-5 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases described in this Section have the meanings designated herein except when a particular context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Acquittal: A verdict or finding of not guilty of an offense rendered by a legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to try the case without a jury. 
Act: Includes a failure or omission to take action. 
Another: A person or persons as defined in this Section other than the offender. 
City or This City: The City of Park Ridge and all land and water in respect to which the City has territorial jurisdiction. 
Conduct: An act or series of acts, and the accompanying mental state. 
Conviction: A judgment of conviction or sentence entered upon a plea of guilty or upon a verdict or finding of guilty of an offense rendered by a legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to try the case without a jury. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, a tent, a vehicle or other enclosed space which is used or intended for use as a human habitation, home or residence. 
Included Offense: A defense which: 
A.  Is established by proof of the same or less than all culpable mental state, or both, than that which is required to establish the commission of the offense charged; or 
B.  Consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged or an offense included therein. 
Includes: Includes or including means comprehending, among other particulars, without limiting the generality of the foregoing word or phrase. 
Offenses: A violation of any penal ordinance of the City. 
Peace Officer: Any person who, by virtue of his office or public employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses. 
Person: An individual, public or private corporation, government, partnership or incorporated association. 
Prosecution: All legal proceedings by which a person's liability for an offense is determined commencing with the signing of a complaint and including the final disposition of the case upon appeal. 
Public Employee: A person other than a public officer as authorized to perform any official function on behalf of, and as paid by, the State or any of its political subdivisions. 
Public Officer: A person who is elected to office pursuant to Statute, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the qualifications and duties of which are prescribed by Statute to discharge a public duty for the State or any of its political subdivisions. 
Reasonable Belief: Reasonable belief or reasonably believes means that the person concerned acting as a reasonable man believes that the described facts exist. 
Solicit or Solicitation: To command, authorize, urge and cite, request or advise another to commit an offense.  
14-15-6 - ASSAULT 
A.  A person commits assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
B.  A person who commits an assault shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
Cross reference— Assault and Battery, § 14-3-2.  
14-15-7 - AGGRAVATED ASSAULT 
A.  A person commits an aggravated assault when, in committing an assault, he: 
1.  Uses a deadly weapon; 
2.  Is hooded, robed or masked in such a manner as to conceal his identity; 
3.  Knows the individual assaulted to be a teacher or other person employed in any school, and such teacher or other employee is upon the grounds of a school or grounds adjacent thereto; 
4.  Knows the individual assaulted to be a supervisor, director, instructor or other person employed in any park district, and such supervisor, director, instructor or other employee is upon the grounds adjacent thereto, or in any part of a building used for park purposes; 
5.  Knows the individual assaulted to be a peace officer, or a person summoned and directed by him, or a correctional officer, while such officer is engaged in the execution of any of his official duties; 
6.  Knows the individual assaulted to be a fireman engaged in the execution of any of his official duties; 
7.  Knows the individual assaulted to be the driver, operator, employee or passenger of any transportation facility or system engaged in the business of transportation of the public for hire, and the individual assaulted is then performing in such capacity or then using such public transportation as a passenger, or using any area of any description designated by the transportation facility or system as a vehicle boarding, departure or transfer location; 
8.  Or the individual assaulted is on or about a public way, public property or public place of accommodation or amusement; 
9.  Knows the individual assaulted to be an employee of the State of Illinois, a municipal corporation therein or a political subdivision thereof, engaged in the performance of his authorized duties as such employee. 
B.  A person convicted of aggravated assault as defined herein shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-15-8 - BATTERY 
A.  A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means: 
1.  Causes bodily harm to an individual; or 
2.  Makes physical contact of any insulting or provoking nature with an individual. 
B.  A person convicted of battery as defined herein shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-15-9 - RECKLESS CONDUCT 
A.  A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety whether they otherwise are lawful or unlawful. 
B.  A person convicted of reckless conduct as defined herein shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-15-10 - CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT 
A.  A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner of residential real estate or as a managing agent or otherwise, he knowingly permits by his gross carelessness or neglect the physical condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated that the health or safety of any inhabitant is endangered. 
B.  A person convicted of criminal housing management as defined herein shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a condition as defined herein occurs.  
14-15-11 - OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY 
A.  Property: As used in this Section, property means anything of value. Property includes real estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor or services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed to or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building; electricity, gas and water; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures, micro-organisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents, blueprints, drawings, maps and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes or models thereof, or any other articles, materials, devices, substances, and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes or models thereof, which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific, technical, merchandising, production or management information, design, process, procedure, formula, invention or improvement. 
B.  Owner: As used in this Section, owner means a person other than the offender, who has possession of or any other interest in the property involved, even though such interest or possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert control over the property. 
C.  Permanent Deprivation: As used in this Section, to permanently deprive means to: 
1.  Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner; or 
2.  Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property; or 
3.  Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner only if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or compensation for its return; or 
4.  Sell, give pledge or otherwise transfer any interest in the property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner. 
D.  Deception: As used in this Section, deception means knowingly to: 
1.  Create or confirm another's impression which is false and which the offender does not believe to be true; or 
2.  Fail to correct a false impression which the offender previously has created or confirmed; or 
3.  Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the disposition of the property involved; or 
4.  Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to disclose a lien, adverse claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record; or 
5.  Promise performance which the offender does not intend to perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is not evidence that the offender did not intend to perform. 
E.  Threat: As used in this Section, threat means a menace, however communicated, to: 
1.  Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or on property; or 
2.  Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or 
3.  Commit any criminal offense; or 
4.  Accuse any person of a criminal offense; or 
5.  Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or 
6.  Harm the credit or business repute of any person; or 
7.  Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person threatened; or 
8.  Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or 
9.  Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the offender. 
F.  Stolen Property: As used in this Section, stolen property means property over which control has been obtained by theft. 
G.  Obtain: As used in this Section, obtain means: 
1.  In Relation to Property: Bring about a transfer of interest or possession, whether to the offender or to another, and 
2.  In Relation to Labor or Services: To secure the performance thereof. 
H.  Obtains Control: As used in this Section, the phrase "obtains control over property" includes but is not limited to the taking, carrying away or the sale, conveyance or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of property. 
I.  Value: As used in this Section, the value of property consisting of any commercial instrument of any written instrument representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor or services or otherwise of value to the owner shall be: 
1.  The marked value of such instrument if such instrument is negotiable and has a market value; and 
2.  The actual value of such instrument if such instrument is not negotiable or is otherwise of market value. For the purpose of establishing such actual value, the interest of any owner or owners entitled to any or all of the property represented by such instrument, by reason of such instrument, may be shown, even if another owner may be named in the complaint. 
J.  Theft: A person commits theft when he knowingly: 
1.  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or 
2.  Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or 
3.  Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen; and 
a.  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use and benefit of the property; or 
b.  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or 
c.  Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. Nothing in this Section shall apply to a theft of a firearm. 
No person shall be prosecuted under this Section if he has previously been convicted of theft under the Criminal Code of the State of Illinois. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
K.  Prima Facie Evidence, Theft by Lessee: It shall be prima facie evidence that a person knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner when a lessee of personal property of another fails to return to the owner within 30 days after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice in writing given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed by registered mail to the lessee at the address given by him and shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute a proper demand. 
L.  Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property: A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he: 
1.  Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and 
2.  Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and 
3.  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use and benefit of the property. 
A person convicted of theft of lost or mislaid property shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
M.  Theft of Labor or Services or Use of Property: A person commits theft when he obtains temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such uses are being obtained without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. Any person convicted of theft of labor or services or uses of property shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
N.  Offender's Interest in Property: 
1.  It is no defense to charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is not entitled; 
2.  Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution for theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living together as man and wife and were living in separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft. 
O.  Theft From Coin-Operated Machines: 
1.  A person commits theft from a coin-operated machine when he knowingly and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such machine, opens, breaks into, tampers with or damages a coin-operated machine. 
2.  As used in this Section, the term coin-operated machine shall include any automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter, coin telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services, money changer. A person convicted of theft from coin-operated machines shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00. 
No person shall be prosecuted under the terms of this subsection if such person has previously been convicted of theft from coin-operated machines. 
P.  Coin-Operated Machines; Possession of a Key or Device: Whoever possesses a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device, or a drawing, print or mold of a key, tool, instrument, explosive or device designated to open, break into, tamper with or damage a coin-operated machine as defined in subsection O above, of this Section, with intent to commit a theft from such machine, shall be guilty of an offense. A person convicted of possession of a key or device as defined herein shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.  
14-15-12 - RETAIL THEFT 
A.  Statement of Policy and Definitions: It is the public policy of the City that the substantial burden placed upon the economy of the City resulting from the rising incidence of retail theft is a matter of grave concern to the people of the City who have the right to be protected in their health, safety and welfare, from the effects of this offense. 
For the purposes of this Section, the words and phrases defined herein have the meanings ascribed to them in the following subsections, unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context. 
B.  Conceal: To conceal merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation. 
C.  Full Retail Value: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise. 
D.  Merchandise: Any item of tangible personal property. 
E.  Merchant: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator. 
F.  Minor: A person who is less than 19 years of age, is un-emancipated, and resides with his parents or legal guardian. 
G.  Person: Any natural person or individual. 
H.  Peace Officer: "Peace officer" has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 14-12-5 of this Chapter. 
I.  Premises of a Retail Mercantile Establishment: "Premises of a retail mercantile establishment" includes but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of patrons of such retail mercantile establishment. 
J.  Retail Mercantile Establishment: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public. 
K.  Shopping Cart: Those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile establishments for the use by the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets, and incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the stores. 
L.  Underring: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of merchandise. 
M.  Offense of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly: 
1.  Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise, display, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise, or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
2.  Alters, transfers, removes any label, price tag, marking indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment, and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value, with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
3.  Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or 
4.  Underrings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise. 
5.  Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal, with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart. 
N.  Presumptions: If any person: 
1.  Conceals upon his person among his belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and 
2.  Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station receiving payment for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of the merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. 
O.  Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time, for all or any of the following purposes: 
1.  To request identification; 
2.  To verify such identification; 
3.  Make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise; 
4.  To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; 
5.  In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person. 
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person. 
P.  Affirmative Defense: A detention as permitted in this Section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in the Criminal Code of the State of Illinois, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person so detained. 
Q.  Civil Liability: The parents or legal guardian of a minor who commits the offense of retail theft as herein defined shall be civilly liable for the full retail value or cost of repair or cost of replacement of the merchandise and actual damages not to exceed $500.00. 
R.  Penalty: A person who commits retail theft as defined in this Section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00; provided however, that no person shall be prosecuted under the terms of this Section for the retail theft of property, the full retail value of which exceeds $150.00; and further, no person shall be prosecuted under the terms of this Section if he has previously been convicted of theft.  
14-15-13 - INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS 
A.  Use: No person shall breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methylethylketone, trichloroathane, isopropanol, methylisobutylketone, methylcellosolveacetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental processes. For the purposes of this Section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. 
B.  Sale: No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to any person under 17 years of age unless upon written order of such person's parent or guardian, any compound, liquid or chemical set forth in subsection A hereof. 
Any person convicted of violating the terms of this Section shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00.  
14-15-14 - AIR RIFLES 
A.  Definitions. 
Air Rifle: Any air gun, spring gun, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement or device that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet constructed of plastic, steel, lead, rubber or other material with a force that may reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm or property damage. 
B.  Air Rifle Sales Prohibited. No person shall sell any air rifle in the City and no business license shall be granted by the City for a purpose which includes selling air rifles. 
C.  Air Rifle Possession. No person under 18 years of age shall possess, in the City, any air rifle. 
D.  Discharge of An Air Rifle Prohibited. No person may discharge an air rifle within the limits of the City. 
E.  Transportation of Air Rifles. It shall be unlawful to transport an air rifle within the City unless the person transporting the same is at least 18 years of age and the air rifle is broken down and nonfunctional or in a locked storage container. 
F.  Disposal of Prohibited Air Rifles. A person may voluntarily and peaceably deliver and abandon to the Police Department any air rifle. Delivery under this subparagraph F may be made at the headquarters of the Police Department or by summoning a police officer to the person's residence or place of business. Every air rifle to be delivered and abandoned to the Police Department under the subparagraph F shall be unloaded and securely wrapped in a package and in the case of delivery to the Police Department, the package shall be carried in open view. No person who delivers and abandons an air rifle under this subparagraph F shall be required to furnish identification, photographs, or fingerprints. No amount of money shall be paid for any weapon delivered or abandoned under this subparagraph F. 
G.  Destruction of Weapons Confiscated or Surrendered. Whenever any air rifle is surrendered or confiscated pursuant to this Section 14-15-14, the Department shall ascertain whether such item is needed as evidence in any matter. 
If the item is not required as evidence it shall be destroyed at the direction of the Department. A record of the date and method of destruction and an inventory of the air rifle so destroyed shall be maintained. 
H.  Acquisition or Possession Prohibited by Law. Nothing in this Section 14-15-14 shall make lawful the acquisition or possession of firearms or firearm accessories which is otherwise prohibited by law. 
I.  Severability. If any provision or term of this Section 14-15-14 or any application thereof is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other applications of the provisions or terms of this Section 14-15-14 which reasonably can be given effect without the invalid provision or term for the application thereof. 
J.  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Section 14-15-14 shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00 for each such offense. A finding of guilty of this Section 14-15-14 by a holder of a business license issued by the City shall constitute grounds for revocation of such business license. 
Cross reference— Storing Firearms, § 14-3-6; Firearms, § 14-3-9. 
(Ord. 2004-57, 9-7-2004)  
14-15-15 - LITTER CONTROL 
A.  Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Litter means any discarded use or unconsumed substance or waste. "Litter" may include, but is not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging construction material, abandoned vehicles (as defined in section 4-100 of the Illinois Vehicle Code), motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil carcasses of dead animals, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly. 
Motor vehicle has the meaning ascribed to that term in section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate or other legal entity or their legal representative, agent or assign. 
B.  Dumping, Deposit of Litter Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or private property in the City, or upon or into any river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water in the City unless: 
1.  The property has been designated by the State or any of its agencies, political subdivisions, units of local government or school districts, for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board; 
2.  The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of litter; 
3.  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or a fire hazard; 
4.  Persons acting under the direction of proper public officials during a special cleanup day; or 
5.  The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes improperly, disposes of such litter when the emergency situation no longer exists. 
C.  Dumping, Deposit From Motor Vehicle Prohibited; Deposit of Garbage or Refuse in Receptacles Along Public Highways: No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or private property, or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of water in the City except as permitted under subsection B above, nor shall any person transport by any means garbage or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit such material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed along public highways or roadside rest areas. 
D.  Accumulation of Litter Prohibited: No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown or otherwise carried by natural elements onto the real property of another person. 
E.  Presumption of Violation by Operator; Throwing, Deposits of Litter From Motor Vehicle: Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the operator of that motor vehicle has violated this Section, but that presumption may be rebutted. 
F.  Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section is subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. In addition to any fine imposed under this Section, the court may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose of the litter, and the City may employ persons to supervise such removal and disposal and may tax the cost of such supervision as costs against the person so convicted.  
14-15-16 - NOTICE OF UNUSUAL DEATH 
In any case in which any person in the City is required by law as set forth in 410 ILCS 505 or in an ordinance establishing the office of Cook County Medical Examiner enacted by the County Board of Cook County, to notify the Cook County Medical Examiner of any death occurring within the City or who shall in fact so notify said Medical Examiner, that person shall concurrently notify the Police Department of the City of such death.  
CHAPTER 16 - CONTROL OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND INSTRUMENTS USED FOR INHALING OR INGESTION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 
SECTION: 
 
14-16-1 - CANNABIS DEFINED 
As used in this Chapter, cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any part of the plant Cannabis Sativa, and including derivatives or subspecies, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. Cannabis does not include industrial hemp, as that term is defined in the Industrial Hemp Act, 505 ILCS 89/5. "Cannabis" also means concentrate and cannabis-infused products. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-2 - SIMPLE POSSESSION DEFINED 
As used in this Chapter, "simple possession" means : 
A.  For adult residents of the State of Illinois who are not registered patients under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program, the knowing possession of greater than (1) 30 grams of cannabis flower; (2) 500 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused product; (3) 5 grams of cannabis concentrate; 
B.  For adult non-residents of the State of Illinois, the knowing possession of greater than (1) 15 grams of cannabis flower; (2) 250 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused product; (3) 2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate 
C.  Adult residents of the State of Illinois who are registered qualifying patients under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program, may possess any cannabis produced by home cultivated cannabis plants grown to the extent permitted by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, provided any amount of cannabis produced in excess of 30 grams of raw cannabis or its equivalent must remain secured within the residence or residential property in which it was grown. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-3 - SIMPLE POSSESSION PROHIBITED 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any person to be in simple possession of cannabis in an amount which exceeds the amounts described in Section 14-16-2. 
B.  It is unlawful for any minor knowingly to possess any cannabis, except under provisions of law authorizing the possession of medical cannabis. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess cannabis in any of the following locations: 
1.  In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; 
2.  On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; 
3.  In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the vehicle is moving; or 
4.  In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises; 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-4 - DEFINITIONS 
Close Proximity: Within 1,500 on a straight line commencing at the property lines nearest to each other. 
Controlled Substance: Any drug or controlled substance as defined under any law of the State of Illinois RICA. 
Instrument: A device used, designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering or preparing cannabis as heretofore defined in Section 14-16-1 of this Chapter, cocaine, phencyclidine, opium or any derivative thereof, or any other controlled substance. 
Minor: Any person who has not attained 21 years of age. 
Place of Display: Any museum, library, school or other similar public place upon which business is not transacted for a profit. 
Premises Open to Minors: Any business establishment which sells its wares or merchandise to minors or which permits minors to enter into its place of business. 
School: Any public or private elementary, junior high or high school. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 6, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-5 - POSSESSION PROHIBITED 
Except as permitted by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any pipe, device or contrivance adapted for the use of smoking or inhaling any controlled substance, which said pipe, device or contrivance is herein defined as an instrument; provided, however, that such pipe, device or contrivance defined herein as an instrument has been used for the purpose of smoking or inhaling or ingesting a controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-6 - SALE AND DISPLAY PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, with or without remuneration, any cannabis anywhere within the City, except in compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, advertise or display any instrument as defined in this Chapter in or upon any premises which: 
A.  Is a premises open to minors; or 
B.  Is within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a public park or public library, or a game arcade to which admission is not restricted to persons 21 years of age or older; 
C.  Violates the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-7 - USE PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume cannabis in any of the following locations: 
A.  In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; 
B.  On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; 
C.  In any motor vehicle; 
D.  In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises; 
E.  In any public place; 
F.  Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act; or 
G.  In any place where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act; 
As used in this Section, "public place" means any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State or a unit of local government. "Public place " does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019)  
14-16-8 - PENALTY 
Any minor who shall violate any of the terms of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $1,000.00 for the first offense and $1,500.00 for each subsequent offense. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is a minor, the court or administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a drug and alcohol education and counseling program that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and requires a certified evaluation program and not less than four hours of counseling. If the violator agrees to attend such a program, the violator shall pay for the cost of the program and a $100.00 fine for a first offense. For a second offense, the offender shall attend an education and counseling program of at least ten hours in duration as determined by the licensed program and shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of not less than $250.00. In cases of illegal display, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that a violation exists. 
Any person over the age of 21 who shall violate any of the terms of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-69, 8-21-2006; Ord. No. 2012-50, 10-1-2012; Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted October 7, 2019 renumbered the former § 14-16-7, which pertained to penalty, to § 14-16-8, as set out herein.  
14-16-9 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE 
In addition to the penalty set forth in Section 14-1-78 above, any person convicted of a violation of Section 14-16-6 hereof shall be subject to revocation of the business license issued to the owner or operator of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted October 7, 2019 renumbered the former § 14-16-8, which pertained to revocation of license, to § 14-16-9, as set out herein.  
14-16-10 - NUISANCE 
A violation of Section 14-16-6 above is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-53 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted October 7, 2019 renumbered the former § 14-16-9, which pertained to nuisance, to § 14-16-10, as set out herein.  
CHAPTER 17 - REGULATION OF FOREST PRESERVE AREAS 
SECTION 
 
14-17-1 - APPLICATION 
This Chapter shall apply to all that territory contained within that part of the Forest Preserve District of Cook county which lies within the territorial limits of the City.  
14-17-2 - DUMPING OR LITTERING 
No person shall deposit, dump, throw, cast, lay or place, nor cause to be deposited, dumped, thrown, cast, laid or placed, any ashes, trash, rubbish, paper, garbage, refuse or debris in or upon the property of the Forest Preserve District, nor in any watercourse, lake, pond or slough within said Forest Preserve District.  
14-17-3 - SWIMMING 
No person shall swim or bathe in any of the swimming pools, watercourses, lakes, ponds or sloughs within the property of the Forest Preserve District except at such places as may be designated for such purpose by the Board of Commissioners of the Forest Preserve District and in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by said Board.  
14-17-4 - DESIGNATED PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREAS 
A.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park said vehicles in any place marked as a passenger or loading zone, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, or for the unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials, and in no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any roadway or in any parking area in such a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon, or in violation of any restrictions or regulations prohibiting parking in any designated area within the Forest Preserve or territory under the jurisdiction of the Commissioners of the Forest Preserve District of Cook County, where, pursuant to regulations issued by the General Superintendent, a sign of such restriction or regulation has been placed.  
14-17-5 - PARKING AFTER HOURS 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle on any driveway, parkway or parking area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.  
14-17-6 - LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLE 
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street, roadway or parking area within any Forest Preserve District during the time between one hour after sunset to sunrise, when not prohibited by Section 14-17-5 hereof, or any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any vehicle on the street, roadway or parking area from a distance of 200 feet, there shall be displayed upon such vehicle two or more lamps, one of which shall be on the roadway side and project a white light or lights of yellow or amber tint visible at a distance of 200 feet to the front of such vehicle and one of which lamps shall project a red light visible from a distance of 200 feet to the rear.  
14-17-7 - DRIVING ON WALKS, PATHS, TRAILS OR WOODLAND 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any automobile, motorcycle, motorscooter or other motor vehicle to drive or cause to be driven such motor vehicle through any woodland or upon any walk, sidewalk, path or trail, whether marked or unmarked, within the property of the Forest Preserve District; nor upon any road or drive or parking space within said District, except in the manner and according to the regulations prescribed by the Board of Commissioners of the Forest Preserve District.  
14-17-8 - SETTING FIRES 
No person shall willfully set on fire, nor cause to be set on fire, any tree, woodland, brushland, grassland or meadow within the Forest Preserve District. No person shall build any fire in or near any tree, woodland, grassland, building or other structure, nor make use of any inflammable material within the Forest Preserve District, except within the fireplaces, receptacles or open areas provided for and designated by the Board of Commissioners of the Forest Preserve District for such purpose, and then only according to the regulations prescribed for such use and in such manner as will cause no harm or injury to any tree, woodland, grassland, building or other structure.  
14-17-9 - POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED WITHIN CERTAIN AREAS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages within 50 feet of any roadway or parking lot in any area designated Forest Preserve within the City.  
14-17-10 - PENALTY 
Upon conviction of a violation of this Chapter, the person so convicted shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense.  
CHAPTER 18 - HANDBILLS 
SECTION 
 
14-18-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Commercial Handbill . Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
A.  Which advertises for same any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing; or 
B.  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereon by sales; or 
C.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; or 
D.  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Newspaper . Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal Statute or regulations, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial Handbill . Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.  
14-18-2 - HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.  
14-18-3 - HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.  
14-18-4 - HANDBILLS IN VACANT LOTS 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.  
14-18-5 - HANDBILLS ON POSTED PROPERTY 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the works: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.  
14-18-6 - HANDBILLS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this Chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal postal laws or regulations.  
14-18-7 - MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS EXEMPT 
The provisions of the preceding Section 14-18-6 shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined herein.  
14-18-8 - POSTING SIGNS 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade trees, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.  
CHAPTER 19 - INFECTED, INFESTED AND DEAD TREES[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-14, 3-5-2007 - Entire rewrite. 
 
14-19-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Infected: The presence of a disease deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or the United States Department of Agriculture, the presence of circumstances that make it reasonable to believe that such a disease is present or the presence of any plant disease that is liable to spread to other plants, trees or shrubs to the injury of such plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of humans or property. 
Infested: The presence of a pest deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of Agriculture or the United States Department of Agriculture, the presence of circumstances that make it reasonable to believe that such a pest is present or the presence of any injurious insect or pest that is liable to spread to other plants, trees or shrubs to the injury of such plants, trees or shrubs or to the injury of humans or property.  
14-19-2 - INSPECTION 
The officers, agents, servants and employees of the City are hereby authorized and directed to enter upon private property whereon there is located any tree having the appearance of being dead or suspected of being infected or infested, for the purpose of inspecting said dead or suspected infected or infested tree and removing therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested to establish whether said tree is in fact dead, infected or infested.  
14-19-3 - DECLARATION OF NUISANCE 
In the event that it is determined by said officers, agents, servants and employees of the City or by any forestry or agricultural laboratory, school or agency of the State of Illinois that the tree from which said samples have been taken, is in fact dead, infected or infested, said tree and all dead wood, or debris, which, because of its condition may serve as a breeding place for such pests or diseases or enable transmission of such pests or diseases shall forthwith be and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  
14-19-4 - REMOVAL BY OWNER 
The owner, or his agent or occupant, of the parcel of land on which a dead, infected or infested tree, deadwood, debris, or dead or dying limbs exists shall forthwith remove and destroy the same or shall cause the same to be removed and destroyed, in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the City, within ten days of notification to such owner, occupant or agent by the officers, agents, servants or employees of the City that said tree, dead wood, debris, or dead or dying limbs situated on said parcel of land is in fact dead, infested or infected and is declared a nuisance. The notice shall include the following: 
A.  The identity of the property, by common description; 
B.  The tree(s) affected; 
C.  Notice that the dead, infected or infested tree(s) is a nuisance and that it is unlawful to permit the dead, infected or infested tree(s) to remain on the property; 
D.  A request for the removal of the tree(s); 
E.  Notice that if the tree(s) is not removed within ten days, the City will make necessary arrangements for the removal and destruction of the tree(s) and will charge the cost of removal and destruction to the owner or his agent or occupant; and 
F.  Instructions regarding the proper removal and destruction of each dead, infected or infested tree. 
(Ord. No. 2017-59 , § 1, 10-16-2017)  
14-19-5 - ABATEMENT BY CITY AUTHORITIES 
In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood or debris is located cannot be found or if found and notified as aforesaid neglects or refuses to abate said nuisance, it shall be lawful for the Municipal authorities of the City, its officers, agents, servants and employees, to abate the same by the removal and destruction of said dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood, or debris; and in that event the said owner, occupant and agent, or any of them, shall be charged with those expenses which may be incurred by the City in the removal or abatement of the dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood, or debris, as aforesaid, which expense shall be collected by the City by suit or otherwise in addition to the fine or penalty herein provided.  
14-19-6 - PENALTY 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter or who shall neglect or refuse to remove and destroy said dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood, or debris on any parcel of land of which said person is owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, when ordered so to do or who shall interfere with the removal and destruction of such dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood, or debris shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which said person shall continue to maintain said nuisance or to permit said dead, infected or infested tree, dead wood, or debris to continue to exist on said parcel of land.  
CHAPTER 20 - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Charitable solicitations, §§ 14-7-7—14-7-10. 
 
14-20-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and phrases as used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context. 
Charitable Organization: Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, religious or eleemosynary person or one purporting to be such which solicits and collects funds for charitable purposes. 
Charitable Purpose: Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, religious eleemosynary purpose. 
Charitable Solicitation: Any request for the donation of money, property or anything of value, or the pledge of as future donation of money, property or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, tangible including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications or brochures, upon the representation, express or implied, that the proceeds of such sale will be used by a charitable organization for a charitable purpose. 
Commercial Solicitation: Any offer to sell, or the taking of orders or subscriptions for purchase of any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, printed material or services of any kind or description. 
Person: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any combination thereof. 
Registered Solicitor: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor, conspicuously displayed on his or her person while engaged in solicitation.  
14-20-2 - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any charitable organization or agent thereof to engage in charitable solicitation, or for any person to engage in commercial solicitation, at any residential premises within the corporate limits of the City, unless such organization or person shall have first obtained a certificate of registration from the City as hereinafter provided.  
14-20-3 - APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the City. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information required on the application: 
A.  The name and address of the charitable or commercial organization. 
B.  The name and address of the supervisor or person in charge of solicitation (if a school or youth organization) in the City or name of the individual solicitor if a commercial organization. 
C.  Length of permit: Two-month or four-month period. 
D.  The dates and time of day such solicitation are to be made and the geographic area within the City wherein such solicitation shall be conducted at a particular time and day. 
E.  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a certificate under this Chapter, if any. 
F.  Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this Chapter has ever been revoked. 
G.  Whether the applicant or any listed solicitor has ever been arrested or convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the ordinances of any other Illinois municipality regulating solicitation. 
H.  If a charitable organization: 
1.  A written statement of recent date issued by the Attorney General of Illinois that the charitable organization has complied with the provisions of "An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes," 225 ILCS 460/1, or a written statement by the Attorney General of exemption under 225 ILCS 460/3. 
2.  A copy of the most recent annual report filed with the Illinois Attorney General pursuant to 225 ILCS 460/4. In the event a charitable organization has not yet been required to file an annual report, a copy of the registration statement filed with the Attorney General of Illinois pursuant to 225 ILCS 460/2 may be utilized. 
3.  A financial statement as described in Section 14-20-6. 
This requirement shall not apply to Park Ridge based youth or school organizations. 
I.  If commercial solicitation: 
1.  The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth must be indicated on the application for a commercial solicitor. 
2.  Name and address of the organization to which the applicant is employed by or represents, and the date of hire of the solicitor. 
3.  A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation which the applicant will engage in. 
4.  Whether the applicant or any listed solicitor has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other State, or of a Federal law of the United States. (See also Section 14-20-12 of this Chapter.) 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 2-15-2015)  
14-20-4 - APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; REVIEW PROCEDURE 
All applications for a certificate of registration shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be verified under oath. For Commercial Solicitation applications, a fee of $40.00 per person shall be imposed for a permit of two months. The City Clerk shall act upon such application within ten days after its receipt. No application shall be effective until acted upon by the City Clerk. If the City Clerk finds and determines that all the requirements of this Chapter have been met, the City Clerk shall issue said certificate of registration forthwith. 
A.  Denial - Charitable Solicitation: In the case of an application for a certificate of registration to engage in charitable solicitation, the failure of an applicant to fulfill the requirements of this Chapter shall be the sole basis for the denial of a certificate of registration by the City Clerk. In the event that any certificate of registration to engage in charitable solicitation is denied for failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for said denial. If said application is not cured within ten days after the date on which the City Clerk denies the issuance of said certificate of registration, the City Attorney shall be and is hereby authorized to apply to the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, or the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois for a judicial determination as to whether the charitable solicitation described in the application may be prohibited. The applicant shall be named in any action as a party defendant. The City shall assert every possible and reasonable effort to have the case heard on its merits without undue delay as soon as legally possible. 
B.  Denial - Commercial Solicitation: In the case of an application for commercial solicitation, the failure of an applicant to fulfill the requirements of this Chapter shall be a basis for the denial of a certificate of registration by the City Clerk. In addition, no certificate of registration for commercial solicitation shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other State or under the Federal laws of the United States within five years of the date of the application; (See also Section 14-20-12 of this Chapter) nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. In the event that any certificate of registration for commercial solicitation is denied for failure to comply with the requirements set forth herein above, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. If said application is not cured within ten days after the date on which the City Clerk denies the issuance of said certificate of registration, said application shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2010-56, 6-21-2010)  
14-20-5 - RECORDS OF APPLICATIONS, CERTIFICATES 
The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in his office, an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this Chapter, and a record of the denial of any and all applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.  
14-20-6 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATION; FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
A charitable organization shall, upon request, make available to every person solicited, a financial statement of said charitable organization for the preceding 12 months which shall include a balance sheet and statement of income and expenses clearly setting forth the following: gross receipts and gross income from all sources broken down into total receipts and income from each separate solicitation project or source; cost of administration; cost of solicitation; cost of programs designed to inform or educate the public; funds or properties transferred out of the State, with explanation as to recipient and purpose; total net income amount for each major purpose, charitable or otherwise. Statements shall be signed by the president or other authorized officer or agent and shall be accompanied by an opinion signed by an independent certified public accountant that said financial statement fairly represents the financial operation of the charitable organization. 
A copy of the annual report to the Attorney General of Illinois required by 225 ILCS 460/4, may be presented in lieu of the aforementioned financial statement. For the purpose of financial statements, the definitions and standards applicable to the annual report to the Attorney General as set forth in section 5104 shall be utilized. 
In the event a charitable organization has not been established for a period of 12 months, a copy of the registration statement filed with the Attorney General of Illinois pursuant to 225 ILCS 460/2, may be utilized.  
14-20-7 - NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITATION 
Any person owning or occupying any residential premises within the City may post a notice indicating whether or not solicitors are invited at said premises. Any such notice shall be given in the following manner: 
A weatherproof sign, approximately two inches by two inches in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the premises indicating the determination made by the owner or occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows: 
"NO SOLICITING" 
Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the owner or occupant of the premises to forbid solicitors from entering upon such premises.  
14-20-8 - OBEDIENCE TO NOTICE ON PREMISES 
It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the City, to first examine the notice provided for in Section 14-20-7, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If the notice states, "No Soliciting," then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.  
14-20-9 - UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute trespass and a nuisance for any person to remain upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the owner or occupant of such premises for the purpose of securing an audience with the owner or occupant thereof, to engage in solicitation as herein defined in defiance of the notice exhibited at the premises in accordance with the provisions of Section 14-20-7.  
14-20-10 - DUTY TO LEAVE PREMISES ON REQUEST 
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any premises, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when notified to do so by the occupant.  
14-20-11 - HOURS OF SOLICITATION 
No person shall engage in solicitation as herein defined in any residential area prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 2008-66, 9-2-2008)  
14-20-12 - FELONS AS SOLICITORS 
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to utilize as a solicitor any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state, or under the Federal law of the United States, or who has been released from any penal institution, within five years of the date of the application.  
14-20-13 - FRAUDULENT MISREPRESENTATION AND MISSTATEMENT PROHIBITED 
No person shall misrepresent his name, occupation, financial condition, or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud, in connection with any charitable or commercial solicitation, or in any application or report filed under this Chapter.  
14-20-14 - REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE; REVIEW 
A.  The City Clerk shall revoke a certificate of registration for a violation of any of the regulations listed in Sections 14-20-6 through 14-20-13, inclusive. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the City Clerk to the holder of the certificate by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by causing personal notice to be delivered to any solicitor registered under such certificate. Upon receipt of said notice of revocation, all solicitation activity shall cease. 
B.  In the event the City Clerk revokes any certificate of registration for charitable solicitation, the City shall seek a judicial determination of such action in the same manner as is provided for in Section 14-20-4 of this Chapter. 
C.  In the event the City Clerk revokes any certificate of registration for commercial solicitation, the person aggrieved by said decision shall have the right to appeal and have a hearing before the City Clerk. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk within ten days after receipt of the notice of revocation, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The City Clerk shall thereupon set the time and a place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.  
14-20-15 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED 
Any charitable organization registered with the Attorney General in the manner provided by law may stand upon selected streets or highways within the City, at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop, for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle as part of a statewide fund-raising activity. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be at least 18 years of age and shall wear a high-visibility vest. Any charitable organization wishing to engage in such solicitation for contributions shall apply to the City for a permit. The application shall contain the following along with such other information as may be required by the City: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the organization. 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of a local representative of the organization or of the person making the application. 
C.  The location or locations at which approval to solicit is being sought. 
D.  The days of the week and time of day at which such solicitation is proposed to take place. 
E.  The number of persons proposed to solicit at each location. 
F.  An affidavit from the organization stating that the organization is registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided by "An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an Appropriation Therefore," approved July 26, 1963, and as amended. 
G.  An affidavit that the organization is engaged in statewide fund-raising activity. 
H.  A certificate of insurance verifying that the organization has in effect at the time of application general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 naming the City of Park Ridge as an additional insured. 
I.  Release and Hold Harmless Letter releasing and indemnifying the City of Park Ridge against any and all liability and expenses whatsoever, for bodily injury or death, including without limitation, injury or death to agents, employees, servants or volunteers of the organization which may be causally related to any act of ordinary negligence, intentional, willful or wanton misconduct of the soliciting agent acting on behalf of the organization. The Certificate of Insurance and Release shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
Additional Requirements for Solicitors: 
Solicitors will only be permitted to enter upon the roadway from the curb side of the roadway, not the median. Solicitors may not stand in or on the median portion of the roadway. 
Solicitors may only solicit when the traffic signal is red. Solicitors must immediately get off the roadway when the signal changes to green, before traffic proceeds. 
Solicitors may only solicit at intersections that the City has predetermined to be safe and appropriate based on the safety of the solicitors and motorists and the expeditious flow of vehicular traffic. The City shall create and maintain a list of streets approved for solicitation. 
If notified of a violation of this Chapter pertaining to solicitation on roadways, the police department may issue a warning to the solicitor, may cause the solicitor to cease operations, or may cause the soliciting organization to cease operations immediately. 
(Ord 2005-18, 3-7-2005)  
14-20-16 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
The City shall issue a permit for such solicitation if the applicant has complied with all of the terms and provisions of State law regarding such solicitation and the provisions of this Chapter. The City must also find that the location, times and duration of the proposed solicitation and number of proposed solicitors shall not result in interference with the flow of vehicular traffic nor jeopardize the safety of solicitors and/or motorists. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, 3-7-2005)  
14-20-17 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
The City is authorized to instantly revoke the permit of any organization in the event there is a determination that the actions or conduct of the representatives of the soliciting organization have violated any of the terms and provisions of this Chapter, or in the event it is determined by the City that such actions have resulted in interference with the flow of vehicular traffic or have jeopardized the safety of solicitors or motorists. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, 3-7-2005)  
14-20-18 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS; PENALTY 
Any person, corporation, unincorporated association or other entity violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, upon a judicial finding of such violation, be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, 3-7-2005)  
CHAPTER 21 - PROVISIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE USE OF ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSONS 
SECTION 
 
14-21-1 - PROVISIONS TO AND USE OF ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSONS 
A.  Delivery of Alcoholic Liquor to An Underage Person. It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of relationship, age or circumstances, to deliver any alcoholic liquor to any underage person, except as set forth in subsection C of this Section. 
B.  Use of Premises for Consumption of an Alcoholic Liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or to knowingly or negligently fail to prevent, on any premises under his or her control, the consumption of an alcoholic liquor by an underage person. This Section shall apply to residential, public and commercial premises. 
C.  Exceptions. Subsections A and B of this Section shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
1.  The performance of a bona fide religious service. 
2.  The delivery of an alcoholic liquor within the home to an underage person, by and under the direct supervision of that underage person's parent. However, the following rules shall be applied to this subsection C2: 
a.  In any prosecution of an underage person for the commission of any State or local offense, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds, may request a ruling and the court shall rule as to whether the consumption of an alcoholic liquor, as permitted by the parent, was a contributing factor to the commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then the penalty set forth in subsection D of this Section shall apply. For purposes of this subsection, the consumption of alcohol may be determined to be a contributing factor if it had the effect of substantially causing an impairment to the person as "impairment" is defined in this Chapter. It need not be shown that, but for the consumption of alcohol, the offense would not have been committed. 
b.  The parent shall remain vicariously liable as set forth in subsection E of this Section. 
D.  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating subsection A or B shall be fined in the mandatory amount of $1,000.00. 
E.  Vicarious Liability of a Parent or Other Person Facilitating the Use or Abuse of Alcoholic Liquor. The following persons shall be liable to any individual who has been injured by an alcohol impaired underage person when the impairment is a contributing cause of the injury: 
1.  Any person who delivered or permitted the delivery of an alcoholic liquor to the underage person. The person making or permitting the initial delivery to an underage person remains liable to anyone injured by the same or different underage person regardless of how many times the alcoholic liquor changed hands. 
2.  Any person in control of a premises, who knowingly or negligently fails to maintain supervision to such an extent that an alcoholic liquor is consumed on the premises by an underage person. 
3.  Any person who knowingly or negligently allows the operation of a motor vehicle under his or her control by an underage person, when the person knew or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that the underage person was either impaired or had consumed any amount of alcohol within two hours prior to when this allowance to drive occurred. 
The vicarious liability established by this Section shall not be subject to the limitations on damages as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21. 
F.  Use of False Identification. Any underage person found guilty of attempting to obtain delivery of an alcoholic liquor by use of false proof of age shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $500.00. If the false proof of age was an improperly used driver's license, the person so using it shall not be permitted, for a period of six months, to operate a motor vehicle on any public way within the corporate limits of the City unless accompanied by a licensed driver over 30 years of age. 
G.  False Identification Not a Defense. It shall not be a defense to any action brought criminally, civilly or administratively against any liquor licensee or any other person charged with the delivery of any alcoholic liquor to an underage person that such a person produced false identification or false proof of age. The person or persons hearing and deciding the charges may consider such a claim when determining the penalty to be assessed or the apportionment of damages. 
H.  Operation of a Motor Vehicle While in a State of Impairment. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway of the City while in a state of impairment due to the consumption of an alcoholic liquor or with any alcohol at all in his or her system. For purposes of this section only, "operation of a motor vehicle" shall have the definition ascribed to it in the Illinois Vehicle Code rather than the definition set forth in Section 12-6-27 of this Code. 
I.  Operation of a Motor Vehicle by Underage Persons with an Alcoholic Liquor in or on the Vehicle; When the Underage Person is Impaired Due to Alcohol or has Alcohol in the System or is Operating the Vehicle in Violation of a Restriction Pursuant to this Chapter. The following shall apply when any underage person is found in the City operating any motor vehicle in which or on which is found any alcoholic liquor, or when the underage person is in a state of impairment due to consumption of alcohol or to have alcohol in his or her system or is found operating a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction pursuant to this Chapter: 
1.  The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the police department. 
2.  The following factors shall not be considerations in determining whether or not to impound the motor vehicle: 
a.  Whether the alcoholic liquor is in an opened or an unopened container. 
b.  Whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic liquor in the vehicle. 
c.  Whether the operator had knowledge of the existence of the alcoholic liquor within the motor vehicle. 
3.  Upon impoundment, the motor vehicle may be released only to another person showing proof of ownership or lease rights to the motor vehicle. 
a.  If the underage operator is the owner or lessor of the vehicle, then the vehicle may be released only to a parent or spouse of the underage owner. If the underage person has no parent or spouse living in the immediate area, the vehicle may be released, upon satisfactory proof of such fact, as set forth in subsection 4 of this Section. 
4.  The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a passenger in the motor vehicle at the time the alcoholic liquor or impairment was found unless at least 24 hours have passed from the time of the finding. 
5.  The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the release has paid an administrative fee of $200.00 to the City, plus any towing or storage costs. 
6.  If the operator is subsequently found guilty of driving with open alcohol in a motor vehicle or possession of alcohol by a minor or of operating a motor vehicle while impaired pursuant to Subsection G of this Section, that person shall not be permitted for a period of six months, to operate a motor vehicle on any public way within the limits of the City unless accompanied by a licensed driver over 30 years of age. 
7.  The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the penalties that may be assessed in a court of law for any charges incident to the stop. 
8.  Any law enforcement officer, the police department and the City and any of its officers or agents shall be absolutely immune from any liability or exposure to liability of any kind or nature for the enforcement or implementation of this Section. 
J.  Procedure for Driving Restriction Notification; Hearing. 
1.  If a person has committed a violation that subjects the person to a restriction on driving in Park Ridge, such a restriction shall not take place until the police department has sent, by regular mail, a notice of the pending driving restriction. The notice shall be mailed at least two weeks before the restriction is to go into effect and shall contain: 1) a statement that the restriction applies only to the City; 2) the date the restriction is to go into effect and the date on which it ends; 3) a map showing the City limits; 4) a notice that the operator has the right to request a hearing within ten days of notification to determine the validity of the restriction. The validity of the restriction may be challenged only on the grounds that the person was not the actual person found guilty or that there was no finding of guilty for the underlying offense. 
2.  The hearing shall be conducted by a supervisory member of the City police department, appointed by the Chief of Police and whose determination shall be final. 
K.  Penalty for Violating Driving Restriction. 
1.  Restriction: No person shall operate and no person, including a parent, shall permit another to operate a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the City in violation of the restrictions set forth in this Chapter. 
2.  Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this Subsection (K) shall be fined in the mandatory amount of $500.00. 
L.  Zero Tolerance With Respect to Alcohol Use. It shall be unlawful for any underage person to have any alcohol of any level detectable by observation or blood/alcohol testing in the person's system. If the blood/alcohol level is less than .05 milliliters of alcohol per liter of blood, then it shall be a defense that the alcohol was acquired pursuant to the exceptions set forth in subsection (C) of this Section. Such defense may be established by clear and convincing evidence and by the testimony of the adult providing the alcoholic liquor. 
M.  Possession of Alcohol By Underage Persons. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to possess, dispense, or consume alcoholic liquor. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.  
14-21-2 - REFERRAL TO PEER JURY 
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the referral of underage persons to the peer jury for disposition consistent with the rules and regulations of the peer jury.  
14-21-3 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Fines assessed by the court against any offender may be in addition to any penalty assessed against a licensee in any administrative proceeding. 
A.  General. Unless another penalty is set forth in this Chapter, every person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of $1,000.00 for the first offense and $1,500.00 for each subsequent offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any fines set forth in this chapter shall be assessed regardless of whether the violator is convicted or placed on supervision by the court. 
B.  Substance Abuse. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under 21 years of age, the court or administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a drug and alcohol education and abuse counseling program that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and requires a certified evaluation program and not less than four hours of counseling. If the violator agrees to attend such a program, the violator shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of $100.00 for a first offense. For a second offense, the offender shall attend a drug and alcohol education and counseling program of at least ten hours in duration as determined by the licensed program and shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of not less than $250.00. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under 21 years of age and is either found guilty or pleads no contest and agrees to pay the applicable fine, the City will report the person to the Secretary of State's Office and his/her driver's license will be suspended in accordance with state law.  
CHAPTER 22 - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES 
SECTION 
 
14-22-1 - NUISANCE DECLARED 
A.  Any certain property within the City which becomes a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this Chapter and is subject to its remedies. 
B.  Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership or ownership and control to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this Chapter and subject to its remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Chronic nuisance property: Property upon which two or more of the activities listed below have occurred during any 180 day period, as a result of any two separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency. 
A.  Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1. 
B.  Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
C.  Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1. 
D.  Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 1.5. 
E.  Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1. 
F.  Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq. 
G.  Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9. 
H.  Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq. 
I.  Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq. 
J.  Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq. 
K.  Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/3 et seq. 
L.  Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in any City ordinance or State statute. 
M.  Violation of any animal control order issued under Article 5, Chapter 8 of this Code. 
N.  "Criminal housing management" as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1. 
O.  "Street gang related" or "gang related" activity as defined in 740 ILCS 147/10. 
P.  "Structures unfit for human occupancy" as defined in the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted by the City (Section 15-3-1). 
Q.  "Unsafe structures" as defined in the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted by the City (Section 15-3-1). 
R.  Multiple and serious violations of the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted by the City (Section 15-3-1). 
S.  Any activity that constitutes a felony or a Class A misdemeanor pursuant to any federal or State statute. 
T.  A violation of Section 14-4-4 of this Code, pertaining to parental responsibility. 
Control: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property. 
Owner: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. "Owner" includes, but is not limited to: 
A.  A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested: 
1.  All or part of the legal title to the property; or 
2.  All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises; or 
B.  An occupant who can control what occurs on the property. 
Permit: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act. 
Person: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using property in the City. 
Person in charge: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under his or her domain, ownership or control. 
Property: Any real property, including land in that which is affixed, incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-3 - EXEMPTIONS 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions contained in this Chapter to the contrary, the following conduct or activity shall not be counted in determining whether a property is a chronic nuisance property: 
A.  Contact made to police or other emergency services, if (i) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual violence; (ii) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (iii) the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability. 
B.  An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises. 
C.  Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other party. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-4 - REMEDY 
A.  In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court or the City hearing officer may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of 180 days, or the court or City hearing officer may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance. 
B.  In addition to the remedy provided in subsection A of this Section, the court or the City hearing officer may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in an amount of not less than $500.00 per day up to $2,500.00 per day, payable to the City, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a public nuisance. 
C.  In determining what remedy or remedies shall be used, the court or the City hearing officer may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property, including, but not limited to: 
1.  The disturbance of neighbors. 
2.  The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises. 
3.  Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-5 - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE 
The City Attorney, or special counsel to the City, may commence an action to abate a public nuisance as described above. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists, the court or City hearing officer may, without notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining order or may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with all property used in connection with the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-6 - PROCEDURE 
When the Chief of Police of the City receives one or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the Chief of Police may: 
A.  Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
2.  A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The Chief of Police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
3.  Demand that the person in charge respond to the Chief of Police within ten days to discuss the nuisance activities. 
B.  After complying with the notification procedures described herein when the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a second nuisance activity at or with a property and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police shall: 
1.  Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
b.  A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her findings. 
c.  Demand that the person in charge respond within ten days to the Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
d.  Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the Chief of Police. 
e.  A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
f.  A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the Chief of Police. 
g.  The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this Chapter. 
C.  If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal proceedings by the City pursuant to this Chapter, a person in charge stipulates with the Chief of Police that the person in charge will pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the Chief of Police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a period of not less than ten days nor more than 30 days, except in the case of a nuisance activity where a search warrant was executed at the property. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 30 days, the Chief of Police shall request authorization from the City to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance. 
D.  Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as, any other documentation which supports legal proceedings to the City Attorney. 
E.  When a person in charge makes a response to the Chief of Police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-7 - COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION; BURDEN OF PROOF 
In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the City shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
A.  It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
B.  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court or the City hearing officer, may consider any of the following factors if the need be found appropriate, and shall refer to those found applicable: 
1.  The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the problem at the property. 
2.  Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous. 
3.  The magnitude or gravity of the problem. 
4.  The cooperation of the person in charge with the City. 
5.  The cost of the City investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
14-22-8 - EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES 
A.  In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court for such interim relief, as is deemed by the Chief of Police to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification provision set forth in Section 14-22-5 of this Chapter need not be complied with, however, the City shall make a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court hearing. 
B.  In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a "chronic nuisance property" as defined in this Chapter, the court may order the remedy set out. In addition, in the event that it also finds the person in charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting or violating this Chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court may assess a civil fine as provided above. 
C.  The court may authorize the City to physically secure the property within the time specified by the court. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property. As used herein, "costs" means those costs actually incurred by the City for the physical securing of the property, as well as tenant relocation costs. 
D.  The City Code Enforcement Department effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the City shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be recorded against said property. 
E.  Any person who is assessed the costs of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the City. 
F.  A tenant is entitled to their reasonable relocation costs, as those are determined by the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property, after either: 
1.  The owner or tenant received notice as described herein of the Chief of Police's determination as described above. 
2.  Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 2, 7-17-2017)  
ARTICLE 15 - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
CHAPTER 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite; Ord. No. 2007-87, 12-3-2007. 
 
15-1-1 - TITLE AND APPLICABILITY 
A.  The regulations in this Article of the Municipal Code shall be known as the Building Code of Park Ridge hereinafter referred to as "the Code." 
B.  The general and administrative provisions contained in this Chapter and in Chapter 2 shall apply to the entire Building Code of Park Ridge.  
15-1-2 - BUILDING OFFICIAL 
There is hereby created in the Department of Community Preservation and Development, the position of Building Administrator. Upon vacancy of this position, the Building Administrator shall be appointed by the Director of Community Preservation and Development. Such appointment shall be based upon the demonstrated ability, knowledge, and experience of applying and enforcing building codes. The Building Administrator shall appoint such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall be necessary for the administration of the Code and as authorized by the appointing authority. The Building Administrator or designated representative and such assistants, inspectors or other employees as may be acting under his direction and authority shall be known as the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-1-3 - POWERS 
A.  The Building Official shall be given specific power to make inspections and shall make such orders, requirements, decisions and determinations as are necessary for the enforcement of the Building Code of Park Ridge. The Building Official shall have the authority of a conservator of the peace. 
B.  In the discharge of duties, the Building Official or authorized representative shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises in the City to enforce the provisions of this Article.  
15-1-4 - INTERFERENCE WITH THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent the Building Official or his designee from discharging or performing his duty.  
15-1-5 - UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition.  
15-1-6 - BUILDING PERMITS 
A building permit is required for the construction of any building or structure, any alterations or additions to any building or structure or appurtenance thereto, including but not limited to: 
1.  The removal of any wall or portion thereof. 
2.  The removal or changing of any structural beam or bearing support. 
3.  The removal or changing of any required means of egress. 
4.  Rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit requirements. 
5.  Construction or resurfacing of driveways and off street parking facilities, excluding seal coating. 
6.  Construction of all flat work. 
7.  Installation of siding in excess of 100 square feet. 
8.  Deck, Porch, stair and stoop construction or replacement. 
9.  Installation or alteration to an elevator. 
10.  Exterior door or window replacement or installation involving structural changes. 
11.  Addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe system, water supply, plumbing, sewer, drainage, gas, soil waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring, heating, air conditioning, water heater or other mechanical components. 
12.  The construction of any accessory structure including but not limited to a fence, sign, shed, solar collector, or garage. 
13.  Altering any land grade. 
14.  Remove a tree with a diameter of ten inches at breast height (DBH) or greater. 
15.  Installation of a swimming pool, hot tub or spa. 
16.  Structural roofing alterations (excluding re-shingling or re-coating) 
17.  Remodeling of any room if it involves any structural, mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components. 
18.  The installation of any berm or landscape wall that is within five feet of any property line or is 25 feet or more in length or is higher than 30 inches. 
19.  Alter any grade or drainage on any parcel of land. 
20.  Drainage pop-ups and other facilities used to aid in sewer maintenance, flood control or improving stormwater drainage pursuant to Section 9-2-25. 
A permit is not required for any repairs to a building or structure that do not result in the installation or relocation of any structural elements; electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system or for any decorating of any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014)  
15-1-7 - REQUIRED INSPECTIONS 
After issuing a building permit, the code official shall conduct inspections from time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a permit has been issued. The Building Official shall maintain a record of all such examinations, inspections and any other record of violations of this Code. Required inspections shall be requested, performed and approved prior to concealment of any work, and/or receiving a Certificate of Occupancy. It is the responsibility of the applicant to request the required inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-1-8 - DEMOLITION NOTICE 
An approved sign indicating the intent to demolish a principal structure shall be placed on the subject property 15 days prior to the issuance of a demolition permit. The sign shall remain posted until demolition is completed.  
15-1-9 - EXPIRATION OF PERMIT 
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 30 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work, or complete work under that permit when he is unable to commence work, or complete work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once, except upon review and approval by the City Manager for an additional 180 days. In order to renew a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay one-half the original permit fee. 
Failure to complete construction as indicated on the approved permit plans within the time indicated in the table below from the date of issuance shall terminate the permit. 
a.  Commercial and Institutional Structures—Principal Building—24 months; 
b.  Multi-family Residential Structures Exceeding 24 Dwelling Units—18 months; 
c.  Single family Dwellings—12 months; 
d.  All Other Exterior Construction—12 months; 
e.  All Interior Construction—12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-1-10 - FEES AND COSTS 
A.  A permit shall not be issued until all fees, escrows, and/or costs incurred by the City have been paid in full. 
B.  A fee for each plan review, building permit, utility connection and equipment, inspections, and any other administrative fees shall be paid in accordance with the permit fee schedule published in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure. 
C.  All fees and costs related to the performance of a special inspection whether requested by the Building Official or permit holder shall be borne by the permittee. 
D.  Refunds shall be issued in accordance with the provisions in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure.  
15-1-11 - DEPOSITS 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant may be required to submit a cash deposit to the City. The sum of the cash deposit shall be determined by the City Engineer, City Forester and/or the Building Official. The cash deposit shall guarantee that any specific requirements made a condition of a permit shall be completed prior to the completion of the project.  
15-1-12 - COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED PLANS 
All new work, additions, and/or accessory structures shall comply with the construction, site, grading, and/or plot plan(s) approved by the Building Official and/or the City Engineer. A copy of all approved building plans shall remain on site, and shall be accessible by the Building Official or his or her designee, until all construction has been completed, inspected and approved, and/or until a final certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-1-13 - UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION 
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter or repair any building or structure in violation of the Building Code or Zoning Ordinance. Violators of any of the provisions or requirements of the Building Code shall be subject to the general penalties as provided for herein.  
15-1-14 - FOUNDATION ONLY PERMIT; SPOTTED SURVEY 
A.  Foundation Only Permit. When any structure or addition to a structure requires the installation of a foundation, footings or a concrete pad ("Foundation"), a Foundation Only permit shall be required prior to the issuance of a Full Building Permit. No Foundation Only Permit may be issued unless the Permittee shall first execute a waiver acceptable to the City Attorney, acknowledging an understanding of this Section, and the fact that the location of the structure is the sole and complete responsibility of the Permittee. For purposes of this Section, Permittee shall include the owner of the premises, the Contractor and any person applying for the permit. 
B.  Full Building Permit. A Full Building Permit shall not be issued until the Foundation is found to be in compliance with City regulations. After the pouring of the Foundation, the permitee shall submit to the Building Official a survey bearing the certificate of a registered surveyor. The survey shall set forth the exact location and elevations of the Foundation in relation to the lot lines, and bear the registered surveyor's certification that the Foundation is in compliance with all City ordinances and regulations. If there is any encroaching work, it must be removed within 30 days of notice from the City of the encroachment or within 30 days of a denial by the Zoning Board of Appeals of a variance request. 
C.  Violation; Variance; Fees. If the Foundation has been installed in violation of City regulations and the Permittee chooses to apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance with respect to the violation; the fee for such application shall be triple the amount of the typical application fee or 20% of the amount of the estimated cost of the new construction, whichever is greater. This additional fee requirement may be waived upon proof by the owner that the owner relied on an inaccurate spotted survey. The hardship of the cost of removing the violating aspect of the work shall not be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals in determining whether or not a variance should be granted. No variance application shall be accepted after the passage of 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice of violation by the City. 
D.  Penalties. If work over and above the pouring of the Foundation is done prior to issuance of a Full Building Permit, the Permittee shall be fined in an amount of $2,500.00 per day from the date that the Foundation pour was completed until the date of the issuance of a Full Building Permit. 
E.  Joint and Several Liability. The owner, the permitee and the contractor shall be jointly and severally liable for any penalties or fees accruing pursuant to this Section 15-1-14. 
(Ord. No. 2007-71, 9-4-2007)  
15-1-15 - TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY 
Upon request of the holder of the permit, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the completion of the entire work covered under the permit, provided that the required fee as outlined in Article 20 has been paid in full, and that the only work to be completed is exterior grading and/or landscaping, sidewalk, drainage, or minor interior construction. A temporary certificate of occupancy may not be issued if any life-safety violations exist, or if a dwelling does not meet the minimum requirements of Article 22, Property Maintenance Code, or the building or structure or portion thereof fails to meet the requirements of Article 5, Health Code, or if a violation of the Zoning Ordinance would be created by the occupancy of the building or structure or portion thereof. The expiration date of a temporary certificate of occupancy may not exceed the expiration date of the permit as specified in Section 15-1-9 of this Code. If a temporary certificate of occupancy expires, the permit must be renewed in accordance with this Article, even if the original permit had not expired pursuant to Section 15-1-9 of this Code.  
15-1-16 - FINAL APPROVAL AND OCCUPANCY 
The Building Official shall not issue a final approval or a final certificate of occupancy for any building or structure until the building or structure complies with all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code and Zoning Ordinance and all necessary repairs of public or private property damaged during construction have been completed. 
The Building Official may require the applicant to hire a civil engineer, licensed in the state of Illinois, and at the applicant's expense, to prepare an analysis of site conditions after completion of work and to submit to the City; an as-built plan identifying features listed in Article 15, Chapter 8, showing actual construction, and certifying that the as-built design shall not cause ponding or flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-1-17 - APPEALS 
The Building Official shall not issue a final approval or a final certificate of occupancy for any building or structure until inspections have demonstrated that the building or structure complies with all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code and Zoning Ordinance, all necessary repairs of public or private property damaged during construction have been completed or an offer of restitution has been accepted and payment has been received for any fines, fees or taxes owed the City. If there has been damage to either public or private property during construction, the Building Official may issue a certificate of occupancy even though repairs or restitution have not been made or an offer of restitution has not been accepted when, in the opinion of the Building Official, a reasonable and good faith attempt has been made to complete the necessary repairs or to provide restitution.  
15-1-18 - CONSTRUCTION NOISE 
Noise from construction sites and construction hours shall comply with the provisions of Article 14 Chapter 9, of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 2-6-2006)  
15-1-19 - CONSTRUCTION SITE CONDITIONS 
A.  All demolition, new construction, room additions and remodeling projects must have a dumpster or containers on site which are adequate in size for the containment and disposal of all job site refuse. All job sites must comply with all applicable sections of Article 5, Chapter 12 of this Code. 
B.  All demolition and new construction, which involve trenching, excavation, utility, and any other types of construction as deemed necessary by the Building Official shall have fencing installed around the entire perimeter of the construction site. All fencing shall be a six-foot high chain link fence attached to driven posts along the side yards and installed on pedestals or stands along the front and/or rear of the property. 
Room additions and other minor projects shall have fencing installed around the perimeter of the construction area as deemed necessary by the Building Official. The fencing for these types of construction projects shall be a minimum of four feet in height. Plastic snow fencing installed securely with approved fence posts may be used. 
Fencing shall be installed at the start of any excavation or demolition and be maintained and shall be removed when the structure(s) are completed and secured. 
C.  All excavations shall be tapered, tarped, and shored to prevent damage to adjoining properties and all open holes and basements on a job site shall be pumped out until all excess water is removed. 
D.  Chemical toilets shall be provided and maintained when no functioning toilet is available on a job site. Portable toilets shall be located in the rear of the construction site when there is access to the rear yard so that the unit may be maintained and the unit shall not be placed closer than five feet to any property line. Portable toilets shall be removed once a functioning toilet is available on the job site. 
E.  Construction stockpiles shall not be placed closer than five feet to any property line and shall not exceed eight feet in height. Construction stockpiles shall be placed in a manner that will not affect the construction process, prevent the placement of a refuse storage dumpster or portable toilet on site, and shall not cause a nuisance as defined in Article 12 Chapter 1, of the Municipal Code. 
F.  Silt fencing shall be properly installed around any soil stockpile or drain deemed necessary by the Building Official to control erosion, protect the sewers or to prevent a nuisance or unsafe condition. 
G.  A temporary construction sign shall be installed in conformance to the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance on all construction sites where a new building is being constructed and such temporary signs shall not exceed six square feet in area, nor five feet in height. The sign shall display the construction company name and telephone number, and the site address with at least three-inch letters and numbers. In addition, the sign shall also display the Building Permit. 
H.  Haul roads are required from the start of any excavation or demolition until prior to final grading. The road shall be placed anywhere construction vehicles drive upon the construction site or parkway. The road shall be constructed of a material such as gravel or woodchips that will provide a sufficient barrier to prevent soil from embedding into vehicle tires. In addition, the haul road shall provide a safe, clear and unobstructed pathway from the public property to the structure under construction in order to allow access for inspections. 
I.  Damage to City Property or damage to private property shall be repaired or restored in a timely manner as deemed appropriate by the Building Official. The Building Official may also deem that a reasonable offer of restitution is appropriate in lieu of doing the actual repairs or restoration. 
J.  No contractor shall enter upon any property without approval of the owner of that property and the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 1-8-2007)  
15-1-20 - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
It shall be unlawful to make false statements or to provide false information on any construction document including but not limited to any application form, plan, or contractor list. It shall be unlawful to deviate from or make any substitution to any approved document including the building plans, forms or contractor list without the approval of the Building Official.  
15-1-21 - PENALTY 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to (1) violate any of the terms of provisions of this Article; or (2) fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Article; or (3) erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan; or (4) violate a directive of the Building Official; or (5) fail to comply with the terms or provisions of any permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any residential property owner who violates any of the terms, provisions or requirements of this Code or a directive of the Building official shall be fined not less than $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for each subsequent offense, but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. For purposes of this paragraph A, residential property owner/occupier shall mean a person who occupies or dwells in a residential dwelling unit of which the same person is the legal or beneficial owner or the owner of residential property that is not offered to tenants for occupancy. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any contractor, commercial property owner, firm or corporation to (1) violate any of the terms of provisions of this Article; or (2) fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Article; or (3) erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan; or (4) violate a directive of the Building Official; or (5) fail to comply with the terms or provisions of any permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code. Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any contractor, commercial property owner, firm or corporation who violates any of the terms, provisions or requirements of this Code or a directive of the Building Official shall be fined not less than $200.00 for the first offense, $400.00 for the second offense, and $1,000.00 for each subsequent offense but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. For purposes of this paragraph B, commercial property owner shall include the landlord of a residential dwelling unit that is tenant occupied or offered to tenants for occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-29, 3-15-2010)  
CHAPTER 2 - ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-2-1 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part thereof the 2015 edition of the International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, installation and construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as modified by additions, insertions, deletions and amendments prescribed in this Article. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the International Building Code and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-43, 7-6-2015)  
15-2-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Accessory Structure: A use, building or structure, which, other than a detached garage: 
1.  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or structure or principal use served; 
2.  Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or structure or principal use served; and 
3.  Is commonly and customarily associated with the principal building or structure or principal use served. 
Basement: That portion of a building, which is partly or completely below grade. 
Driveway Repair: The patching or filling of holes, cracks or the renewal of any part of an existing driveway for the purpose of its maintenance. 
Driveway Resurface: The application of an overlay, cap or covering over the existing driveway surface with an approved impervious material. 
Driveway Sealing: The application of an approved, non-porous coating to a driveway. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single family, two family and multiple family dwellings, but not including mobile homes, trailers, hotels, motels, or lodging houses. 
Dwelling, Attached: A dwelling joined to two or more other dwellings by unpierced party walls or vertical cavity walls from ground to roof. 
Dwelling, Detached: A dwelling, which is surrounded on all sides by open spaces on the same zoning lot. 
Dwelling, Multiple Family: A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, which may have dwelling units above the first floor. 
Dwelling, Semi-Detached: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, or vertical cavity wall, and above ground physically unifying horizontal structural elements. 
Dwelling, Single Family: A detached dwelling containing one dwelling unit only. 
Dwelling, Two Family: A dwelling containing two dwelling units only. 
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, are customarily included within each dwelling unit. 
Efficiency Unit: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room only. A bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal room are customarily included within each efficiency unit. 
Grade Adjacent to a Structure: A reference plane representing the average of the existing finished ground or impervious surface adjacent to a building or structure. 
Grade Existing: The elevation of the ground or impervious surface of a lot or lots prior to any form of construction. 
Grade Approved: The proposed elevations of the ground, or impervious surface of a lot or lots as approved by the Building Official or City Engineer. 
Off Street Parking Facilities: The land or a structure that is designed and used exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Ordinary Construction: As applied to buildings and structures, means that in which all exterior walls are of masonry, concrete, or are of other non-combustible materials or an assembly of materials, which have not less than a two hour fire-resistance rating. The structural and non-structural elements may be wholly or partly of wood consistent with frame construction, which includes interior walls, floors, ceilings and roof rafters. 
Story Above Grade: Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade when more than one-half of its height is above the established finished grade. 
Unprotected Metal: Unprotected metal construction as applied to buildings, means that in which the structural supports are unprotected metal and in which the roofing, and walls or other enclosures, are of sheet metal, or of other non-combustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-2-3 - GENERAL BUILDING LIMITATIONS 
A.  Residential garages shall comply with Article 15, Chapter 10 of this Code. 
B.  Unprotected metal structures shall comply with Article 15, Chapter 10 of this Code. 
C.  Roll roofing shall not be used for covering a building roof that has a slope in excess of 17 percent (two in 12-inch pitch) or used for building siding unless approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-2-4 - MEANS OF EGRESS 
A.  Direct Access Exiting and Enclosures: All dwelling units in Residential Use Group R, located above a first floor, ground floor or parking level of any building shall have direct access exiting to a minimum of two enclosed stairways which shall exit to grade level. 
B.  Under Stair Protection: Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls and soffits protected on the enclosed side with ?-inch gypsum board. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-2-5 - FOOTINGS, FOUNDATIONS AND SLABS 
A.  General Requirements: Timber or wood footings and foundations are prohibited. Poured in place concrete footings and foundation walls will be considered to the accepted good practice unless an alternate design is approved by the Building Official. 
1.  Footings: 
a.  The minimum edge thickness cannot be less than the walls they support but in no case less than eight inches. 
2.  Foundation Walls: 
a.  The minimum edge thickness cannot be less than eight inches for foundation walls, seven feet six inches in height or less and spanning not more than 30 linear feet and supporting only one story. 
b.  All foundation walls other than that noted in subsection 1 above shall have a minimum thickness of ten inches. 
c.  Foundation wall depth measured from the top of the finished grade to the undersides of the footing cannot be less than four feet provided the soil is capable of supporting the intended load. Accessory Structures less than 720 square feet are exempt from this requirement. 
d.  Foundation walls abutting or adjoining an existing foundation wall shall be treated as a construction joint and be attached by reinforcing steel bars drilled into the existing foundation wall. The size, spacing, and method shall be approved by the Building Official following the guidelines set forth by the American Concrete Institute (ACI). 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-2-6 - WOOD FRAME WALLS AND PARTITIONS 
A.  Load Bearing Walls: Posts and studs in bearing walls and partitions shall be designed as columns, with due allowance for lateral support furnished by sheathing, intermediate bracing, horizontal bridging, wall coverings and the floor and roof assemblies. Walls shall be constructed to develop a strength and rigidity equivalent to wood studding, not less than two inches by four inches, nominal dimensions, spaced not to exceed 16 inches on center, except studs two inches by six inches, nominal dimensions, may be spaced at 24 inches on center. The walls shall be fabricated in such a manner as to provide adequate support for the material used to enclose the building and to provide for transfer of all lateral loads to the foundation. 
B.  Non-Load Bearing Walls: Studs shall be two inches by four inches, nominal dimensions spaced 16 inches on center. The studs may be facing at right angles or parallel to the bottom and top plate. A single top plate may be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-2-7 - GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER 
When used on any construction project gypsum board or plaster shall not be less than 5/8 inch in thickness. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-2-8 - WINDOW WELL COVERS 
A.  All window wells, light wells and escape windows shall have bars, grills or covers installed. If covers are used, they shall be the raised type so that the cover is a minimum of two inches above the top of the window well. 
B.  All escape window well covers must be removable without the use of tools or a key and require no greater force that that needed to operate the escape window. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-2-9 - ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part thereof the Illinois Accessibility Code published by the State of Illinois Capital Development Board and any future revisions or amendments thereto for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, installation and construction, alteration, demolition, equipment, location and maintenance of buildings and structures to assure the safety and welfare of all members of society and to be readily accessible to and usable by environmentally limited persons. Accessibility, Chapter 11 of the International Building Code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
CHAPTER 3 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS 
SECTION 
 
15-3-1 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth therein and made a part thereof the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code For One and Two Family Dwellings, published by the International Code Council, Inc., for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, installation and construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, except as modified by additions, insertions, deletions and amendments prescribed in this Article. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the International Residential Code For One and Two Family Dwellings and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-43, 7-6-2015)  
15-3-2 - BUILDING PLANNING 
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria: Buildings constructed within the City shall be built according to the following design criteria: 
Roof Load, 20 psf; 
Roof Snow Load, 30 psf; 
Wind Speed, 115 mph; 
Seismic Condition, Zone 1; 
Weathering, severe; 
Frost Line Depth, 42 inches; 
Termite, slight to moderate; 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-3 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
Accessory Structures shall comply with Article 15, Chapter 10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-3-4 - MEANS OF EGRESS 
Direct Access Exiting and Enclosures: A two-family building having a dwelling unit above the first floor shall have direct access to a minimum of two separate enclosed stairways exiting at grade level. 
Under Stair Protection: Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls and soffits protected on the enclosed side with 5/8 -inch gypsum board with joints taped and sanded. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-3-5 - FOOTINGS, FOUNDATIONS, SLABS AND TRENCH FOUNDATIONS 
A.  General Requirements: Timber or wood footings and foundations are prohibited. Poured in place concrete footings and foundation walls will be considered as the accepted good practice unless the Building Official approves an alternate design. 
1.  Footings: 
a.  The minimum edge thickness cannot be less than the walls they support but in no case less than eight inches. 
2.  Foundation Walls: The minimum edge thickness cannot be less than eight inches for foundation walls, seven feet six inches in height or less and spanning not more than 30 linear feet and supporting only one story. 
All foundation walls other than that noted in subsection 2 above shall have a minimum thickness of ten inches. 
Foundation wall depth measured from the top of the finished grade to the undersides of the footing cannot be less than four feet provided the soil is capable of supporting the intended load. Accessory structures less than 720 square feet are exempt from this requirement. Foundation walls abutting or adjoining an existing foundation wall shall be treated as a construction joint and be attached by reinforcing steel bars drilled into the existing foundation wall. The size, spacing and method shall be approved by the Building Official following the guidelines set forth by the American Concrete Institute (ACI). 
3.  Concrete Slab Thickness: The minimum thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground shall not be less than four inches with a minimum of a four inch granular base. 
4.  Trench Foundation: Trench foundations may be permitted for a one-story single-family addition when approved by the Building Official and must comply with the following: 
a.  The trenched wall must be a minimum of ten inches thick and the footing flared to 20 inches wide. 
b.  The soil supporting the trenched wall must be plumb, smooth and free of roots or other foreign materials. 
c.  The flared footing base shall be poured on a flat even surface minimizing differential settlement and capable of supporting the intended dead and live loads. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-6 - WOOD FRAME WALLS AND PARTITIONS 
A.  Load Bearing Walls: Posts and studs in bearing walls and partitions shall be designed as columns, with due allowance for lateral support furnished by sheathing, intermediate bracing, horizontal bridging, wall coverings and the floor and roof assemblies. Walls shall be constructed to develop a strength and rigidity equivalent to wood studding, not less than two inches by four inches, nominal dimensions, spaced not to exceed 16 inches on center, except studs two inches by six inches, nominal dimensions, may be spaced at 24 inches on center. The walls shall be fabricated in such a manner as to provide adequate support for the material used to enclose the building and to provide for transfer of all lateral loads to the foundation. 
B.  Non-Load Bearing Walls: Studs shall be two inches by four inches, nominal dimensions spaced 16 inches on center. The studs may be facing at right angles or parallel to the bottom and top plate. A single top plate may be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-7 - GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER 
Gypsum board or plaster used for the installation, alteration, repair, addition or construction of one- and two-family dwellings shall not be less than ?-inch in thickness. 
(Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-8 - WINDOW WELL COVERS 
A.  All window wells, light wells and escape windows shall have bars, grills or covers installed. If covers are used, they shall be the raised type so that the cover is a minimum of two inches above the top of the window well. 
B.  All escape window well covers must be removable without the use of tools or a key and require no greater force than that needed to operate the escape window.  
15-3-9 - FIRE RATING 
Floor joist protection: 
A.  All open webbed floor joists and manufactured floor joists shall be protected underneath with 5/8 -inch drywall or any other material that provides a one-hour fire rating, except where an approved fire sprinkler system is installed and operational or as deemed not necessary by the Building Official. 
Wall construction in all Attached Dwelling Units: 
A.  All unit separations shall be constructed with a non-combustible, minimum two-hour fire rating, either vertically or horizontally. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-10 - DEFINITION OF NEW STRUCTURE 
The Building Official will classify a Building Permit for altering an existing structure as new construction, when the proposed construction project will result in the amount of demolished existing exterior walls greater than or equal to 50% of the total lineal feet of the existing exterior walls (perimeter of the existing walls) or when the amount of demolished existing exterior walls is greater than or equal to 25% and the amount of demolished existing ceiling joists and/or floor joists is greater than or equal to 25%. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-3-11 - DEFINITION OF DEMOLITION 
An exterior wall is considered demolished when the structural integrity of the wall has been compromised (no longer capable of supporting the structure) or when two or more components of the wall are removed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-3-12 - CHIMNEYS AND VENTS 
A.  Any chimney attached to a wood or solid fuel burning appliance shall extend no less than three feet above any structure located within 20 feet of the chimney. 
B.  Vents located ten feet—zero feet or less from the lot line shall not be directed toward any adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-3-13 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-3-14 - RESERVED 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
CHAPTER 4 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 
SECTION 
 
15-4-1 - ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part thereof the 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc., for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the design, installation and construction of mechanical systems, except as modified by additions, insertions, deletions and amendments prescribed in this Article . In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the International Mechanical Code and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail. 
(2015-43, 7-6-2015)  
15-4-2 - DUCT SYSTEMS 
A.  Stud cavities and joist spaces shall not be used to convey air. 
B.  All solid ductwork shall be made of metallic material. 
C.  Flexible air duct runs shall not exceed 14 feet in length.  
15-4-3 - CHIMNEYS AND VENTS 
A.  Any chimney attached to a wood or solid fuel burning appliance shall extend no less than three feet above any structure located within 20 feet of the chimney. 
B.  Vents shall not be directed toward any adjoining properties.  
15-4-4 - FUEL GAS PIPING 
A.  All gas distribution piping shall be made of rigid metallic material when above grade. 
B.  All gas distribution piping and fittings shall be American Gas Association (AGA) approved.  
15-4-5 - FUEL STORAGE 
Fuel oil, gas, kerosene, and any other type of combustible or flammable liquids or gases in excess of 12 liquid gallons or 60 pounds of compressed gas shall not be stored above ground without written permission of the City of Park Ridge Fire Official.  
15-4-6 - CONDUIT AND TUBING 
All conduit and tubing installed above grade shall be made of metallic materials except fire sprinkler piping.  
CHAPTER 5 - ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-5-1 - ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made part thereof the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for design, installation and construction of all new electrical systems and all alterations to existing wiring systems therein, except as modified by additions, insertions, deletions and amendments prescribed in this Article. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the National Electrical Code and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-43, 7-6-2015)  
15-5-2 - LOW VOLTAGE, CONTROL AND COMMUNICATION WIRING 
Circuit wiring exceeding 24 volts shall be installed in metal conduit or raceway. Open circuit wiring tested in accordance with U.L. 910 and having a peak optical density not greater than 9.50, an average optical density not greater than 0.15 and a flame spread of 5.0 feet or less and classified as having adequate fire resistance and low smoke-producing characteristics, shall be permitted for low voltage control and communications wiring.  
15-5-3 - WIRING DEVICES AND FIXTURES 
A.  Attic Ventilation and Ceiling Exhaust Fans: All motorized attic furnaces and ventilators shall be equipped with a high limit control or similar automatic shut-off device. 
B.  Bathroom Recessed Lighting Fixture: Recessed lighting fixtures installed directly above a bathtub or shower shall be equipped with either a solid glass or plastic lens. 
C.  Carbon Monoxide Detector: A carbon monoxide detector shall be line voltage with battery backup and shall be installed on any level containing sleeping rooms (bedrooms) of a dwelling unit which is new or being altered. 
D.  Residential Garages: In all detached garages at least one light, one switch, and one duplex receptacle shall be installed. A separate ground conductor must be installed on all accessory structures that are wired for light and/or power. 
E.  Fan Rated Boxes: A heavy-duty fan rated box shall be used for any ceiling mounted light where a ceiling fan could be reasonably installed. 
F.  All line voltage under-cabinet lights are to be grounded. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2011-49, 9-6-2011)  
15-5-4 - SERVICES 
A.  The installation of sub panels may be allowed, but only after a request has been submitted in writing, and approved by the Building Official in writing. Upon approval by the Building Official, a sub panel located within three feet of the Service panel shall be allowed to serve any portion of the dwelling unit. A sub panel that is not located within three feet of the Service panel shall only service the floor it is on. 
B.  To determine the proper size electrical service, the Building Official shall calculate the total area of structures by measuring the perimeter of the structure from the outside exterior walls for each floor and any basements. 
C.  Structures 2,500 square feet or less shall be supplied by no less than a 100-ampere service. 
D.  Structures larger than 2,500 square feet shall be supplied by no less than a 200-ampere service. 
E.  Structures larger than 5,000 square feet shall be supplied by no less than a 400-ampere service. 
F.  All service entrance conductors shall be copper and installed in rigid metallic conduit where above grade. 
G.  The minimum conductor size for a 100-ampere service shall be #3 copper. 
H.  The minimum conduit size for a 100-ampere service shall be 1¼-inch. 
I.  The minimum service entrance conductor for a 200-ampere service shall be 3/0 copper. 
J.  The minimum conduit size for a 200-ampere service shall be two-inch. 
K.  All load centers shall have a minimum of four spare spaces for future use. 
L.  Grounding Of Water Container Equipment: Electrical boxes servicing water container equipment related to hydro massage tubs, hot tubs, and steamers, pools, and the like are required to have a continuous copper Equipment Grounding Conductor from this box to the Service panel. This wire shall be sized to the NEC Table 250.122. 
M.  All AC condensing units are required to have a continuous copper Equipment Grounding Conductor from the AC Disconnect to the Service panel. In addition, the AC unit shall be grounded to the Disconnect with an Equipment Grounding Conductor. These Equipment Grounding Conductors shall be sized according to Table 250.122 of the NEC. 
N.  All new/modified electric services at or below 400-ampere service shall be installed with an exterior/outdoor disconnect means capable of being secured to prevent tampering. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2011-49, 9-6-2011)  
15-5-5 - ELECTRICAL MATERIALS, USE AND RESTRICTIONS 
A.  The following materials may not be used for any type of wiring: 
1.  Service entrance cable. 
2.  Non-metallic sheathed cable. 
3.  Knob and tube wiring. 
4.  Messenger supported wiring. 
5.  Open wiring on insulators. 
6.  Flexible non-metallic tubing. 
B.  All wiring installed above grade shall be copper and in metallic conduit, except as follows: 
1.  Flexible metallic conduit 25 feet or less may be installed in existing wall or ceiling cavities provided a ground conductor is installed. 
2.  Armored cable 25 feet or less may be installed in existing wall or ceiling cavities. 
C.  All junction boxes, panel boards, meter sockets and surface raceways shall be made of metallic materials.  
CHAPTER 6 - ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE[5] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-6-1 - ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE 
There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made part thereof the Illinois State Plumbing Code and any future revisions or amendments thereto for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for design, installation and construction of all new plumbing and drainage systems, in building and structures, and all alterations to existing plumbing and drainage systems therein, except as modified by amendments. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code and any provision of the City of Park Ridge Municipal Code, the specific provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code shall prevail.  
15-6-2 - PLUMBING MATERIALS, USE AND RESTRICTIONS 
A.  Acrylonitrite Butadiene Styrene (ABS) may not be used for building drainage and venting. 
B.  Acrylonitrite Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and Asbestos Cement Pipe may not be used for building sewer systems. 
C.  Water Distribution Piping may not be installed using the following materials: 
1.  Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC Pipe/Tubing) 
2.  Cross Linked Polyethylene 
3.  Poly Butylene (PB) Pipe/Tubing 
D.  Type L copper shall be used for water distribution above ground only. 
E.  Type M copper may be used above ground for waste and vent only. 
F.  Type K copper may be used for water distribution, drain, waste or vent above or below ground. 
G.  All underground sewer or house drain piping shall be bell and spigot type with gasketed connections. 
H.  Each terminal shall be made watertight with the roof by proper flashing. The terminals shall be flashed with a minimum of two and one-half-pound sheet lead or a cast iron roof collar.  
15-6-3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A.  Metropolitan Water Reclamation District: There is hereby adopted as a municipal ordinance of the City by reference as though fully set forth herein and made a part thereof the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago Ordinances and any future revisions or amendments thereto for the purpose of controlling the quality and quantity of sewage and industrial waste admitted to or discharged into the sewerage systems and waters under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago. 
B.  Tapping Main: No person unless authorized by the City shall be permitted to tap any street main or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein. 
C.  Water Shut Off: Water may be withheld or shut off from any building or premises in which shall be found any plumbing or fixtures not conforming to the provisions of this Article or for which a permit has not been issued. 
D.  Water Distribution: The water supply shall be distributed through a piping system entirely independent of any piping system conveying another water supply. 
E.  Water Service Pipe Size: The water service pipe of any building shall be of sufficient size to permit a continuous ample flow of water on all floors at a given time. The minimum size of water service pipes from the curb to the dwelling shall be one inch. 
F.  Water Shutoff: A main shutoff on the water supply line shall be provided near the curb. Accessible shut-offs shall be provided on the main supply line just inside the foundation wall, on each side of any water meter, for each flat or apartment of a building, for each lawn sprinkler, and for supply to each hot water tank. The water service to every plumbing fixture shall be controlled by a shut off valve that permits the fixture to be shut off without interfering with the water supply to any other fixture except bathtubs and showers. 
G.  Material: All water supply pipes for a plumbing system shall be of galvanized wrought iron or steel, copper, brass or cast iron, with brass or galvanized cast iron, copper of galvanized malleable iron fittings. No pipe or fittings that have been used for other purposes shall be used for distributing water. Water supply pipes from the water main to the building shall be of copper or brass with copper or brass fittings. The installation of any other water piping materials is prohibited for general installation. However, the Building Official having jurisdiction may waive specific requirements of this provision or permit its use as an alternative method when he is assured that the installation will maintain effective safety. Such approvals must be authorized in writing. 
H.  Connection Between Buildings: The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any other building, and every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer. 
I.  Basement And Crawl Space Drains And Traps: Basement floor drains, crawl space drains and cellar floor drains shall connect into a trap so constructed that it can be readily cleaned and of a size to serve efficiently the purpose for which it is intended. The drain inlet shall be so located that it is at all times in full view. When subject to back flow or back pressure, such drains shall be equipped with an adequate backwater valve. In all residence structures in which a basement or cellar is constructed, a drain shall be installed to serve and drain the basement or cellar of said residence structure. 
J.  Exterior Drainage: All buildings and structures in excess of 100 square feet in area shall be equipped with gutters and downspouts for the collection and discharge of natural sources of water on the building or structure. No downspout, footing drain, area drain, roof, paved area, yard, court or courtyard shall be drained into a sanitary or combined sewer except by special permit approved by the Building Official and the City Engineer. In all Residential Zoning Districts, all downspouts that are connected to the City sewer system shall be disconnected within 90 days of receipt of notice of disconnection from the Building Official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where positive drainage away from the structure is not possible and the disconnection is likely to cause damage to the structure. 
2.  Where positive drainage from the structure will cause damage to immediately adjoining structures or property. 
A request for exception must be submitted to the Building Official in writing. The request shall include an explanation for the request, a plan indicating the subject structure and adjoining structures, including the location of all downspouts, rear yard elevations and direction of drainage flow. 
All downspouts and/or sump pumps shall be installed in such a manner that the flow of discharge shall be directed away from interior side lot lines. Downspouts shall be located within five feet of a front or rear corner of a building and must be directed towards the front or rear of the property unless attached to a drainage system approved by the Building Official. The point of discharge shall be four feet or more from any interior side lot line and ten feet or more from any other lot line. Downspouts for detached accessory buildings shall be located in a manner to minimize discharge of water onto neighboring properties. The point of discharge for downspouts on detached accessory buildings shall be located at least two feet from any property line. 
K.  Subsoil Drains: Subsoil drains must be installed around the perimeter of basements or any room below grade and may be installed outside or inside of the foundation. Window wells must connect directly to the subsoil drain with a four-inch diameter pipe. Subsoil drains must connect directly to a sump that mechanically ejects the storm water at grade. Subsoil drains are prohibited from discharging into a sanitary sewer. Subsoil drains shall be four-inch diameter open or perforated drain tile pipe laid in a six-inch bed of ¾-inch stone. 
L.  Overhead System Required: When the floor of any room or basement is located two feet or more below the top of the building foundation, a closed overhead sewer system must be installed. 
M.  Ejector Pumps: Basement floor drains, wash tubs and all plumbing fixtures must connect directly into an ejector basin and mechanically eject into the overhead sanitary system. 
N.  Metered Services: All water services must be metered with a water meter approved by the Park Ridge Public Works Department. Residential fire suppression systems may be connected prior to the water meter, if approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
CHAPTER 7 - APPEARANCE CODE[6] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-7-1 - TITLE 
This Chapter, including any regulations adopted hereunder, shall be hereafter known, cited and referred to as the "Park Ridge Appearance Code."  
15-7-2 - INTENT AND PURPOSES 
The City Council of the City of Park Ridge finds and declares: 
A.  That the appearance of open spaces, buildings, structures and signs visible from public streets, places and ways has a material and substantial relationship to property values in the City and the cost of the municipal services provided therefore; 
B.  That neighborhoods in some other communities have deteriorated in the past by reason of poor planning, neglect of proper maintenance standards and the erection of buildings and structures unsuitable to and incompatible with the character of the neighborhood, resulting in a reduction of property values and impairment of the public health, safety, morals and welfare therein; 
C.  That the purposes of an appearance review is: 
1.  To promote those qualities in the environment, which bring value to the community; 
2.  To foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the community as a place to live and work; 
3.  To preserve the character and quality of our heritage by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a discernible character. 
4.  To protect public investments in the City; and 
5.  To raise the level of community expectations for the quality of its environment. 
D.  That it is the policy of the City to: 
1.  Avoid and prevent deterioration of the character and appearance of this community; 
2.  Provide a favorable environment for residents and business activities; and 
3.  By the various means provided in this ordinance, preserve and enhance the property and taxable values, and the public health, safety, morals, aesthetics and welfare of the City.  
15-7-3 - APPEARANCE COMMISSION 
A.  Appearance Commission. There is hereby created an Appearance Commission in and for the City of Park Ridge. 
B.  Commission Membership. The Appearance Commission (hereinafter referred to as "Commission") shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor of the City of Park Ridge with the advice and consent of the City Council constituted as follows: 
1.  All members shall be residents of Park Ridge and shall have an interest in community appearance. 
2.  Not more than four members shall be recognized as experienced in matters of aesthetic judgment by virtue of training, education and experience (such as architects, land planners or persons specifically qualified for reasons of education, training or experience in the area of graphic or allied arts). Insofar as practical, three members shall be architects registered to practice in the State of Illinois, the City of Park Ridge. 
C.  Compensation. The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation unless specific provision is made therefore by the City Council. 
D.  Terms of Service. The members of the Commission shall serve for the following terms or until there successors have been duly appointed and qualified. One of the first five appointees shall serve for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years and the remaining for the full five-year term. Following the initial terms, the term of service of the Commission members shall be five years. 
E.  Chairman. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint one of the members to serve as Chairman. The Chairman shall appoint a Vice-Chairman to serve in his/her absence. The Chairman shall have the duty of calling all meetings and shall preside at all meetings of the Commission. 
F.  Vacancies. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
G.  Removal. Removal of Commission members shall be on recommendation of the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. 
H.  Conflicts of Interest. No member of the Commission shall participate in discussion or vote on requests for a Certificate of Approval from any client he/she is serving or from any business or property in which he/she has a financial interest or of which he/she is an officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-65, 10-17-2005; Ord. No. 2012-13, 2-20-2012)  
15-7-4 - MEETINGS 
A.  The Commission shall meet monthly unless there is no business to conduct or a meeting shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission shall determine. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. A majority decision of members present at a duly constituted meeting shall be required for all Commission actions. 
B.  The Commission may adopt its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent with this ordinance. 
C.  All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. It shall be the duty of the Commission to arrange for and require conformance with all applicable provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1). 
D.  The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official action. 
E.  An ex-officio member of the Commission may vote as a member of the Commission on any matter coming before it if, because of the absence of any regular member, that vote is needed to break a tie or create majority vote. If more than one ex-officio member is called upon to vote, the principal liaison member shall vote before any alternate. The fact that an alderman has voted with the Commission as an ex-officio member shall not disqualify that alderman from voting as an alderman on the same matter if it comes before the City Council.  
15-7-5 - GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties. 
A.  To review exterior design features, lighting, landscape and site plans, and materials for any proposed construction or reconstruction as provided in Section 15-7-7 as to the architectural or aesthetic aspects thereof. 
B.  To hold meetings, when required in accordance with Section 15-7-7, on the issuance of Certificates of Approval pertaining to applications for building permits and other permits and to issue or deny such Certificates. 
C.  To consult with and cooperate with other Commissions, City departments, and any other governmental bodies on matters affecting the appearance of the City. 
D.  To develop manuals and guidelines for the assistance of architects, builders and owners of property. 
E.  To make determinations on requested appeals of City Staff's denial of sign permits. 
(Ord. No. 2014-21, 4-21-2014)  
15-7-6 - LIMITATIONS OF REVIEW 
The Commission shall restrict its considerations to a reasonable and professional review of the proposal and plans pursuant to the Urban Design Guidelines described in Section 5-78. 
A.  The Commission does not have the responsibility to design or assist in the design of any building or project submitted for approval except that the Commission in reviewing the design for compliance with the Design Guidelines may make suggestions in an attempt to make the design consistent with the Design Guidelines. 
B.  In its endeavor to improve the quality of a design, the Commission shall keep considerations of cost in mind. But consideration of cost shall not override the other objectives of this Ordinance. 
C.  The Commission is not to use design review intentionally or inadvertently to prohibit or unduly restrict building types, materials or methods, or to grant variances from the requirements of the City's building, zoning, subdivision, or other development controls. 
D.  Individual initiative and experimentation are to be encouraged.  
15-7-7 - REGULATORY POWERS OF THE COMMISSION 
No building permit required under the ordinances of the City for the following shall be issued by the Building and Zoning Administrator except upon the granting of a Certificate of Approval when such proposals are found to be consistent with the Design Guidelines. 
A.  The Commission shall review all new construction, including residential, commercial and institutional structures, but not including detached accessory structures on single-family residential parcels. 
B.  The Commission shall review all building alterations involving exterior design features of multiple-family residential, commercial, and institutional structures. The Commission shall also review alterations, solar PV and solar thermal systems, affecting street elevations of single-family residences except alterations limited to windows, doors, exterior cladding or roof covering. 
C.  The Commission shall review alterations (including painting) within the B-4 Commercial Conservation District. 
D.  The Commission shall hear and make a determination on appeals of staff determinations regarding Design Guidelines for all ground and wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 2014-21, 4-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 1, 5-6-2019)  
15-7-8 - URBAN DESIGN GUIDELINES 
The Commission shall prepare proposed Urban Design Guidelines. To do so they are authorized to seek the advice and counsel of qualified professionals in the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, urban design, and graphics. 
A.  The Urban Design Guidelines shall apply to all new construction, additions and alterations in the City. 
B.  The Urban Design Guidelines shall be based upon the intent and purposes of this Code, as set forth previously. 
C.  The Urban Design Guidelines shall establish standards or guidelines for: building design, relationships of buildings to site, relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area, landscape and site treatment, signs, miscellaneous (including accessory) structures and street hardware, and maintenance. 
D.  Nothing contained in the Urban Design Guidelines shall conflict with, modify, or alter any provisions of any existing City ordinances or regulations controlling physical development. 
E.  After agreeing on proposed Urban Design Guidelines, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. A copy of the proposed Guidelines shall be on file during the regular business hours at the office of the City Clerk in the City Hall for public inspection. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Park Ridge not more than 30 and not less than 15 days before the hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. Within 30 days after a final adjournment of the hearing, the Commission shall recommend final Urban Design Guidelines to the City Council. 
F.  The City Council shall thereafter at a public meeting consider the proposed Urban Design Guidelines and may adopt the same in whole or in part, with or without change. The Urban Design Guidelines as finally approved shall be adopted by Ordinance. 
G.  The Urban Design Guidelines may be amended by the Commission after a public hearing thereon. A copy of the proposed amendments to the Guidelines shall be on file during the regular business hours at the office of the City Clerk in the City Hall for public inspection. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Park Ridge, not more than 30 and not less than 15 days before the hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. After the Commission approves the amendment, a copy of the amended Guidelines shall be forwarded to the City Council. The City Council shall have 30 days to object to the amendments. If there are no objections within this time, the amendments shall become final.  
15-7-9 - OPERATIONS OF THE APPEARANCE COMMISSION 
A.  Pre-application Conference. Any applicant or prospective applicant for a building permit, which may require a Certificate of approval, may file a written request for a preliminary conference with the Commission or Building and Zoning Administrator. Said conference shall be held within 45 days of the receipt of the request. At such conference, the Commission or Administrator shall give consideration to preliminary exterior drawings, sketches or photographic examples, landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project, and shall give the applicant its informal opinion to assist said prospective applicant in the development of a plan which would be consistent with the requirements and purposes of the Urban Design Guidelines and this Ordinance. 
B.  Procedure for Certificate of Approval. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the Administrator, after receipt of an application for a building permit, to determine and advise the applicant whether, under the provisions of this Chapter, a Certificate of Approval (Certificate) is required. 
2.  Upon the determination that a Certificate is required, the matter shall be reviewed by the Building and Zoning Administrator or scheduled for a meeting of the Commission in accordance with Section 15-7-7. Such meeting is to be held within 60 days of the receipt of a complete formal application. In cases when the review is by the Building and Zoning Administrator, the application shall be reviewed within 15 days of its receipt. 
3.  The applicant shall submit the documentation necessary for the Commission or the Administrator to review the application. This documentation will be described in the rules and procedures of the Commission. 
4.  In conducting the review, consideration shall be given to the materials and oral comments submitted on each application and shall provide such advice, counsel, suggestions and recommendations on matters pertaining to external design features as they may deem necessary to guide the applicant to a solution that will affect the general purposes of the Urban Design Guidelines. 
5.  After hearing and considering the material presented, the Commission shall issue a Certificate if the design is consistent with the Urban Design Guidelines. 
6.  A decision on the application shall be made within 30 days after the conclusion of the review. The applicant shall be notified thereof. In the event that the Commission or the Administrator denies the issuance of a Certificate to the applicant, no permit shall be issued on the application. 
7.  Amendments to a Certificate may be obtained by application therefore in the same manner as provided for an original Certificate.  
15-7-10 - INSPECTIONS 
Upon the granting of a Certificate of Approval or Amendments thereto, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon which said Certificate or Amendment was granted shall be turned overt o the Administrator whose responsibility it shall be to determine, from time to time as the project is in progress and finally upon its completion, that there have been no deviations there from. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation to whom a Certificate has been granted to comply with the requirements of the Certificate and to obtain such inspections as may be necessary in order to assure compliance. The Administrator will notify such person of any deficiencies found to exist. Failure to correct any deficiencies within ten days after notification of such deficiency will constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Before any use may be made of improvements constructed under the provisions of this Appearance Code, a final inspection of the premises must be obtained from the Administrator who will consider his findings in matters under the jurisdiction of the Commission together with other ones in the issuance of an occupancy permit. An occupancy permit will not be issued unless such an inspection has been made and the completed work found to be in compliance with plans approved by the Commission and under which the Certificate was issued except as provided below.  
15-7-11 - SUBSTITUTIONS 
When, by reason of nonavailability of construction materials, it becomes necessary to vary any of the provisions under which a Certificate has been granted and in the opinion of the Administrator, such variation will be aesthetically equal to or be better than the original provisions and will not conflict with the intent of the appearance Code, the Administrator shall have the power to grant such variation. He/she shall not be obligated to grant the variation, however, and may instead choose to send the matter back to the Commission for an Amendment to the original Certificate. To the extent that the Administrator exercises the aforementioned power, he shall submit within ten days thereafter a written report of the circumstances and his findings to the Commission.  
15-7-12 - TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMITS 
If it should become impossible by reason of weather, strike or any other circumstance beyond control of the person, firm, or corporation to whom a Certificate of Approval has been granted to complete all work required before occupancy or start of use, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued by the Administrator on such conditions he/she may deem appropriate.  
15-7-13 - DEFINITIONS 
A.  Administrator: Building and Zoning Administrator of the City of Park Ridge. 
B.  Certificate of Approval: A certificate issued by the Appearance Commission under the provisions of this Ordinance that certifies the exterior design features of an applicant's plans as suitable and as consistent with the Appearance Code and Urban Design Guidelines. 
C.  Commission: The Park Ridge Appearance Commission. 
D.  Exterior Design Feature: The general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping or structure and including the kind, color and texture of the materials of such portion and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions, as will be open to public view form any street, place or way.  
15-7-14 - SEVERANCE CLAUSE 
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this Code or the application of such provision to any other person or circumstance, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision, clause, sentence paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and/or to the person or circumstance involved. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Corporate Authorities that this Code would have been adopted had such invalid provision or provisions not been included or if same had not been made applicable to such person or circumstance.  
CHAPTER 8 - RESIDENTIAL LAND GRADES[7] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite; Ord. No. 2007-87, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 2011-33, 5-2-2011. 
 
15-8-1 - PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Activity Requiring a Permit. Permits, issued by the Building Official, shall be required as follows: 
1.  Alteration of grade; addition of impervious surface of less than five percent of lot size; installation of landscape walls or berms of less dimension than set forth in subsection 2 below; and resodding. (May be reviewed by the City Engineer and does not require stamped engineering drawings.) 
2.  Construction of Landscape Wall or Berm. (Requires stamped engineering drawings that are to be reviewed by City Engineer.) This shall include, but not be limited to, the installation of any landscape wall or berm that is either: (1) 25 feet or more in length; or (2) raises the grade by 30 inches at any point. 
The requirements found in subsection 3 below shall be applicable to the installation of any landscape wall or berm, except that the review of the plans shall be accomplished by the City Engineer. 
3.  Increase in the Amount of Impervious Surface. (Requires engineering drawings and review by outside engineer.) 
a.  Engineering Plan. Any new single-family home or any installation or construction that results in an increase of impervious surface that is greater than five percent of the overall lot size shall require an engineering plan, stamped by an Illinois licensed professional engineer. The engineering plan must certify by written statement that the proposed construction will not increase the amount or rate of storm water runoff onto any neighboring properties. The engineering plan shall be reviewed by an engineer, retained by the City. The cost of the retained engineer shall be borne by the applicant. 
b.  "As-built" Drawings. Each permit shall contain language informing the applicant that "as-built" drawings, at least as detailed as the approved permit plans, shall be required at the sole expense of the applicant. The "as-built" drawings must be stamped by an Illinois licensed professional engineer and must contain a statement certifying that the project as built conforms in all respects to the drawings that were submitted as part of the permitting process. If there is any deviation from the approved drawings, no Certificate of Occupancy will be issued and/or daily fines will be assessed until the project is brought into conformity with such drawings. 
4.  Other Projects. The City Engineer or Building Official may, in the sole discretion of either, require stamped engineering drawings for projects that affect the flow of storm water other than those circumstances set forth in subsections 2 and 3 above. 
B.  Activity Not Requiring a Permit. The depositing of mulch (or similar landscaping or gardening material) on a parcel of property in an amount that does not exceed one cubic yard per 500 square feet of lot size in any 12-month period; and that is not spread at a height greater than two inches (as settled within two weeks of placement) at any point within five feet of any lot line.  
15-8-2 - PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
Each applicant for a permit as set forth in 15-8-1 shall submit a proposed drainage plan. The information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions and shall conform to the following: 
A.  Form of Submittal. 
1.  Sheet size - 8½? × 11?; 
2.  Must be legibly drawn to the same scale throughout the plan; 
3.  Subdivision name, lot number, and street address; 
4.  Dimensions for all property lines; 
5.  All easements; 
6.  Building lines; 
7.  North arrow (up); 
8.  Include the benchmark used (preferably from list of Benchmarks in Engineering Department); 
9.  All elevations shall be to 1/10 of one foot accuracy to benchmark; 
10.  Existing and proposed elevations to be shown: 
a.  All lot corners and midpoints; 
b.  Side yard lot line and low points; 
c.  The public sidewalk adjacent to the lot; 
d.  Curb and flow line on both sides of the lot; 
e.  Adjacent buildings and garage foundations and midpoint grades; 
f.  Centerline of roadway at center of property frontage; 
g.  Existing one-foot contours within lot and extended a minimum of 10 feet from perimeter to adjacent property; 
h.  Proposed elevations to be shown (in bold or indicate with a "box"); 
i.  Top of the proposed foundations for house (show all multilevel elevations and detached garage; 
j.  Side yard as well as midpoint grade elevations; 
k.  Existing and proposed grade elevations, along all lot lines, on both sides of the lot line(s), in a five-foot pattern; 
l.  Arrows indicating the proposed direction of storm water drainage (existing and proposed); 
m.  Side yard summits. 
11.  Phasing of drainage work; 
12.  Certify that all clearing, grading, drainage and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage plan; 
13.  Location of the area drain, if any; 
The finished dirt grade of any resodding project shall be deemed to be two inches (2?) below top of sod. 
B.  Substantive Requirements. 
1.  Storm water controls shall: 
a.  Be accomplished through the installation of area drains, on-site detention, or other approved drainage control measures; 
b.  Not increase storm water runoff to neighboring properties; 
c.  Accept the existing natural flow of water from neighboring properties. 
2.  No portion of a landscape wall or berm shall be installed within five feet of a lot line. 
3.  Except as set forth in Subsection 15-8-1.B above, no landscaping that is done within five feet of a lot line may result in an increase in elevation. 
4.  An area drain shall: 
a.  Be located in the rear yard; 
b.  Be properly connected to the combined sewer; 
c.  Include a reducer inlet (minimum of two inches; 
d.  Have a clean out for every 100 feet of horizontal pipe length (cleanouts shall not be located on City property except on written permission from the City); 
e.  Not place landscape material adjacent to the drain basin so as to impede the free flow of water into the drain; 
f.  Wherever practicable, drain to City property.  
15-8-3 - DOWNSPOUT AND SUMP DISCHARGES 
Downspout and sump pump discharges shall: 
A.  Be installed in accordance with Article 15 Chapter 6; 
B.  Drain in a matter to minimize runoff onto neighboring properties; 
C.  Be directed toward City property or interior of the lot. (The sump pump discharge for any property equipped with an area drain must be directed toward the drain and must terminate no closer than ten feet from the drain to allow overland flow so water has an opportunity to percolate into the soil before draining into the sewer system.); 
D.  Not cause an unsafe condition such as icing or algae buildup on City property. 
Note— Refer to Article 15, Chapter 6.  
15-8-4 - PENALTY 
Any violation of the regulations of this Chapter that result in an actual increase of storm water runoff onto neighboring properties shall result in a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,500.00 per day per violation.  
CHAPTER 9 - ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS[8] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-9-1 - MACHINE ROOMS AND MACHINERY SPACES 
A.  All machine rooms or spaces housing any elevator equipment shall be constructed of no less than a two-hour fire resistance rating unless the space is fully protected by a sprinkler system. When a machine room or space is fully sprinkled the enclosure may be one-hour rated. 
B.  All machine rooms or spaces housing any elevator equipment shall have artificial light installed to provide, at a distance of 30 inches from the floor, an illumination of ten foot-candles over the entire floor area of the room. 
C.  Entry doors for all machine rooms shall be no less than 36 inches in width and 84 inches in height, self closing, locking, and be 1½-hour fire rated. 
D.  Elevator machinery, controllers, and governors shall be located overhead or adjacent to the hoist way. They shall not be located in or under the hoist way. 
E.  A heavy duty rated three-phase fused disconnect switch shall be installed for each elevator. The disconnect switch shall be installed on the lock side of the machine room access door. 
F.  A heavy duty fused disconnect switch shall be installed for the protection of all car lighting. The switch shall be located along side the elevator disconnect switch.  
15-9-2 - HOIST WAY ACCESS SWITCHING 
Hoist way access switching shall be installed only on access landings, top, and bottom floors. The access switch may operate only when the cylinder lock transfer switch located on the face of the car operating panel is in the on position. The cylinder lock transfer switch must have OFF/INSP. positions clearly labeled on the operating panel faceplate. The cylinder lock transfer switch key must not match any other key for that elevator or any other lock in that building.  
15-9-3 - ELEVATOR EMERGENCY DEVICES 
A.  All passenger and freight elevators shall have an emergency light source of not less than six volts direct current capable of operating two 0.2-foot candle lamps for four hours. The emergency lighting must turn on immediately after the elevator lighting circuit is opened. 
B.  All passenger and freight elevators shall have an emergency bell installed on the elevator car. The alarm bell must be capable of sounding for one hour after power to the elevator circuits have been opened. 
C.  All passenger and freight elevators shall be equipped with a functional emergency telephone.  
15-9-4 - ELEVATOR EXIT DOORS 
All elevator doors including top or side doors shall have contact switches installed so that when any door of the elevator car is open, the elevator car cannot be operated.  
15-9-5 - SMOKE DETECTORS 
A.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in every elevator lobby, on each floor, and in all elevator machine rooms and elevator shafts in accordance with National Fire Protection Association standards. 
B.  When any of the required smoke detectors are activated, the elevator shall return non-stop to the designated level. 
C.  If a smoke detector on the designated level has been activated, the elevator shall return to an alternate floor.  
15-9-6 - SHUT OFF VALVES 
All hydraulic elevators shall be equipped with a shut off valve. The valve shall be designed with a permanently attached handle installed adjacent to the hydraulic machine in order to shut off the oil supply from the hydraulic machine to the elevator.  
15-9-7 - RESIDENTIAL ELEVATOR EMERGENCY DEVICES 
All residential elevators shall be equipped with all devices required in Section 15-9-3 of this Code.  
15-9-8 - WHEELCHAIR LIFT EMERGENCY DEVICES 
All wheelchair lifts installed within a structure shall be equipped with all devices required in Section 15-9-3 of this Code.  
15-9-9 - LIMITED USE LIMITED ACCESS ELEVATOR EMERGENCY DEVICES 
All limited use limited access elevators shall be equipped with all devices required in 15-9-3 and 15-9-5 of this Code.  
15-9-10 - ELEVATOR CAR ACCOMMODATIONS 
A.  In all new or renovated buildings required to have an elevator by this code, at least one elevator shall be required to provide Fire Department access to all floors of the building. 
B.  The Fire Department access elevator shall be designed to accommodate a 24-inch by 80-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal position. 
C.  The Fire Department access elevator shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (the Star of Life). This symbol shall be placed on both sides of the main lobby hoist way door frame.  
15-9-11 - CERTIFICATE REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a building to operate or permit the operation or use of an elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk hereafter installed or constructed until a certificate shall have been obtained from the Building Official.  
15-9-12 - POSTING CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 
The owner or lessee shall post the last issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place inside all elevator cars and dumbwaiters and on the side of all escalators and moving walks. The certificate shall not be accessible to the general public.  
15-9-13 - INSPECTION 
The Building Official shall make or cause to be made an inspection of every elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator and moving walk at least once in every year.  
CHAPTER 10 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES[9] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008. 
 
15-10-1 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURE DEFINED 
A building or structure located on the same lot as, and of a nature customary incidental and subordinate to, the principal building, the use of which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
1.  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or structure or principal use served; 
2.  Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or structure or principal use served; and 
3.  Is commonly and customarily associated with the principal building or structure or principal use served. 
4.  Must be installed per manufacturers' installation instructions or constructed to comply with the International Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-10-2 - RESIDENTIAL GARAGE DEFINED 
A structure with the outside walls being not less than 14 feet wide and 19 feet long designed or constructed to be used for the parking of passenger motor and recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-10-3 - DETACHED GARAGES 
A.  Detached garages accessory to one- and two-family dwelling units must be constructed to comply with the International Residential Code. All other detached garages must be constructed to comply with the International Building Code. 
B.  Garages Not Exceeding 720 Square Feet: 
1.  Foundation Design for Frame Garages: Grade beam or thickened edge concrete construction is permitted provided there is a five-inch concrete floor poured monolithically with a continuous 12-inch thick by 20-inch wide foundation around the perimeter of the building supporting the structural load of the garage. 
2.  Garage Floor: Shall be poured concrete a minimum of five inches thick and not less than five bags of cement for each cubic yard. 
3.  Vehicle entry doors shall not be less than seven feet in height. 
D.  Garages Exceeding 720 Square Feet: 
1.  Foundation Design: A frame or masonry garage exceeding 720 square feet in area shall provide a concrete or masonry foundation designed to support the intended structural load and shall be installed 48 inches below approved grade. 
2.  Garage Floor: Shall be poured concrete a minimum of five inches thick and not less than five bags of cement for each cubic yard. 
3.  Vehicle entry doors shall not be less than seven feet in height. 
4.  Fire Separation Walls: All detached garages shall be limited to 720 square feet in area unless properly fire stopped. A fire separation wall shall extend from the garage floor slab to the underside of the roof sheathing and shall be the equivalent of wood stud construction two-inch by four-inch with ?-inch Type X gypsum board fastened to each side. 
E.  All Detached Garages. For single-family and two-family residences, no part of a detached garage shall be below the approved grade. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2019-20 , § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2019)  
15-10-4 - PERMIT AND CONSTRUCTION WAIVER 
The following accessory structures, buildings and uses are exempt from permit and construction code requirements, subject to the following standards: 
Tool, garden and all-purpose sheds, kiosks, playhouses, playground equipment, dog houses and other similar buildings, uses and structures less than 65 square feet in area and less than 8½ feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
15-10-5 - UNPROTECTED METAL STRUCTURES 
Unprotected metal structures shall not exceed 100 square feet in area or nine feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2008-87, 12-1-2008)  
CHAPTER 12 - FENCES[11] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-12-1 - DEFINITION 
Fence: A structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary. 
Fence, Open: A fence including gates, which has, for each one-foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, 50 percent of the surface area in open spaces which afford direct view through the fence. 
Fence, Solid: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, street, or alleys, activities conducted behind it.  
15-12-2 - VERTICAL MEASUREMENTS 
No fence shall exceed the maximum permitted height measured at any point along the length of the fence in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Fences erected on top of patios, drives, parking lots and other paved areas shall be measured from the applicant's side. 
B.  Measurements for fences abutting patios, drives, parking lots and other paved areas shall be taken from the land grade abutting same. 
C.  Measurements for fences, which abut a common lot line and where a radical difference of grade occurs between the two zoning lots, shall be determined by the Building Official.  
15-12-3 - STRENGTH 
Every fence shall be designed and constructed to resist and withstand a wind pressure from any angle of approach of not less than 15 pounds per square foot of gross projected area of fence less openings.  
15-12-4 - DESIGN AND MATERIALS 
All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect them from deteriorating when they rest upon or enter into the ground. In no event shall barbed wire or electric wire be used. The outward side of the fence shall be finished.  
CHAPTER 13 - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL[12] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-13-1 - TITLE 
This Chapter, including any regulations adopted hereunder, shall be hereinafter known, cited and referred to as the "Park Ridge Cross Connection Control Code."  
15-13-2 - INTENT AND PURPOSES 
The purpose of this Chapter is: 
A.  To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the consumer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could back flow through the service connection into the public water supply system. 
B.  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public and the consumer's potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable quality. 
C.  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control, which will prevent the contamination, or pollution of the public and consumer potable water system.  
15-13-3 - DEFINITIONS 
Agency: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approved Cross-Connection Control Device: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation. 
Auxiliary Water System: A source of water outside of the City's public water supply system. 
Backflow: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
CCCDI (Cross Connection Control Device Inspector): A person who is a licensed plumber in the State of Illinois and has successfully completed both written and performance examinations administered by the IEPA, as described in the IEPA Regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802. 
Consumer: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
Consumer's Water System: Any water system serving the premises, commencing at the curb stop valve. 
Contamination: The introduction into water of micro-organisms, chemicals, wastes or wastewater in a concentration that makes water unfit for its intended use. 
Cross-Connection: Any connection through which a supply of potable water could be contaminated or polluted. 
Health Hazard: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being of consumers. 
Inspection: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. 
Nonpotable Water: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604. 
Plumbing: Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. 
Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Potable Water: Water that meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
Public Water Supply System: All mains, pipes and structures owned and/or maintained by the City of Park Ridge through which water is obtained and distributed to the public. 
Reduced Pressure Zone Principal Backflow Prevention Device (RPZ): A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Service Connection: The physical connection to the water main, including all fittings and appurtenances, through which water is supplied to the consumer. 
Survey: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the locations, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within the customer's piping system. The survey shall be completed on a form approved by the City of Park Ridge.  
15-13-4 - ENFORCEMENT 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City of Park Ridge may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality unless such private auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the Building Official to cause surveys and investigations to be made of commercial and other properties, excluding one- and two-family detached dwellings, served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be open for public inspection to the extent required by the Illinois Freedom of Information Act and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the Building Official shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years. 
C.  The Building Official shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the City for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, or to verify information submitted by the owner or consumer regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. Should the owner or consumer deny access to the Building Official, the Building Official is authorized to seek the issuance of an administrative search warrant. On demand, the owner or consumer of any property so served shall furnish to the Building Official any information, which he may request regarding the piping system or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this Chapter. 
D.  The Director of Public Works of the City is hereby authorized to discontinue water service to the violator's property after written notice is given to the violator wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this Chapter are known to exist and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution system. The Director of Public Works may immediately disconnect the water service to any property where actual or imminent danger of contamination or pollution to the public water supply is present. Any such disconnection shall be followed by written notice to the violator of the cause for disconnection. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  If contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, the owner or consumer shall bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system. 
F.  The owner or consumer shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the consumer's water service connection. If, in accordance with the Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Building Official, a cross connection control device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Building Official shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved device at each service connection to the premises in accordance with the Plumbing Code. The owner or consumer, after due written notice and within the prescribed time indicated on the notice, shall install such approved device or devices at his own expense. Failure or refusal on the part of the owner or consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed.  
15-13-5 - WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED 
A.  An approved cross-connection control device shall be installed on each water service line to a consumer's water system where the following conditions exist: 
1.  Premises where any substance(s) exist which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. 
2.  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the Plumbing Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist. 
3.  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connections survey. 
4.  Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished. 
B.  An approved cross-connection control device shall be installed on each water line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Plumbing Inspector determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
1.  Hospital, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes. 
2.  Laboratories. 
3.  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations. 
4.  Restaurants and food dispensing facilities. 
5.  Facilities, dispensing or storing petroleum products. 
6.  Car washes, automotive repair, and automotive body shops.  
15-13-6 - TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED 
A.  The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard, which exists. An approved fixed air gap or an approved cross-connection control device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated causing a system or health hazard. 
B.  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer shall be installed between any fire sprinkler system connected to the public water supply system when: 
1.  The sprinkler system contains antifreeze and/or chemical additives; 
2.  Water may be pumped into the system from another source that can be connected to the sprinkler system; 
3.  Piping material used for the sprinkler system is not approved for potable use.  
15-13-7 - BOOSTER PUMPS 
A.  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low-pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Building Official at least once a year that the device is operable.  
15-13-8 - SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS 
A.  It is the responsibility and financial obligation of the water consumer to prevent cross-connections by ensuring that: 
1.  Cross-connection control devices are inspected at least annually, or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer or Building Official, by a person approved by the Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. An inspection report shall be submitted to the Plumbing Inspector. The report shall include results of the inspection and maintenance performed. 
2.  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most recent test, name and approval number of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
3.  A maintenance log shall be maintained on site and include: 
a.  Date of each test; 
b.  Name and approval number of person performing the inspection; 
c.  Test results/inspection; and 
d.  Services performed and date completed.  
CHAPTER 14 - DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING FACILITIES[13] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-14-1 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, resurfacing and/or replacement of any driveway or parking facility before a permit for such work has been obtained from the Building Official.  
15-14-2 - ISSUANCE OF PERMITS 
The Building Official is hereby authorized to issue a permit to construct, resurface, replace, or widen a driveway provided that a copy of the plat of survey of the property is submitted indicating the location and all dimensions of the proposed work to be done along with a completed permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-38, 8-4-2014)  
15-14-3 - RESIDENTIAL SPECIFICATIONS 
A.  Driveways for one- and two-family detached dwellings shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  A minimum of four inches of well-compacted crushed stone or C.A. 6 shall be used as a suitable base upon which four inches of concrete, six bag mix shall be placed. 
a.  Expansion joints shall be required at the garage apron, between the driveway and the adjacent foundation wall, where applicable, at private and public sidewalks. Expansion material shall extend the entire thickness of the slab. 
b.  Contraction joints shall be required every ten lineal feet of driveway length, at a minimum of one-fourth the thickness of the slab. 
c.  Proper placement, curing and protection of driveway slabs shall meet the recommendations found in the American Concrete Institute Standards. 
2.  A minimum of six inches of well-compacted crushed stone, or C.A.-6 shall be used as a suitable base upon which two inches of Class I Bituminous Surface shall be placed. 
3.  A minimum of one inch of Class I Bituminous Surface shall be required for all driveway resurfacing. 
4.  Brick pavers shall have a proper base and lateral support. Brick pavers shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' installation instructions. 
5.  Any other material used for a driveway shall be approved by the Building Official and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' installation instructions. 
6.  Driveways, overlays, and approaches shall not be constructed in such a manner as to create ponding, flooding of adjoining properties, or an obstruction to natural drainage. 
B.  The minimum allowable driveway width for one- and two-family detached dwellings shall be eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-14-4 - COMMERCIAL, MULTI-FAMILY SPECIFICATIONS 
Driveways for commercial and multi-family buildings shall be constructed as follows: 
A.  A minimum of 12 inches of well-compacted crushed stone base coarse with two inches of Class I Bituminous Surface. 
B.  A minimum of four inches of well-compacted crushed stone base coarse with six inches of concrete, six bag mix. 
C.  Brick pavers shall have a proper base and lateral support. Brick pavers shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' installation instructions. 
D.  Any other material used for a driveway shall be approved by the Building Official and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturers' installation instructions. 
E.  The minimum allowable driveway width for commercial and multi-family buildings shall be 18 feet or a width less than 18 feet, if approved by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(Ord. No. 2005-46, 8-15-2005)  
15-14-5 - DRIVEWAY APPROACHES 
A.  All driveway approaches shall be designed in accordance with one or more of the following references as they apply: 
1.  Policy on Permits for Access Driveways to State Highways, Illinois Department to State Highways, Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition. 
2.  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition. 
B.  All driveway approach construction must be approved by the Building Official.  
15-14-6 - OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES 
To obtain a permit, the owner or his representative shall submit an application to the Building Official for his review and approval. Each application shall be accompanied by a plan of such parking facility including driveways, which indicate size, location, capacity and structural details with all dimensions at a scale of not less than one inch equals 60 feet. The parking facility design shall be consistent with the rules and regulations set forth in the Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance.  
CHAPTER 15 - PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS[14] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-15-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR IN-GROUND AND ABOVE GROUND SWIMMING POOL INSTALLATIONS 
A.  Compliance Required: Every private residential swimming pool constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and Article 5, Chapter 10 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
B.  Definition: The term "private residential swimming pool: is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground; provided further, that such private residential swimming pool is maintained by a person or persons primarily for the sole use of members of dwelling units or guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in residential districts only. 
C.  Building Official Approval: All plans and specifications for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the Building Official for examination and approval as to proper location, construction and use. 
D.  Plans and Specifications: All plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot lines, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool, indicating depth, shall be included. 
E.  Deviation from Plans: All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter. 
F.  Health Officer Approval: The Building Official shall refer all plans and specifications to the environmental health officer for review in order to determine whether they comply with health, safety and sanitation requirements. If the health officer determines that such plans and specifications are satisfactory, his approval shall be marked thereon prior to the issuance of a permit. 
G.  Setback Area: 
1.  Side and Rear Yards: No portion of a private residential pool, or any of its equipment or appurtenances, shall be located at a distance less than eight feet from any side or rear property line. The outer edge of elevated platforms, decks or walkways will be considered as an appurtenance. Platforms, decks or walkways constructed at grade level may encroach three feet into the eight-foot side and rear yard setback. 
2.  Front and Corner Side Yards: No portion of a private residential swimming pool and its appurtenances may encroach into a front yard or a corner side yard. 
3.  Pool Area: The inside swimming area of a private residential swimming pool shall not exceed 25 percent of the rear yard area. 
4.  Elevated Platforms, Decks and Walkways: An elevated platform, deck or walkway shall not be erected more than six inches above the pool rim nor exceed 60 percent of the pool area, but must have a minimum area of not less than 120 square feet. 
H.  Materials: Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with light colored, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a non-slip finish as smooth as possible. The side and the end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish. 
I.  Electrical Requirements: All electrical installation provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with the National Electrical Code, as amended.  
15-15-2 - IN-GROUND PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS 
A.  Structural Design: In-ground residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within, and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty. 
B.  Wall Slopes: To a depth up to five feet from the pool top, the wall slope shall not be more than one unit horizontal in five units vertical (1:5). 
C.  Floor Slopes: The slope of the pool floor on the shallow side of the transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to seven units horizontal (1:7). The slope of the pool floor on the deep side of the transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to three units horizontal (1:3). The transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than five feet deep. 
D.  Diving Boards: No diving board shall be more than three meters above the water surface. International Building Code, as amended, shall determine minimum water depths and distances when diving boards are proposed. 
E.  Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of non-slip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool. 
F.  Steps or Ladders: Two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided. The means of egress shall be located at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of non-slip material and shall have a handrail on both sides. 
G.  Fences: All in-ground swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence five feet in height above the existing grade. The fence shall enclose either the periphery area of the pool walks or the entire yard where the pool is located. The finished side of all pool fences shall face the abutting properties. All fence openings shall be equipped with gates five feet in height, having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. All fencing material shall be approved by the Building Official. Dense planted shrubs, bushes or any other living screening shall not be construed as meeting the requirements of this Chapter.  
15-15-3 - ABOVE GROUND PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS 
A.  Structural Design: All above ground pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within. 
B.  Diving Boards: Diving boards for above ground pools are prohibited. 
C.  Steps and Ladders: All above ground swimming pools shall have one or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders; except pools with an area exceeding 400 square feet shall provide two means of egress. Such means of egress shall be located on opposite sides of the pool. Treads of steps, ladders or step holes shall be constructed of non-slip materials. All steps, ladders or step holes shall have a handrail on both sides. 
D.  Fences: All above ground swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence five feet in height above the existing grade. The fence shall enclose either the immediate pool area or the entire yard where the pool is to be located. The finished side of all pool fences shall face the abutting properties. All fence openings shall be equipped with gates five feet in height, having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gates. Whenever a pool has an attached raised deck or walk area not less than three feet, nor more than 4½ feet feet above grade, a deck fence may be installed. Said deck fence shall be three feet above the deck level. 
E.  Maximum Depth: No above ground pool shall exceed five feet in depth measured from the top rim of the pool to the pool floor. The top of the pool floor cannot be inserted more than one foot below the finished grade. No pool shall exceed four feet in height measured from the top of the pool rim to the approved grade.  
CHAPTER 16 - SOLAR COLLECTOR REQUIREMENTS[15] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-16-1 - DEFINITION 
Solar Collector: 
1.  An assembly, structure, or design, including passive elements, used forgathering, concentrating, or absorbing direct or indirect solar energy, specially designed for holding a substantial amount of useful thermal energy and to transfer that energy to a gas, solid, or liquid or to use that energy directly; or, 
2.  A mechanism that absorbs solar energy and converts it into electricity; or, 
3.  A mechanism or process used for gathering solar energy through wind or thermal gradients; or, 
4.  A component used to transfer thermal energy to a gas, solid, or liquid, or to convert it into electricity.  
15-16-2 - ARCHITECTURAL, STRUCTURAL AND ENGINEERING SEALS 
No plans shall be approved for permit unless such plans are signed and sealed either by an architect licensed to practice architecture, as approved by the "Illinois Architectural Act", a structural engineer licensed to practice engineering, as provided by the "Illinois Structural Engineering Act" or by a professional engineer licensed to practice engineering, as provided by the Illinois Department of Registration and Education.  
15-16-3 - PLANS AND DRAWINGS 
Plans shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one-eighth inch to a foot and shall contain the following information unless specifically waived by the Building Official: 
A.  Complete structural details indicating size and location of all structural members supporting the solar collectors and storage areas. 
B.  All details relating to construction of proposal solar system, including size, type of materials, location of all duct work, heat exchangers, solar collectors, storage areas, piping, fans, valves, insulation details for floors, walls and ceilings or any other related details may be required by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
15-16-4 - INSTALLATION AND MATERIALS 
Materials shall be approved and installed according to rules and regulations set forth in the International Building Code, International Mechanical Code and provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 2, 5-6-2019)  
15-16-5 - BACK-UP SYSTEMS 
All structures designed to provide solar heat shall install a conventional back-up system which is capable of supplying 100% of the energy required for heating and hot water needs.  
15-16-6 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 2, adopted May 6, 2019, repealed § 15-16-6, which pertained to review by the building council and derived from the original code.  
15-16-7 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 2, adopted May 6, 2019, repealed § 15-16-6, which pertained to solar collector obtrusive determination and derived from the original code.  
CHAPTER 17 - RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE RELOCATION[16] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-42, 7-21-2003 - Entire rewrite. 
 
15-17-1 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the relocation of a single family dwelling within the limits of the City of Park Ridge without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official. Structures other than single-family dwellings may not be relocated. All administrative and general provisions of Article 15, Chapter 1 shall apply to this Chapter.  
15-17-2 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Building: Any structure that is designed and built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons. 
Public Right-of-Way: Area between and including the public sidewalk, parkway, gutters and public street. 
Public Street: Paved surface that is owned and maintained by state, county and/or local government. 
Single Family Dwelling: A detached building containing one dwelling unit only. 
Utility Company: A business that supplies a service to the public, such as, but not limited to, electric, telephone and cable television. 
Utility Lines: Cable or cables used for the transmission of, but not limited to, electric, telephone and cable television. Utility lines shall include not only main transmission cables but also service drop cables.  
15-17-3 - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
A.  The applicant shall submit the following information and plans to the Building and Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of a permit: 
B.  A current plat of survey indicating the proposed location of the house on the lot and all easements and restrictions on the property. 
C.  A grading plan indicating existing elevations and proposed elevations, including top of foundation elevation and proposed direction of storm water flow. 
D.  A map indicating the route the house moving contractor is proposing to follow. 
E.  A statement outlining the move, distance of relocation, timetable related to the move and total weight per axle. 
F.  A letter from the utility company affected by the move stating that said utility company will be responsible for the relocation of any utility lines and/or equipment which will have to be raised or moved. The moving contractor shall not raise, move or relocate any utility line and/or equipment. 
G.  A valid permit from the Illinois Department of Transportation, County of Cook and/or Township if the move shall either cross or travel upon a state, county or township owned Public Street. 
H.  A foundation plan indicating footing and foundation wall, drain tile, location of sump and/or ejector pit basins and locations of the water and sewer services. 
I.  Completed building permit application forms for foundation, electrical, plumbing and HVAC outlining the extent of the work to be completed  
15-17-4 - DURATION OF RELOCATION 
A structure may be relocated only between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. The relocation of a structure shall be completed within one day.  
15-17-5 - ARCHITECTURAL CERTIFICATE 
The permit applicant shall submit a letter from a registered architect certifying that the building is structurally sound and that the integrity of the building will not be affected by the move. Any building that is located outside of the Park Ridge city limits shall be inspected by a registered architect and certified that the building complies with the current Building Code of the City of Park Ridge.  
15-17-6 - APPROVAL 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, approval for the relocation must be obtained from the Building Official, City Engineer, City Forester, Chief of Police and The Appearance Commission. The relocation and placement of the structure on the proposed lot shall comply with all of the applicable Codes and Ordinances of the City of Park Ridge.  
15-17-7 - WEIGHT LIMIT 
Axle weight limits shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for a single axle and 32,000 pounds for a tandem axle.  
15-17-8 - SURETY BOND 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the moving contractor shall deposit with the Building Official a bond in the amount listed below. Said bond, with surety to be approved by the City Attorney, shall indemnify, keep and save harmless the City against loss, damage, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the City may suffer or be put to, or which may occur against, be charged to or be recovered from the City or any of its officials by reason of any act or failure to act. Said bond shall also be conditioned that contractor shall well and faithfully observe all the provisions of this Chapter and other Articles, Ordinances and regulations of the City of Park Ridge. Such bond shall remain in effect for a period of 60 days after the completion of the move. 
The following scale shall determine the amount of the required bond: 
1.  Moving less than 600 feet ..... $10,000.00 
2.  Moving one block ..... 25,000.00 
3.  Moving two blocks ..... 35,000.00 
4.  Moving three blocks or further ..... 55,000.00 
One City block = 600 feet. Any portion or fraction moved further than a whole block shall be upgraded to the next whole block.  
15-17-9 - POLICE ESCORT 
Any relocation which crosses or travels upon a public street may, at the discretion of the Police Chief, be required to have a Police escort. The moving contractor shall be responsible for any cost incurred related to the Police escort.  
15-17-10 - RESTORATION 
A vacant lot created by the relocation of a structure shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity to the established grades of the adjoining properties. The lot shall be maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish and all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public. Provisions shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water on the lot or the drainage of storm water to an adjoining lot. 
The foundation, footing and/or slab shall be broken up and removed from the site. The sewer service shall be capped within five feet of the foundation and the water service shall be removed up to the curb stop.  
CHAPTER 18 - TREE PRESERVATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[17] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2010-83, 12-6-2010. 
Cross reference— Regulations regarding Parkway/Public trees, Article 9, Chapter 4. 
 
15-18-1 - POLICY 
It has been determined that trees provide the following enhancements to the public health, safety and welfare: 
a.  Enhance the scenic beauty of the City and its natural and unique environment. 
b.  Enhance air quality by reducing and filtering air pollutants. 
c.  Reduce topsoil erosion. 
d.  Reduce stormwater runoff and replenish ground water supplies. 
e.  Provide a buffer and screen against noise pollution. 
f.  Reduce energy consumption by acting as a wind barrier and providing shade. 
g.  Preserve and enhance nesting areas for birds and other forms of wildlife which assist in insect control. 
h.  Protect and enhance property values. 
i.  Protect and enhance the quality of life and general welfare of the City and its residents. 
Therefore, it is the policy of this Chapter to preserve, protect, replace and properly maintain trees on private property within the City while at the same time respecting the private property rights of Park Ridge landowners.  
15-18-2 - DEFINITIONS 
Buffer zone: For the purposes of this ordinance, Buffer Zone shall be defined as an area of land extending out twelve feet from the exterior walls of the principal structure, measured perpendicular to the exterior wall at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. The twelve-foot Buffer Zone shall be measured from the exterior walls only and not from unattached amenities, attached decks, patios or porches. 
Building footprint: That precise portion of a lot or parcel where it is proposed that a structure will be placed. 
Circumference: The measure of the distance around a circle. The circumference of a circle is computed by multiplying the diameter by pi (3.1412). 
DBH: The diameter in inches of a tree trunk measured at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground. (DBH = Diameter Breast Height) 
Diameter: The width of a circular or cylindrical object; a straight line passing through the center of a circle or sphere and meeting the circumference or surface at each end. 
Drip line: An imaginary, perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Maintenance activity: Any activity including (but not limited to) the pruning, spraying, injecting, bracing, and nutrient supplementation of a tree with the intention of improving or maintaining tree health and/or structure. 
Multi-stem tree: A tree having two or more stems attached to the same common root system. 
Principal structure: A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
Private property: Any property not owned by the City of Park Ridge. 
Protected trees: (A) Any tree larger than ten inches DBH (31.5" circumference) or multi-stemmed tree having a total diameter of 15 inches DBH (47.12" circumference); and (B) Any tree of any size that was required to be planted by City regulation, permit, ordinance or agreement. 
Protected trees shall fall into one of two categories: 
An "At Risk Protected Tree" is any Protected Tree that the City Forester, by applying accepted arboricultural standards, has determined that due to (1) loss of structural integrity resulting from internal defects or external factors; (2) aging; (3) disease; (4) damage; or (5) decay is either dead or would not be expected to be viable beyond three subsequent growing seasons. 
A "Healthy Protected Tree" is any Protected Tree that has not been classified as an At Risk Protected Tree. 
When the term "Protected Tree" is used, it shall mean both Healthy Protected Trees and At Risk Protected Trees. 
Removal: The cutting down or other Substantial Destruction of a tree. 
Root zone: Portion of the tree located underground spreading out from the trunk in all directions, and at varying depths, generally confined to the drip line area. (Most root zones are found within 18 inches of the ground surface.) 
Structure: Anything built, constructed, installed, erected or placed on, in or under the ground, or attached to something on, in or under the ground. 
Substantial destruction: The pruning out of more than 35% of the live branches of a tree; or an activity that in the opinion of the City Forester, is likely to result in the death of a tree; or any activity that puts a tree in an "At Risk" category. 
Topping: The cutting back of a tree to buds, stubs or lateral branches not large enough to assume the terminal role. 
Tree bank replacement fund: That fund established by the City for the purpose of compliance with Section 15-18-6 of this Code. 
Unattached amenity: Any swimming pool, gazebo, patio, play apparatus, basketball court, tennis court or similar structure or installation which is not attached to the principal building on the lot, and which is a permitted accessory structure on the parcel.  
15-18-3 - REMOVAL OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED 
Except as provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, including but not limited to the Property Owner, to remove a Protected Tree or cause the Substantial Destruction of a Tree.  
15-18-4 - PRUNING 
No Healthy Protected Tree may be pruned except in compliance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Tree Care Performance Standards. No permit is required for pruning a private property tree. However, any party performing such pruning shall do so in full compliance with the aforesaid ANSI standards. If any Healthy Protected Tree is subjected to Substantial Destruction, the Party doing the pruning shall be deemed to be in violation of Section 15-18-3.  
15-18-5 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR REMOVAL OF PROTECTED TREES 
No Protected Tree may be removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit from the City Forester pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
Permits authorizing the removal of trees may be issued by the City Forester in accordance with, but not necessarily limited to, the following conditions: 
A.  The tree is dead, dying, diseased, or within the Buffer Zone. 
B.  The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become hazardous within three years. 
C.  Removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practices in consideration of the species, location, condition, age, safety, and historic/aesthetic value of the tree to be removed. 
D.  Removal of the tree will enhance the health of one or more trees, of greater relative value, within the immediate vicinity of the tree to be removed. 
E.  Reasonable efforts have been undertaken in the architectural layout and design of the proposed development or improvement to minimize tree damage and/or removal.  
15-18-6 - PROTECTED TREE REMOVAL 
A.  Removal of At Risk Protected Trees. Upon proper application, the City Forester shall inspect and issue a permit for the removal of any At Risk Protected Tree. 
B.  Removal of Healthy Protected Trees. 
1.  Removal of Healthy Protected Trees due to New Construction of One Single Family Residence, an Addition to Such a Residence, or an Unattached Amenity Serving One Single Family Residence shall be subject to the following: 
a.  A Healthy Protected Tree in any area falling within a Buffer Zone or footprint of a detached garage or new driveway may be removed but shall be replaced as set forth in Section 15-18-8. However, the City Forester, in consultation with the Department of Community Development and Preservation, may require the reduction in size, relocation or other modification of any attached deck, new driveway, patio, porch or detached garage that would require the removal of a Healthy Protected Tree. 
b.  No Healthy Protected Tree may be removed for the placement of an Unattached Amenity or for expansion or relocation of a front or side yard driveway or sidewalk. 
2.  Removal of Healthy Protected Trees for a non-residential development, a residential development that involves two or more principal structures or any multifamily development shall be subject to the following: 
a.  No Healthy Protected Tree may be removed unless it is within a building footprint or the Buffer Zone. 
b.  All Healthy Protected Trees that are removed shall be replaced according to Section 15-18-8. 
c.  The City Council may approve exceptions to this Paragraph pursuant to approval of a Subdivision Plan, Planned Unit Development or Special Use. Any such exception must include a specific finding that the alternative will be in furtherance of the City's policies as a Tree City. 
C.  Other City Landscaping Requirements. To the extent that this Article imposes greater planting requirements than any other regulations of the City, this Article shall control. 
D.  Escrow. 
1.  If tree replacement is required by this Chapter, then as a condition of the tree removal permit, the applicant shall place into escrow with the City an amount of money equal to tree replacement value, as determined by the City Forester. The money shall be returned once the new tree(s) is planted or deposited to the tree bank if no tree has been planted after a period of one year. The City Forester shall maintain a current schedule of the cost (including planting expenses) for replacement of trees. 
2.  If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the City Code have resulted in tree damage, then the City may require that an escrow payment, equal to the replacement value of the damaged tree(s) (See Section 15-18-08). The City Forester shall determine the period for which the cash escrow shall be held (not to exceed 36 months). That period shall be reasonably related to the amount of time that is necessary to determine the health of the damaged tree(s). The escrow shall be held for the purpose of assuring that all remedial actions required by the City to restore the health of the tree(s) are taken, and/or for the purpose of assuring the appropriate tree replacement should any damaged tree die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by a certified arborist.  
15-18-7 - TREE REMOVAL PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE 
A.  Tree Removal Permit Application When a Building or Site Work Permit is Being Sought. When a building or site work permit is being sought, a tree removal permit application shall be submitted which includes three copies of a legible Tree Preservation Plan, drawn to scale of one inch equals 20 feet, and indicating the following information for the entire site: 
1.  A tree survey indicating location, size, and species of all Protected Trees on site. All trees requiring a tree removal permit must be specifically labeled on the survey. 
2.  All tree protection measures to be taken to minimize damage to trees. At a minimum, all fencing shall go to the dripline or to the excavation limits. Excavation limits falling within the dripline shall be subject to the approval of the City Forester. 
3.  Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all existing and proposed buildings, walls, impervious surfaces, improvements and structures. 
4.  Location, shape and spatial arrangement of all driveways, construction access roads, and construction material/debris storage areas. 
5.  Existing and proposed utility services including gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, water and sewer. 
6.  Existing and proposed elevations with contour lines at one-foot intervals. 
7.  Setbacks, yard requirements, easements and conservancy areas. 
B.  Tree Removal Permit When No Building or Site Work Permit is being sought. The applicant seeking a Tree Removal Permit shall provide the City with a completed permit application that includes the following information: 
1.  First and last name, address and telephone number of applicant. 
2.  General location and size (DBH) of tree(s) for which permit is sought. 
3.  Reason why applicant seeks removal of tree(s). 
C.  Review of Tree Removal Permit Application. The City Forester shall review the tree removal permit application. This review may include an inspection of the site and/or meetings with the applicant. The City Forester shall render a decision on the tree removal permit request within ten working days of the receipt of a properly filed request. 
D.  Appeals. Any appeal of the denial of a Tree Removal Permit shall be heard by the City's Public Works Committee of the Whole. Appeals must be filed, in writing with the City Forester, within ten days of denial of the Tree Removal Permit. Appeals will be heard within 30 days of such filing.  
15-18-8 - TREE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Any Healthy Protected Tree that is removed, and requires replacement by this Chapter shall be replaced with single stem trees from Appendix A. The minimum size of any replacement tree shall be two-inch DBH; the maximum size shall be four-inch DBH. The number of replacement inches is determined on the following basis: 
•  DBH of 1—10 inches: No replacement trees required. 
•  DBH of greater than 10 inches to 20 inches: One replacement tree required. 
•  DBH of greater than 20 inches to 30 inches: Two replacement trees required (Min. of one tree planted back on site). 
•  DBH of greater than 30 inches to 40 inches: Three replacement trees required (Min. of one tree planted back on site). 
•  DBH of 40 inches or larger: Four replacement trees (Min. of two trees planted back on site). 
•  At Risk Protected Trees that are removed do not require tree replacement. 
If the City Forester determines that it would not be consistent with best arboricultural practice to plant replacement trees on the parcel from which trees were removed, then an amount of money equal to the value of the replacement trees shall be deposited into a tree bank replacement fund. This fund may only be used for the planting of trees on public property.  
15-18-9 - PERMIT ISSUANCE 
A.  Issuance. The City Forester shall issue a tree removal permit upon compliance with the requirements described in this Chapter and payment of any required fees and escrows. 
B.  Time Limitations. A permit shall expire if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within one year from the date of the permit or if such work, when commenced, is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of six months. If a permit expires, a new permit must be obtained before work may be resumed.  
15-18-10 - TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION 
Where any construction activity is taking place, the following preservation methods and standards must be followed: 
A.  No construction activity, movement and/or placement of equipment, vehicles, material, spoils excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the protected root zone or at any elevation above the root zone. 
B.  Crushed limestone and other materials detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the protected root zone of any tree nor at any location above the root zone where drainage toward the tree could reasonably be expected to affect the health of the tree. 
C.  Appropriate protective fencing shall be temporarily installed at the periphery of the tree's root zone/dripline. All fencing must be secured to metal posts driven into the ground no further than ten feet apart. The entire parkway must be fenced and maintained for the period of the construction whether trees are present or not. Either the existing drive or the proposed drive may remain open. 
D.  No attachments, signs, fences, or wires, other than approved for bracing, guying, or wrapping shall be attached to trees during the construction period. 
E.  Other measures, including but not limited to, construction pruning and root pruning may be required upon the written demand of the City Forester. 
F.  Unless otherwise authorized by the City Forester, no soil is to be removed or added within the root zone area of any tree. 
G.  All Protected Trees within 12 feet of the building footprint shall be evaluated by the City Forester to determine the effect of the construction on the trees' long-term survivability and safety. Protection or removal may be required accordingly. 
The general contractor shall be responsible for the construction, erection, and maintenance of temporary fencing in accordance with the conditions of the building permit around tree preservation areas. Violation will result in the stoppage of all work until corrections have been made to the satisfaction of the City Forester.  
15-18-11 - EMERGENCIES 
In the event of emergency conditions requiring the immediate cutting or removal of a tree or trees protected by this Chapter in order to avoid danger or hazard to persons or property, an emergency permit will be issued by the City Forester without formal application. If City Hall is closed when the emergency arises, the Police Department shall be contacted for appropriate assistance before any action is taken.  
15-18-12 - PENALTY 
1.  Any person, who removes or substantially destroys a tree(s) without a City tree removal permit, in violation of Section 15-18-3, shall be fined a minimum of $500.00 per inch of tree DBH. 
2.  Any person who violates any other provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $250.00 and not more than $2,500.00 for each violation. 
3.  Where applicable, each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
4.  The payment of a fine shall not relieve any violator of this Chapter from tree replacement requirements. 
APPENDIX A 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Black Maple 	Acer nigrum 
Red Maple 	Acer rubrum 
Sugar Maple 	Acer saccharum 
Yellow Buckeye 	Aesculus flava 
Ohio Buckeye 	Aesculus glabra 
Horse-chestnut 	Aesculus hippocastanum 
River Birch 	Betula nigra 
European Hornbeam 	Carpinus betulus 
American Hornbeam 	Carpinus caroliniana 
Bitternut Hickory 	Carya cordiformis 
Pignut Hickory 	Carya glabra 
Pecan 	Carya illinoinensis 
Shagbark Hickory 	Carya ovata 
Mockernut Hickory 	Carya tomentosa 
Catalpa 	Catalpa speciosa 
Hackberry 	Celtis occidentalis 
Katsura tree 	Cercidiphyllum japonicum 
Yellowwood 	Cladrastis kentukea 
Persimmon 	Diospyros virginiana 
American Beech 	Fagus grandifolia 
Ginkgo 	Ginkgo biloba (male only) 
Honey-locust, thornless 	Gleditsia triacanthos f. inermis 
Kentucky Coffeetree 	Gymnocladus dioica 
Black Walnut 	Juglans nigra 
Tamarack 	Larix laricina 
Sweetgum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 
Tuliptree 	Liriodendron tulipifera 
Dawn Redwood 	Metasequoia glyptostreboides 
Tupelo (black gum) 	Nyssa sylvatica 
American Hophornbeam 	Ostrya virginiana 
Sycamore 	Plantanus occidentalis 
London Planetree 	Plantanus x acerfolia 
White Oak 	Quercus alba 
Swamp White Oak 	Quercus bicolor 
Scarlet Oak 	Quercus coccinea 
Hill's Oak 	Quercus ellipsoidalis 
Shingle Oak 	Quercus imbricaria 
Bur Oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 
Chinkapin Oak 	Quercus muehlenbergii 
Chestnut Oak 	Quercus montana 
English Oak 	Quercus robur 
Red Oak 	Quercus rubra 
Shumard Oak 	Quercus shumardii 
Black Oak 	Quercus velutina 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium Distichum 
American basswood (linden) 	Tilia Americana 
American Elm 	Ulmus (cultivars) 
Japanese Zelkova 	Zelkova Serrata 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-25 , § 1, 4-15-2019)  
ARTICLE 19 - SIGNS AND CANOPIES 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 
 
19-1-1 - PERMITS REQUIRED 
No person shall erect, alter or relocate within the City any permanent or temporary sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Zoning Administrator and making payment of the required fee, which is established by the City Council and published in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure.  
19-1-2 - APPLICATION 
Application for erection permits shall be made on forms provided by the Building Official and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
B.  Two prints or ink drawings of sign or other advertising structure indicating: 
1.  Size. 
2.  Location on building (if applicable). 
3.  Location on zoning lot with relationship to buildings, structure and property lines. 
4.  Specifications listing materials, dimensions and structural design showing attachment to the building or anchorage in the ground. 
C.  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, when required by the Zoning Administrator, showing the sign is designed for a dead load and wind pressure in the amount required under Section 19-1-8, Strength. 
D.  Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign. 
E.  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected. 
F.  All illuminated signs shall require an electrical permit, subject to Article 17 of this Code, and payment of fees as established in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure. 
G.  Such other information as the Zoning Administrator shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the City.  
19-1-3 - ELECTRICAL WIRING APPROVAL 
The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with Article 17 of this Code and he shall approve said permit if said plans and specifications comply with said Article, or disapprove the application if noncompliance with said Article is found.  
19-1-4 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT 
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, upon the filing of an application for an erection permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and if all the requirements of this Article and all other laws and ordinances of the City are complied with, he shall then issue the erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the said permit shall become null and void.  
19-1-5 - REVOCABILITY 
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Article or any amendment thereto, are mere licenses revocable at any time by the City Council, and all such permits shall contain this provision. In the event that, by action of the City Council, any license is revoked, it shall be unlawful to thereafter permit such sign to continue to remain on the premises, and it shall be the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of said premises and each of them to remove the same forthwith.  
19-1-6 - UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS 
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this Article, he shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply by the Zoning Administrator at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The Zoning Administrator shall recommend to the City Council the revocation of the permit covering said sign or other structure regulated herein and thereupon said permit may be revoked by order of the City Council. The Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.  
19-1-7 - DATA TO BE POSTED 
Every sign or other advertising structure hereafter erected shall have painted in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than one inch in height, the date of erection, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith.  
19-1-8 - STRENGTH 
All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 25 pounds per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in this Code or other ordinances of the City.  
19-1-9 - SIGNS EXEMPTED FROM PERMIT 
A.  Non-illuminated real estate signs not exceeding six square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which said signs are located only. 
B.  Non-illuminated professional nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area. 
C.  Bulletin boards not over 24 square feet in area for church bulletins and signs for public or quasi-public buildings, when the same are located on the premises of said institutions. 
D.  Government flags and insignia. 
E.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed or bronze or other incombustible materials. 
F.  Traffic or other Municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary emergency or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the City Council.  
19-1-10 - REFLECTORS AND GLARE 
Goose-neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs and wall signs; provided, however, that any lights be installed only in such manner that the direct rays of such lights be concentrated on the sign and be prevented from causing a glare on, or striking, the street or nearby property, or the reflectors shall be provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or nearby property.  
19-1-11 - LIGHTING REGULATIONS APPLICABLE 
The terms, provisions, regulations, restrictions and penalties of Chapter 9 entitled "Lighting" or Article 14 entitled "Conduct and Offenses" of the Municipal Code of the City shall be applicable to all signs in existence and hereafter erected within the City, which terms, provisions, regulations and penalties are expressly incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein.  
CHAPTER 2 - GROUND SIGNS AND WALL SIGNS 
SECTION 
 
19-2-1 - MATERIALS 
All signs for which a permit is required under this Article shall have a surface or facing which can be maintained to keep an attractive appearance.  
19-2-2 - FASTENING OF CHARACTERS 
All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure.  
19-2-3 - PROTECTION AGAINST DECAY 
All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect them from deteriorating when they rest upon or enter the ground.  
19-2-4 - MAINTENANCE OF GROUNDS 
All signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.  
CHAPTER 3 - TEMPORARY SIGNS 
SECTION 
 
19-3-1 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a temporary sign without obtaining a sign permit unless said signs are listed as exempt under Section 19-1-9 of this Article.  
19-3-2 - FEES 
The permit fee to erect a temporary sign is established by the City Council and published in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure.  
CHAPTER 4 - AWNINGS 
SECTION 
 
19-4-1 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
Permits for awnings shall be required as provided in Section 19-1-1 of this Article.  
19-4-2 - MATERIALS 
Awnings shall be constructed of materials approved by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Park Ridge Fire Prevention Department.  
19-4-3 - SUPPORTS AND BRACING 
Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the building in a manner approved by the Zoning Administrator. Posts or columns shall not extend beyond the property line.  
19-4-4 - FEES 
The permit fee to construct an awning is established by the City Council and published in the Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedure.  
CHAPTER 5 - NONCONFORMING EXISTING SIGNS 
SECTION 
 
19-5-1 - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
Every sign or other advertising structure made nonconforming by the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance of the City, as passed and approved by the Mayor and City Council on September 2, 1975, and as heretofore amended, shall not be altered or moved except in compliance with same Zoning Ordinance of the City.  
19-5-2 - DURATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
Every nonconforming sign or other advertising structure shall be moved or made conforming not later than the dates stipulated under Section 5.04.B and 10.05.B of the Zoning Ordinance of the City, as passed and approved by the Mayor and City Council on September 2, 1975, and as heretofore amended.  
19-5-3 - INSPECTION FEES 
An inspection fee to maintain a nonconforming projecting sign is hereby established by the City Council and published in the Park Ridge Municipal Code, Article 20, Administrative Procedures.  
CHAPTER 6 - VIOLATIONS 
SECTION 
 
19-6-1 - VIOLATIONS 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that any such violation shall continue.  
ARTICLE 20 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - CITATIONS; PAYMENT OF FINES 
SECTION 
 
20-1-1 - ISSUANCE OF CITATION 
A.  Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of a City ordinance in respect of any of the following subjects: 
1.  Parking violations; 
2.  Requiring the purchase and display of a vehicle sticker; 
3.  Regulating and licensing dogs and cats; 
said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a charging document with the Administrative Hearing Officer, in the first instance issue to such alleged violator a citation advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance, requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation as set forth in Section 20-1-5 hereof as settlement of said violation claim; and informing him that upon failure to settle, he will be required to appear before the Administrative Hearing Officer to contest the violation. 
B.  In addition to those violations specified above, citations may also be issued for such other violations as the Police Chief may, by rule, determine to be appropriate for settlement and compromise as described in this Chapter. In determining which violations shall be subject to such a settlement and compromise, the Chief shall, at a minimum, give consideration to the severity of the violation, the necessity for judicial imposition of a penalty, the administrative impact of court appearances by enforcement personnel, and the effectiveness of such procedures in deterring and correcting violations. In the case of violations of a continuing nature, the rules may provide that violator shall present to the Police Department evidence of correction of the violation before the citation may be settled and compromised. Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, all violations subject to settlement and compromise procedures shall be treated as Subsection A violations. 
(Ord. 2005-34, 5-2-2005)  
20-1-2 - PAYMENT WITHIN FOURTEEN DAYS 
Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of such ordinance violation by paying to the City the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in Section 20-1-5 hereof, within a period to be specified in said citation - not more than 14 days of the time said citation was issued. Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the City Clerk, who shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said amount to the City Treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund. 
(Ord. 2010-30, 3-15-2010)  
20-1-3 - NOTICE TO APPEAR 
In the event that the person to whom said citation is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon him), then the individual will be required to appear before the Administrative Hearing Officer for a hearing, as provided for in Section 20-6-1, et seq. of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. 
(Ord. 2005-34, 5-2-2005)  
20-1-4 - REGISTRATION AS PROOF OF CONTROL 
The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is registered with the Secretary of State in the name of said alleged violator; or, in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by a municipality has been issued in the name of and to said alleged violator, shall be considered prima facie proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such alleged violation.  
20-1-5 - PAYMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
The violation claim described in said citation so to be issued may be settled, compromised and paid pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, in the respective amounts as set forth in the following schedule: 
A.  In the event that said payment is made prior to date specified on said citation, the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement and payment: 
Group A Violations ..... $ 50.00 
Group B Violations ..... 50.00 
No Dog/Cat License ..... 50.00 
No At-Risk Animal License ..... 100.00 
No Dangerous Animal License ..... 500.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (first offense) ..... 25.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (subsequent offenses) ..... 75.00 
Failure to Purchase Vehicle License ..... 75.00 
B.  In the event that payment has not been made prior to the date specified in said citation, a notice shall be sent to the violator and the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement, compromise and payment of the citation if paid within 14 days of the date of the notice: 
Group A Violations ..... $ 75.00 
Group B Violations ..... 75.00 
No Dog/Cat License ..... 35.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (first offense) ..... 25.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (subsequent offenses) ..... 100.00 
Failure to Purchase Vehicle License ..... 100.00 
C.  In the event that said payment has not been made prior to the date specified on the notice, a second and final notice shall be sent to the violator and the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement, compromise and payment of the citation if paid within 14 days of the date of the notice: 
Group A Violations ..... $100.00 
Group B Violations ..... 100.00 
No Dog/Cat License ..... 50.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (first offense) ..... 40.00 
Failure to Display Vehicle License (subsequent offenses) ..... 125.00 
Failure to Purchase Vehicle License ..... 125.00 
D.  If the amount listed in the second and final notice is not paid within 14 days of the date of the notice, the alleged violator will be required to attend a hearing on the date specified on the second and final notice. If the alleged violator does not pay the amount listed on the second notice within 14 days and does not appear at the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer will enter a finding of guilty and impose a fine and/or costs. The Hearing Officer will issue a Notice of Determination of Liability to the alleged violator in accordance with the default provisions set forth in of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. 
E.  Nothing set forth in Subsections A, B and C of this Section 20-1-5 shall limit the ability of the Administrative Hearing Officer to set and determine the fine within the minimum and maximum limits for the offence as set forth in the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
F.  Parking violations, Group A Violations and Group B violations shall be as established in the Parking Fine Schedule set forth in Section 20-1-6 herein. 
G.  In the event that a second or subsequent violation of the same provision of this Code regarding parking is committed by the same vehicle in the same place, on the same date, the payment which will be accepted in settlement and compromise of the violation shall be double the settlement amounts specified in this section. 
H.  If any person who has received a violation for Failure to Purchase Vehicle License purchases the vehicle license at the time of settlement of the fine, the settlement amount for the violation shall be reduced by 50%. 
I.  Nothing set forth herein shall limit the ability of any violator to request, at any time prior to the entry of a final determination of liability, a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer to determine liability for the violation or to contest the violation by filing a notarized statement and following the procedures set forth in Section 20-6-9(F) of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. In addition, nothing set forth herein shall limit the ability of any violator to seek judicial review of a final determination of liability in accordance with the Illinois Administrative Review law. 
(Ord. 2003-38, 5-19-2003; Ord. 2005-34, 5-2-2005; Ord. 2009-69, 9-21-2009; Ord. 2010-15, 02-03-2010; Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 1, 1-18-2016)  
20-1-6 - PARKING FINE SCHEDULE 
Violation 	City Code or 
Statute Section 
Group A 	
Meters 	13-16-1 
Two-hour parking limit 	13-15-5 
Left wheel to curb 	13-10-5 
Parking outside lines 	13-16-4 
Thirty-minute parking limit 	13-15-2 
One-hour parking limit 	13-15-3 
Ninety-minute parking limit 	13-15-4 
Three-hour parking limit 	13-15-6 
Parking on sidewalk or Parkway 	13-10-1K 
City Hall restricted lot 	13-12-2 
Parking in violation of Resident permit restriction 	13-13-2 
All other parking, vehicle and compliance citations not specifically covered elsewhere: 2014-35, 8-4-2014 	
Group B 	
Parking prohibited within certain Hours 	13-12-4 
Parking in an intersection 	13-10-1A 
Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant 	13-10-1G 
Parking within fire lanes 	13-10-1P 
Parking on property of Maine Township High School District 207 	13-10-10 
Parking on Lutheran General Property 	13-10-10 
Parking on private property without consent of owner 	13-10-10 
Street Cleaning 	13-10-2 
Loading Zones 	13-10-7 
Parking in Alley (blocking) 	13-10-8 
Cab and bus stands 	13-10-9 
Truck parking in residential area 	13-10-11 
Parking within 30 feet of a signal or sign 	13-10-1E 
Parking within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk 	13-10-1F 
Blocking driveway 	13-10-1H 
Parking within 50 feet of railroad grade crossing 	13-10-1I 
Parking in library drive 	13-11-2 
Parking in a crosswalk 	13-10-1B 
Parking in Snow Route 	13-14-1 
13-14-2 
13-14-3 
13-14-4 
 
(Ord. 2005-34, 5-2-2005)  
20-1-7 - SUPERVISION 
In any prosecution for a violation of any section of the Park Ridge Municipal Code the court may, in lieu of or in addition to other penalty or fine, impose a period of supervision as defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-1-21, as amended, together with such incidents and conditions of supervision as are set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3.1, as amended, the terms of which Statutes are hereby incorporated into the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
20-1-8 - FEE FOR COLLECTION 
In addition to any other remedy or method provided in this Code or by other law for collection of fines or other debts owed to the City, services of a commercial collection agency may be used. The Finance Director shall establish rules regarding circumstances in which a collection agency will be used. Any fine or other debt owed to the City, which is referred to a collection agency, shall be increased by an amount sufficient to offset the additional cost to the City of the collection agency services.  
CHAPTER 2 - FEES AND ZONING APPLICATIONS 
SECTION 
 
20-2-1 - FEES 
The petitioner for a zoning determination or appeal shall pay the following filing fee plus deposit at the time of filing their petition. No petition, except as hereinafter provided, shall be accepted by the City unless accompanied by the required filing fee. The fees required for various types of petitions shall be as follows: 
TABLE OF FEES 
	Actual Publication Cost, Court Reporter Cost, and Cost of Original Transcript Plus Flat Fee of: 
A. Petition for Variation 	
 1. In Residential Districts 	
  a. To vary the intensity of use or yard requirements 	$200.00 if City Council action is not required; $225.00 if City Council action is required 
  b. All other variations 	$250.00 
 2. In Commercial and Office Districts 	$400.00 if City Council action is not required; $450.00 if City Council action is required 
B. Time Extension Application 	$250.00 
C. Petition for Amendment 	
 1. Text Amendment 	$450.00 
 2. Map Amendment to R-1 or R-2 	$250.00 
 3. Map Amendment all other districts 	$400.00 
D. Special Use Application 	
 1. Planned Unit Development 	$900.00 
 2. Other Special Uses 	$500.00 
E. Zoning Interpretations and Appeals from Decisions of the Zoning Administrator 	$200.00 
F. Site plan reviews: 	
 1. Administrative site plan reviews, including sign reviews 	$100.00 
 2. All other site plan reviews 	$300.00 
 3. Signage appeals 	$200.00 
G. Zoning Certificates 	$30.00 
 
(Ord. 2015-45, 7-20-2015)  
20-2-2 - RULES FOR APPLICATION OF FEE STRUCTURE 
In application of this fee structure, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  For any requested public hearing including more than one variation or classification of petition or application, the filing fee shall be calculated on the basis of the highest fee for an individual variation or classification, plus $100.00 for each additional variation or classification. 
B.  For special uses, variances, site plan review and zoning amendments, a sign must be erected on the subject property advertising that there will be a public hearing on same. The City provides and erects sign for a fee of $50.00 per sign. 
C.  The actual amount deposited with the City shall exceed the flat fee by an amount to be determined by the City based on an estimate of the costs to be incurred which will be held in escrow to cover the cost of publishing legal notices, court reporter fees, and preparation of the transcript. Any balance remaining after all such costs are paid will be returned to the petitioner. 
D.  For additional or continued hearings, the petitioner shall add to the escrow account an additional amount to be determined by the City based upon an estimate of the costs to be incurred to cover legal notices, court reporter fees, and preparation of the transcript. In the event there are any accounts receivable pending and unpaid at the time of the additional or continued public hearing the public hearing may be canceled by the City until payment has been received. 
E.  Notwithstanding any of the above fee schedules, the City Council shall have the authority to waive in whole or in part any fee for any hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals/Planning and Zoning Commission for petitions by any governmental agency or for any other party when such a fee would present a hardship. An applicant for a hardship waiver must present his request in writing to the City Council outlining the degree of such hardship.  
CHAPTER 3 - BUILDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE 
SECTION 
 
20-3-1 - PERMIT FEES REQUIRED 
Every applicant, before being granted a permit, shall pay to the City Clerk a permit fee as noted in each construction classification. 
A.  In any case in which any work requiring a permit, as provided in this code, is begun without a permit having first been issued, the fee for such permit shall be double the amount as stated in this chapter. Such fee shall be in addition to, and independent of, any fine or penalty imposed for a violation of Section 15-1-20 of this code. 
B.  The building coordinator shall, after receiving a written request, refund 80% of any building permit fees paid for any building project that has been cancelled or abandoned prior to any construction activity. For building permit applications that have not been issued but the fee was submitted, the building coordinator shall refund the entire building permit fee. Plan review fees are not refundable. 
C.  The building permit fee shall be forfeited for any building project which has begun but has been suspended, revoked, abandoned or discontinued. 
(Ord. 2002-55, 11-18-2002; Ord. 2004-28, 4-5-2004)  
20-3-2 - GENERAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
The fees for the issuance of general building construction permits listed hereunder shall be as follows: 
A.  Fees for new structures, additions and enlargements are based on valuations as follows: 
1. New Principal Structures 	= $8.00 per $1,000 of building value 
2. Horizontal and vertical additions to principal structures 	= $8.00 per $1,000 of building value 
3. Attached garages basements and additions not designed for year-round use 	= $8.00 per $1,000 of building value 
4. Detached garages and accessory buildings 	= $12.00 per $1,000 of building value 
 
Building valuation shall be based on the square foot costs indicated in the table on file in the office of the Building Administrator. 
B.  The permit fee for all alterations, repairs, remodeling, and for all off-street parking facilities, shall be the sum of $12.00 for each $1,000.00 of the estimated cost or fraction thereof. 
C.  The fee for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or duplicate thereof for new residential construction or additions shall be $50.00 (one certificate required for each dwelling unit and final overall certificate for multiple residential structures). For new commercial and institutional construction or additions, the fee shall be $75.00. 
D.  The fee for advance water shall be $50.00 per new construction permit. 
E.  The fee for each driveway shall be $50.00. 
F.  The fee for posting of a demolition or other sign shall be $50.00. 
G.  The fee for demolishing any building or structure, except detached accessory structures, shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 12-1999; Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-3 - PLUMBING 
The fees for the issuance of permits for the installation and inspection of plumbing systems or any portions thereof including fixtures, drains, sprinkler systems, refrigeration systems and any other parts or units connected to such systems shall be as follows: 
A.  For the issuance of a permit covering the installation of a plumbing system including not more than five fixtures, $75.00. 
B.  In addition to A, for each additional fixture in excess of five, $10.00 per fixture. 
C.  For the issuance of a permit covering installation of a system for sprinkling and watering grounds and lawns, $75.00. 
D.  For the issuance of a permit for a water-cooled air-conditioning system, $75.00. 
E.  For the issuance of a permit covering the installation of an automatic building sprinkler system, the fee shall be $100.00 plus $1.00 per sprinkler head. 
F.  For the issuance of a permit covering the installation of a water heater, $30.00. 
(2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-4 - ELECTRICAL 
The fees for the issuance of electrical permits listed hereunder shall be as follows: 
A.  The minimum permit fee shall be $75.00. 
B.  In addition to A, the permit fee for new electrical work shall be based on the total floor area using outside wall dimensions. This charge shall be at the rate of $0.05 per square foot of total floor area. 
C.  The permit fee for each electrical service panel shall be $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-5 - FENCES 
The permit fee for the construction of a fence shall be $25.00 for each 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-6 - LAND GRADES 
The permit fee for any land grade alteration including the installation of a yard drain, berm or other landscaping shall be $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-7 - SWIMMING POOLS/SPAS 
The permit fee for the issuance of a swimming pool permit shall be as follows: 
A.  The permit fee for the erection or construction of an above-ground or in-ground swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be a minimum fee of $50.00 plus $12.00 for each $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fraction thereof. 
B.  See Section 20-3-4 above for electrical fee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-3-8 - SIGNS 
The fees for the issuance of sign permits listed hereunder shall be as follows: 
A.  The fee for a permit to erect an illuminated ground or wall sign shall be $75.00 for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
B.  The fee for a permit to erect a non-illuminated ground or wall sign shall be $40.00 for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
C.  The fee for a permit to erect a temporary sign shall be $30.00. 
D.  The fee for a permit to erect an awning shall be $30.00. 
E.  See Section 20-3-4E above for electrical fee.  
20-3-9 - ELEVATORS 
The fee for an elevator plan review shall be $100.00 and the fee for the first inspection shall be an additional $100.00 collected at the time the permit is issued. Any fees paid by the City of Park Ridge for additional inspections made by a private consultant on behalf of the City shall be collected before issuance of a certificate of inspection. The fee for the annual inspection shall be $60.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-55, 11-18-2002)  
20-3-10 - SOLAR HEATING 
The fee for a solar heating installation shall be $50.00, plus $0.25 per square foot of solar collector.  
20-3-11 - HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC) 
A.  The permit fee for single-family residential HVAC work shall be $75.00 per heating, air conditioning and blower unit plus $0.05 per square foot of total floor area for new ductwork. The floor area shall be based on the total floor area using the outside wall dimensions. 
B.  The permit fee for commercial, multi-family residential, or institutional HVAC work shall be $100.00 per heating, air conditioning and blower unit plus $12.00 for each $1,000.00 of estimated cost or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
CHAPTER 4 - INSPECTION FEES 
SECTION 
 
20-4-1 - PLAN REVIEW FEES 
At the time an application for a building permit is submitted to the Building Department, the applicant shall pay a Plan Review Fee, in accordance with the following schedule: 
Type of Structure 	Fee 
Single-family New 	$200.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
Residential Additions 	100.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
Residential Remodeling 	50.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
Multi-family New 	100.00 per unit + $0.02/sq. ft. 
Multi-family Remodeling 	50.00 per unit + $0.02/sq. ft. 
 
Commercial or Institutional 	Floor Area of project (Square Feet) 
0—999 	$300.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
1000—4999 	$500.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
5000 and over 	$600.00 + $0.02/sq. ft. 
Accessory Buildings and Structures 	$ 0.10/sq. ft. 
 
The plan review fee shall be separate from the permit fee; collected at the time the permit is issued, and shall be non-refundable. A separate plan review fee shall be charged for any revision in plans which requires a recalculation of bulk or density requirement or a re-evaluation of building, health, zoning, fire, engineering, or forestry requirements. In addition, the plan review fee shall also include any fees paid by the City of Park Ridge for plan reviews made by private consultants on behalf of the City and any administrative costs to secure and pay said consultants. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-4-2 - SUBDIVISION FEE 
At the time a proposed plat of subdivision is filed, the applicant shall pay a fee of $200.00, plus $50.00 for each lot in the proposed subdivision.  
20-4-3 - RE-INSPECTION FEE 
Re-inspection fee schedule per discipline and inspection type: 
Re-Inspection 	Fee 
First re-inspection 	$0.00 
First re-inspection not ready and failed to cancel 	$50.00 
Second re-inspection 	$100.00 
Third re-inspection 	$200.00 
Fourth re-inspection and for each subsequent re-inspection 	$300.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-20, 4-21-2014)  
CHAPTER 5 - AMBULANCE SERVICE FEE[1] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2003-32, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2006-71, 8-21-2006; Ord. 2008-29, 5-5-2008; Ord. 2008-74, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2011-29, 4-18-2011; Ord. 2014-10, 3-3-2014. 
 
20-5-1 - FEE IMPOSED—NON-RESIDENT 
The following fees for ambulance and life support services are imposed upon any non-resident to whom such services are provided, except that such fees shall not be imposed where a Park Ridge ambulance is rendering assistance to a Public Safety agency of another governmental entity and has entered into a mutual aid billing agreement with that Public Safety agency. In that instance, resident fees set forth in Section 20-5-2 will be imposed. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "non-resident" means any person whose actual domicile is outside the City of Park Ridge. 
Type of Service Fee 
A.  Basic life support ..... $  825.00 
B.  Advanced life support ..... 1,025.00 
C.  Advanced life support II ..... 1,175.00 
D.  Mileage charge (1 mile minimum) ..... 15.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-2-2016)  
20-5-2 - FEE IMPOSED—RESIDENT 
The following fees for ambulance and life support services are imposed upon a resident of the City of Park Ridge to whom such services are provided. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "resident" means any person whose actual domicile is within the City of Park Ridge. 
Type of Service Fee 
A.  Basic life support ..... $650.00 
B.  Advanced life support ..... 800.00 
C.  Advanced life support II ..... 950.00 
D.  Mileage charge (1 mile minimum) ..... 15.00 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-2-2016)  
20-5-3 - FEE IMPOSED—MEDICARE—RESIDENT AND NON-RESIDENT 
The then current Medicare rates will apply and be charged to a resident or non-resident who has Medicare coverage and to whom such services are provided. The current Medicare rates are published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services at cms.gov. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-2-2016)  
CHAPTER 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM[2] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2004-43, 6-21-2004. 
 
20-6-1 - CREATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM 
A.  Pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1, et seq., which authorizes municipalities to implement a system of administrative adjudication, there is hereby created a system of administrative adjudication of charges of Code violations for the City of Park Ridge. The system will authorize a hearing officer to conduct adjudicatory hearings of cases instituted by City Departments. 
B.  The City adopts Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1, et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between said statutes and this Article, this Article shall prevail. 
C.  The adoption of this Article does not preclude the City from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this Code. 
D.  The City adopts Sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 and 5/11-208.6, which authorize municipalities to implement a system of administrative adjudication for automated traffic law violations and parking, standing and vehicle compliance citations. The administrative adjudication of standing, parking and vehicle compliance citations are governed by the City's authority pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014)  
20-6-2 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of the Administrative Adjudication System of charges of Code violations is to provide a procedure by which charges of Code violations, including automated traffic law violations, can be equitably and efficiently adjudicated administratively by an Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-3 - JURISDICTION 
Those matters subject to the Administrative Adjudication System provided for by this Article are charges of violation of any regulation of the City of Park Ridge, so long as the relief sought is not a penalty of incarceration or a total fine in excess of $50,000.00, excluding allowable costs. The $50,000 limitation shall not apply to those cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the City.  
20-6-4 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, words or terms shall have the following meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended: 
Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device with one or more motor vehicle sensor(s) working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce Recorded Images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light signal in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision of this Code. 
Automated traffic law violation means a motor vehicle entering an intersection against a red signal indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or similar City Code, as described in Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
Certified report means a report concerning five or more unpaid fines or penalties for Automated Traffic Law Violations made by the City to the Secretary in accordance with Section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
Illinois Vehicle Code means 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq. 
Recorded images means images showing the time, date and location of an Automated Traffic Law Violation recorded by an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System on: (i) two or more photographs; (ii) two or more microphotographs; (iii) two or more electronic images; or (iv) a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
Secretary means the Illinois Secretary of State. 
Suspension notice means a notice of impending driver's license suspension issued pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and Section 13-20-3 of this Code. 
System means, individually, an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System or, collectively, Automated Traffic Law Enforcement Systems established in the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
Violation notice means an Automated Traffic Law Violation notice issued pursuant to Sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and the provisions of this Chapter. 
Vehicle compliance violation means the violation of any regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of City licenses or stickers and includes, but is not limited to, those violations set forth in Section 13-20-4 of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. 
(Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014)  
20-6-5 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS SUPERVISOR 
There is hereby established the Office of Administrative Hearings Supervisor. That Office shall be directed by an Administrative Hearings Supervisor, who shall be the City Manager, or his designee. The Administrative Hearings Supervisor's function is to expedite the prosecution and/or correction of Code violations subject to the jurisdiction of the Administrative Adjudication System. The Administrative Hearings Supervisor is authorized to manage the administrative adjudication process in the manner provided for in this Article, which shall include determining the qualifications of Administrative Hearing Officers, appointing Administrative Hearing Officers, and establishing such rules and regulations, as may be necessary for the effective operation of the Administrative Adjudication System. The City Manager may also appoint other persons to assist with the Administrative Adjudication System provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-6 - TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR 
Administrator means the person appointed as the City's Traffic Compliance Administrator of this Code who shall have the following powers: to adopt, distribute and process parking, standing, vehicle compliance and automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this Chapter; collect money paid as fines and penalties; operate the automated traffic law enforcement system; and make certified reports to the Secretary of State as required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. 2014-35, 8-14-2014)  
20-6-7 - QUALIFICATIONS OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER 
Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this Article, the Administrative Hearing Officers shall have successfully completed a formal training program that includes the following: 
A.  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the Administrative Hearing Officers shall preside; 
B.  Orientation to each subject area of the code violations they will adjudicate; 
C.  Observation of administrative hearings; and 
D.  Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. 
In addition, an Administrative Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years, and be in good standing with the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission of the Supreme Court of Illinois. An Administrative Hearing Officer must also not be a resident of the City of Park Ridge. 
(Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-8 - SCOPE OF AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICERS 
Administrative Hearing Officers shall preside over adjudicatory hearings. The authority of an Administrative Hearing Officer shall encompass all acts necessary to conduct fair and impartial adjudicatory hearings, including, but not limited to: 
A.  Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violation. 
B.  Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses. 
C.  At the request of any party or on the Administrative Hearing Officer's own motion, issuing subpoenas for the attendance of relevant witnesses and/or the production of relevant books, records, or other information. 
D.  Preserving the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence admitted into the record at the hearing. 
E.  Issuing a determination based upon a review of the notice of violation, citation, other charging document (hereinafter, "charging document") and on the evidence admitted, which determination shall be final for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. The determination shall be in writing, shall be signed by the Administrative Hearing Officer, shall be designated as finding(s), decision, and order, and shall include the fine, penalty or action with which the respondent must comply. 
F.  Upon finding a respondent liable for violating one or more charged Code provisions: 
1.  Imposing penalties as provided by the governing penalty provision, except, however, that in no event shall an Administrative Hearing Officer have authority to (i) impose a penalty of incarceration, or (ii) impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00, excluding allowable costs. When applicable, each day a Code provision is found to have been violated by the respondent shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense subjects the respondent to the penalty provided by the governing penalty provision. 
2.  Imposing, in addition to fines, administrative and/or enforcement costs and, when applicable, imposing costs incurred by the City for effecting compliance with Code provision(s) for which a respondent has been found liable. 
3.  Ordering, notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent to comply with Code provision(s) found to have been violated, and, if appropriate, ordering the respondent to post a compliance bond as provided by Section 20-6-15.B.1). 
4.  Ordering, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed, the respondent to perform a term of community service or to complete a chemical abuse counseling program as set forth in Sections 12-6-31 and 14-16-7 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
5.  Ordering forfeiture of all or part of bond money deposited by a defendant in a case involving a violation of the overweight provisions of Chapter 15 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/15-100 et seq., and Section 5/3-401(d) of the Illinois motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-401(d), if Defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation or fails to appear at the hearing. 
6.  Ordering forfeiture of bond money deposited by a defendant in a vehicle impoundment case in accordance with Article 13, Chapter 23 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code if the owner of record is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, fails to appear at the hearing, or fails to timely request a hearing. 
G.  Adhering to the policies, procedures, and legislation set forth in the City Code, except where discretion is specifically vested in the Administrative Hearing Officer; provided, however, that an Administrative Hearing Officer is authorized to waive the fine and/or costs that otherwise would be imposed upon finding a respondent liable for one or more Code violations when the Administrative Hearing Officer specifically finds as a matter of fact that the violation(s) occurred under such circumstances that, as a reasonable person, would constitute an excuse for the violation(s). 
H.  Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to ensure the clarity and completeness of the testimony and the record. 
I.  Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this Article, the rules adopted by the Administrative Hearings Supervisor for the conduct of administrative hearing, and other applicable law. 
(Ord. 2006-51, 5-19-2006; Ord. 2006-69, 8-21-2006; Ord. 2007-49, 6-4-2007; Ord. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-9 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
A.  All administrative hearings conducted by the Office of Administrative Hearings are open to the public and shall be presided over by a duly appointed Administrative Hearing Officer who is charged with providing the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard. 
B.  The City shall not be represented by an employee or other representative of the Office of Administrative Hearings Supervisor, provided, however, that documentary evidence, prepared by another Department of the City and submitted to the Office of Administrative Hearings, may be presented at the hearing by the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
C.  All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. For good cause shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion of the Administrative Hearing Officer. The purpose of administrative hearings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged Code violations, and accordingly, the request for, and the grant of, continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness permits. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Continuances shall not be granted for more than two months. 
D.  The Administrative Hearing Officer may issue subpoenas. 
E.  The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
F.  The Administrative Hearing Officer may permit persons to contest the merits of an alleged vehicular violation subject to the administrative adjudication procedures of this Article without attending a hearing, pursuant to the authority and procedures established by Sections 20-6-11(L) and 20-6-12(L). 
G.  No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, that the original or a legible copy of the charging document, issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified therein. 
H.  The Administrative Hearings Supervisor shall determine the manner in which the record shall be preserved. Such preservation may be made by tape recording or other appropriate means. Recording by any means by any member of the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the Administrative Hearings Supervisor. The record of all hearings before an Administrative Hearing Officer shall include a copy of the findings, decision, and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer's final determination. 
I.  At the conclusion of a hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue his final determination. If the Administrative Hearing Officer issues a final determination of liability, he may impose fines, assess costs, and make orders, all as provided by Section 20-6-8.F, and as are consistent with the specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated. 
J.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall inform the parties orally and in writing of his determination, which determination constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. Based on the charging document and the evidence admitted, the Administrative Hearing Officer may issue the following determinations: liable, not liable, or liable upon a plea of no contest. The Administrative Hearing Officer also may dismiss the case with or without prejudice or grant a properly made motion by the City voluntarily dismissing the case. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 3, 1-18-2016)  
20-6-10 - PROCEDURE FOR ALL CODE VIOLATIONS EXCEPT AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW AND PARKING, STANDING, AND VEHICLE COMPLIANCE CITATIONS 
All matters to be adjudicated by the Office of Administrative Hearings shall be commenced against the party alleged to have violated one or more Code provisions by issuing and serving upon that party a charging document and shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  The charging document shall be issued by a City officer or employee authorized to exercise Code enforcement authority and served as provided for in this Section 20-6-10.C. 
B.  Any charging document issued pursuant to this Section 20-6-10 shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name; City Department; position; and identification number, if applicable, of the person issuing the charging document; 
2.  The name and address of the person or entity being charged with one or more Code violations ("respondent"); 
3.  The name and address of the person to whom the charging document is given if that person is not the respondent; 
4.  The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated; 
5.  The date, time, and place of the alleged violation(s); 
6.  A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the charging document or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set forth in the charging document; 
7.  The complainant's name if the complainant is not the issuing City officer or employee. 
The City officer or employee shall certify the correctness of the information required by this Subsection 20-6-10.B.1 by signing his name to the charging document to be issued. Compliance with this Subsection 20-6-10.B.1 shall establish a prima facie case. 
C.  A charging document issued pursuant to Subsection 20-6-10.B.1 also shall set forth (a) the date, time and place of the adjudicatory hearing to be held with respect to the violation(s) alleged in the charging document and (b) the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held. 
1.  Said hearing shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all non-emergency situations, the respondent shall have at least 15 days after service of process to prepare for a hearing if requested by the respondent. For purposes of this subsection, "non-emergency situation" means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety or welfare. 
2.  The respondent named in a charging document, shall be given notice of the date of the adjudicatory hearing which may appear on the face of the notice of violation, citation, or other charging document. Notice of the hearing date may be given in any of the following ways: (i) by first class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at the respondent's last known address or if the respondent is a business entity, at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business; or, (ii) by personal service, (iii) by posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s) when the respondent is the owner or person in control of the property, or (iv) by any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons. 
3.  If service is provided by first class mail or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service, the 15-day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail or given to the commercial delivery service, as applicable. 
D.  The original or a legible copy of the notice of violation, citation, or other charging document shall be filed with the Office of Administrative Hearings as soon as practicable at the place and in the manner as the Administrative Hearings Supervisor directs. Upon receiving the original or legible copy of the charging document, the Administrative Hearings Supervisor shall select a hearing date and give respondent notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in Subsection 20-6-10.C, unless the charging document sets forth the date, time, and location of the hearing and was served personally on the respondent. 
E.  Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney or other agent, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas. 
F.  In a hearing regarding a vehicle impoundment pursuant to Article 13, Chapter 23 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code, any sworn or affirmed report, citation or ticket that (i) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties; and (ii) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the owner of record's liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014)  
20-6-11 - PROCEDURE FOR ALL PARKING, STANDING AND EQUIPMENT VIOLATIONS 
All parking, standing and equipment violations shall be commenced against the party alleged to have violated one or more Code provisions by issuing and serving upon that party a violation notice and shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  The violation notice shall be issued by a City officer or employee authorized to exercise Code enforcement authority and served as provided for in this Section 20-6-11(C). 
B.  Any violation notice issued pursuant to this Section 20-6-11 shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date, time and location of the violation; 
2.  The particular vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation alleged to have been violated; 
3.  Vehicle make and state registration number; 
4.  The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment; 
5.  The signature (which may be made by signing a certificate kept by the Administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by a computerized device while under his/her control) and identification number of the person issuing the notice; 
6.  A section entitled "request for hearing" which shall explain how an administrative hearing may be requested and shall state that a hearing shall be held within 30 days in accordance with this Chapter; and 
7.  A statement that payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation. 
C.  Service of the violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by: 
1.  Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle; or 
2.  Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present. 
D.  The original or a facsimile of the violations notice(s) shall be retained by the Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
E.  Any violation(s) notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, or any recorded image, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. 
F.  Violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) or any recorded image shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. 
G.  Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to pay the fine, to request a hearing or to contest the matter by mail, an additional notice shall be sent, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  The date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance or automated traffic enforcement regulation violation(s) notice(s). 
2.  The particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation alleged to have been violated. 
3.  The vehicle make and state registration. 
4.  The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment. 
5.  The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits. 
7.  A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation for the cited vehicle violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated. 
8.  A statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City. 
H.  Any additional notices shall be served by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State of Illinois, and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database, or if to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office database. Service of such notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
I.  A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability shall be sent following an appearance by the violator and a determination of liability or the failure to appear by the violator at a hearing and upon conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review procedures, as is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings: 
1.  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the City. 
2.  A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the City within the time specified may result in the City's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference. 
3.  A warning that the failure to pay the fine and penalty may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. 
4.  A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the City may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for one or more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s). 
J.  A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for a vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation may file a petition to set aside a determination of liability within 14 days after service by the City of a Notice of Determination of Liability. Such a petition shall be filed by sending it, together with any documentation in support thereof, to the Administrator, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the Administrator. The grounds for such petition shall be limited to (1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the Violation Notice was issued; (2) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question; or (3) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
K.  The schedule of fines shall be as set forth in Section 20-1-5 or Section 13-20-4, whichever is applicable, of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
L.  Nonresidents of the City who have been served vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in accordance with this section, may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Administrator within 30 days. The statement shall set forth any facts relevant to establishing a defense to the alleged violation. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Administrator. The acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing" after the due date or with cause, is at the discretion of the Administrator, and may be accepted for hearing consideration and decision. The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is contained in the violation notice. Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail. All other provisions of this section shall apply equally to nonresidents of this City. 
(Ord. No. 2014-35, 8-4-2014)  
20-6-12 - PROCEDURE FOR AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATIONS 
A.  Determination prior to violation notice. Before a Violation Notice may be issued for any Automated Traffic Law Violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or contracted by the City that based upon inspection of Recorded Images generated by the System, the motor vehicle was being operated so as to commit an Automated Traffic Law Violation. If the technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a Violation Notice shall not be issued. A Recorded Image of a violation obtained by the automated traffic law enforcement system and that has been inspected by a technician shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Code. 
B.  Violation notice. 
1.  A Violation Notice shall be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for an Automated Traffic Law Violation as recorded with the Secretary within 30 days after the Secretary notifies the City of the identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than 90 days after the violation. The original or a facsimile of a Violation Notice or, in the case of a Violation Notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the Violation Notice, shall be retained by the Administrator, and a record kept in the ordinary course of business. A Violation Notice issued and served in accordance with this Chapter, a copy of the Violation Notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the Violation Notice. The Violation Notice, copy or computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings. 
2.  The City shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within 60 days of the Notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within 60 days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. 
3.  The Notice of Violation shall include the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database; 
b.  The make (only if readily discernable and available) and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
c.  The violation charged/section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated; 
d.  The location where the violation occurred; 
e.  The date and time of the violation; 
f.  A copy of the recorded images and, for video images, an explanation of how to access the images on the Internet; 
g.  The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty should be paid (21 days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; 
h.  a statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or lessee; 
i.  The amount of the late fee; 
j.  A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified or to contest liability in a timely manner will result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle; 
k.  A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of a red light signal; 
l.  A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; 
m.  A statement explaining how an administrative hearing may be requested; and 
n.  The identification number of the person issuing the Notice. 
C.  Service of notices. All notices shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary, and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database or, if to the lessee of the cited vehicle, at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease, and, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office database. Service of such Notices shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
D.  Administrative hearings. The owner of a vehicle cited in a Violation Notice may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the Notice of Violation (21 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a Violation Notice likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Section 20-6-7 of this Code. 
E.  Defenses. The following may be considered defenses by the Hearing Officer for an Automated Traffic Law Violation: 
1.  That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation; 
2.  That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either (i) in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle; or (ii) as part of a funeral procession. 
3.  The driver received a Uniform Traffic Citation from a police officer at the time of the violation for the same incident 
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner. 
F.  Findings, decision and order. The hearing officer shall enter a Findings, Decision and Order at the conclusion of a hearing. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's Notice of Findings, Decision and Order shall become final: (a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or (b) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: (1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the Violation Notice was issued, (2) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the Violation in question, (3) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. A Findings, Decision and Order is final for purposes of judicial review when the Respondent appears for the hearing. 
G.  Notice of determination of liability. If the registered owner fails to pay or contest the Notice of Violation within 21 days, a Notice of Determination of Liability will be sent to the owner indicating that a fine in the amount of $100.00 is due to the City. The notice will also state that the owner can petition the City to set aside the determination of liability within 14 days. The owner will also be notified that the failure to pay the $100.00 fine within 14 days will result in a late fee of $100.00 added to the original fine. If the owner does not pay the $100.00 as specified in the notice or petition the City to set aside the determination within 14 days, a Notice of Final Determination of Liability, as described in Sections 20-6-9(I) and 20-6-11(I), will be mailed to the owner indicating, in addition, that the owner has exhausted all challenge options and the $100.00 fine and $100.00 late fee is a debt due and owing to the City and must be paid within 14 days. 
H.  Appealing determination of liability. A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for an Automated Traffic Law Violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a determination of liability within 14 days after service by the City of a Notice of Determination of Liability. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same, together with any documentation in support thereof, to the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the Administrator. The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to: (1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the Violation Notice was issued, (2) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the Violation in question, (3) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
I.  Notice of final determination of liability. A Notice of Final Determination of Liability shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of any judicial review proceedings or the expiration of the time to file for judicial review, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the City. 
2.  A warning that a failure to pay the fine and penalty due and owing the City within 14 days may result in the City's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with Section 11-208.3(f) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
3.  A warning that a failure to pay the fine and penalty may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more Violations. 
J.  Suspension notice. A Suspension Notice, as provided by Section 11-208.6 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6, and Section 13-20-3 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code, shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five or more unpaid Automated Traffic Law Violations. The Suspension Notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database. Service of a Suspension Notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
K.  Challenging certified reports. 
1.  If the Administrator provides a Suspension Notice to a vehicle owner and subsequently makes a Certified Report to the Secretary, the subject vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the Certified Report in writing. To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the Certified Report: (1) that the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or vehicles receiving five or more Automated Traffic Law Violations on the date or dates such Violation Notices were issued, or (2) that the person already paid the fines or penalties for the five or more Automated Traffic Law Violations indicated on the Certified Report. Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand-delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person receives notice from the Secretary that the person's driver's license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the Secretary is presented with a notice from the City certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the person's name on the Certified Report was in error. 
2.  The Administrator shall notify the Secretary of State whenever a person named in the Certified Report has paid the previously recorded fine or penalty or whenever the City determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein. 
L.  Non-appearance procedures. Those who receive Violation Notices may contest the merits of the alleged Automated Traffic Law Violation without attending a hearing by sending a notarized statement, together with any supporting documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested, within 21 days after service of the Violation Notice. Such a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be entered. The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts and the facts contained in the Violation Notice. 
M.  Penalties. The owner (or lessee) of a motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of $100.00 per Automated Traffic Law Violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid within 14 days after service of a Notice of Determination of Liability or a Findings, Decision and Order, an additional $100.00 late payment penalty shall be imposed. A penalty shall not apply if the driver of the motor vehicle received a Uniform Traffic Citation from a police officer at the time of the violation.  
20-6-13 - LOCATION OF AUTOMATED TRAFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM 
The Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System consists of the devices that have one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light signal in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision of this Code. 
Devices shall be installed at the following location(s): 
Westbound 	Oakton 	at 	Northwest Hwy 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-14 - REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS 
A.  City Representation: The case for the City may be presented by a City employee or by an attorney designated by the corporation Counsel but not by an employee or other representative of the Office of Administrative Hearings, except as allowed by Section 20-6-9.B. 
B.  Respondent Representation: The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent or by an attorney or agent of the respondent. An attorney or agent appearing at an adjudicatory hearing on behalf of a respondent shall present the Administrative Hearing Officer with a signed appearance form stating, on oath or affirmation, that he or she has been authorized by the respondent to represent the respondent at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-15 - DEFAULT 
A.  If at the time set for hearing, the respondent, or his attorney or agent of record, fails to appear, the Administrative Hearing Officer may enter a default judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines and assess costs. A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner permitted by this Article and applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, shall apprise the respondent of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and shall also apprise the respondent of the availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
B.  A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file a motion with the Office of Administrative Hearings to set aside the default judgment and request a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed at any time if the respondent alleges lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction; in all other cases, the motion must be filed within 21 days of entry of the default judgment excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. A motion to set aside a default judgment shall set forth the reason(s) the respondent failed to appear on the original hearing date. An Administrative Hearing Officer shall hear and rule on the motion. If the Administrative Hearing Officer grants the motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged Code violation(s) set forth in notice of violation, citation, or other charging document unless the respondent requests another hearing date and presents good cause for continuing the hearing. 
C.  If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this Section 20-6-14, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the City as a result of the vacated default judgment. 
D.  For automated traffic law violations, the person may petition to set aside a Notice of Determination of Liability pursuant to Section 20-6-11.H and may petition to set aside a Notice of Findings, Decision and Order, if the person failed to appear at a hearing, pursuant to Section 20-6-11.F. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-16 - FINES; COMPLIANCE BOND 
A.  All fines and other monies to be paid to the City in accordance with this Article shall be remitted to the City and deposited in the appropriate City account as designated by the City Manager. All fines and other payments must be made within ten calendar days. 
B.  1.  In order to ensure that Code violations are remedied in a timely manner, an Administrative Hearing Officer, upon issuing a determination of liability that includes an order of compliance, may order the respondent in the case to obtain a bond to ensure respondent's timely compliance with the Code provision(s) found to have been violated. Any bond ordered pursuant to this Subsection 20-6-15.B.1 shall name the City as beneficiary and shall be in the amount specified by the Administrative Hearing Officer, provided that the amount of the bond shall be reasonably related to the cost of compliance. Any bond issued as a result of an Administrative Hearing Officer's order is subject to review and modification by the City Manager as to form and amount. If the respondent fails to remedy in a timely manner the Code violation(s) for which a bond has been ordered and issued and the City undertakes remediation or otherwise expends funds related to the Code violation(s) for which a bond has been ordered and issued, the Administrative Hearing Officer, after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, may issue an order permitting the City to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall order the bond amount, less the reasonable costs incurred by the City, returned to the respondent upon proof of compliance with the Code provision(s) found to have been violated. 
2.  In the event that a respondent, who was ordered to secure a bond as provided by Subsection 20-6-15.B.1, seeks judicial review of that portion of the Administrative Hearing Officer's order requiring a bond and prevails on that issue, the City shall release the bond, and if the City has drawn against the bond, the City shall refund to the respondent the total amount drawn within 30 days of receiving a copy of the reviewing court's mandate. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 2-21-2005; Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-17 - ENFORCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER'S ORDER 
A.  Any fine and any administrative, enforcement, or compliance costs imposed by an Administrative Hearing Officer's order that remain unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be a debt due and owing the City and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
B.  After the expiration of the period for which judicial review may be sought, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the determination of liability of an Administrative Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction, except for automated traffic law violations. At such time, the Administrative Hearings Supervisor shall send a notice of final determination of liability to respondent. 
C.  Any fine, penalty, and/or cost remaining unpaid after the notice of final determination of liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and owing the City. Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty within 14 days of the notice may result in a lien against the respondent's property or such other remedies as may be available by law, including the denial of the issuance or renewal of licenses or permits pursuant to Chapter 6 of this Article 20. 
D.  In any case in which a respondent fails to comply with an Administrative Hearing Officer's order to correct a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the City to enforce the Administrative Hearing Officer's order, including but not limited to attorney's fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or an Administrative Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the City. Prior to any expenses being fixed by an Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to this Subsection 20-6-16.D, the respondent shall be provided with notice that directs the respondent to appear at a hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply with the Administrative Hearing Officer's order. The Notice shall set the place and the time for the hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date the Notice is served. Notice may be served by first class mail or by an overnight or two-day commercial delivery service and the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was personally served, deposited in the mail or placed with the overnight or commercial delivery service. 
E.  Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City from enforcing or seeking to enforce any order of an Administrative Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
20-6-18 - ELECTION OF REMEDIES 
In no case may the Office of Administrative Hearings conduct an adjudicatory hearing for an alleged Code violation where the remedy provided for is a punishment of imprisonment. Nothing in this Article, however, shall preclude the City from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to adjudicate any ordinance violation or an ordinance violation, which provides the remedy of imprisonment, or from petitioning a court of competent jurisdiction to impose the remedy of imprisonment for failure to comply with an order of an Administrative Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30, 4-20-2009)  
CHAPTER 7 - PUBLIC WORKS FEES[3] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006. 
 
20-7-1 - STORM WATER DETENTION FEE 
When required by 11-3-9, the developer or owner shall pay to the City, a fee in the amount of $30.00 per cubic foot of required storm water detention not provided; however, such fee shall not exceed five percent of the construction cost of the development as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 2011-04, 1-17-2011)  
20-7-2 - CONSTRUCTION RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS 
Unless otherwise provided by law, franchise, license or similar agreement, upon issuance of any permit for construction on a City Right-of-Way, the applicant shall pay a Permit Fee of: 
1.  Seventy five dollars for each inspection required by the Director of Public Works for every 
a.  Opening in any Right-of-Way; 
b.  Construction of curb and gutter, driveway approach, sidewalk, sprinkler system, or Freestanding Facility; 
c.  Land grade alteration, restoration site, water tap, or sewer tap; 
d.  Dumpster or equipment that disrupts the Right-of-Way. 
For any two of the foregoing inspections at the same time, the fee shall be a total of $100.00. 
2.  The fee for opening a street shall be $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-3 - WATER TAPS 
The following fee shall be charged for water taps: 
1" Tap 	$450.00 
1½" Tap 	 550.00 
2" Tap 	 600.00 
Over 2" Tap 	The contractor is responsible for providing the materials and performing the tap. 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-4 - WATER METERS 
All meters will be charged at City cost plus a $25.00 administrative fee. 
The following shall be charged for water meters: 
A.  Disc Meters 
5/8 " 	$ 80.00 
¾" 	 110.00 
1" 	 150.00 
1½" 	 300.00 
 
B.  Compound Meters 
2" 	$1,000.00 
3" 	Market Price 
4" 	Market Price 
6" 	Market Price 
Turbo Meters 	Market Price 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 2015-35, 06-01-2015)  
20-7-5 - SEWER CONNECTION FEE FOR NEW CONTRUCTION 
The fee for sewer connections shall be $200.00 for a single-family building and $150.00 per unit for multi-family buildings. For all other types of construction, the fee shall be $100.00 for the first 1,000 square feet of the building and $50.00 for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of the building thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-6 - NEW WATER SERVICE CONNECTION FEE 
Whenever a new single-family building is being connected to the City water system for the first time and as a result adds a new service to the City water system, the fee shall be $350.00. Whenever any commercial, institutional or multi-family building is being connected to the City water system for the first time and as a result adds a new service to the City water system, the fee shall be $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-7 - TAP INSPECTION FEE 
There is hereby established the charge of $75.00 as the fee payable to the City of Park Ridge for its inspection of the physical tap onto either the water or sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-8 - PARKWAY TREE CARE 
There is hereby established the charge of $300.00 for the fertilization, mulching and aeration of trees located on parkways adjoining a property where either a new house or an addition is being constructed. Such fee may be waived if, in the opinion of the City Forester, such construction does not affect the health of the trees on the adjoining parkway. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
20-7-10 - UTILITY PLAN REVIEW FEE 
At the time an application for a permit to install any utility on, over, above, along, upon, under, or across, or within any City Right-of-Way is submitted to the Director of Public Works, the applicant shall pay a Plan Review Fee in amount of $500.00 to defray the reasonable cost to the City for reviewing the application. The plan review fee shall be separate from the permit fee; collected at the time the permit is issued, and shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-49, 6-19-2006)  
CHAPTER 8 - CITATIONS FOR OFFENSES EXCLUDING PARKING OFFENSES[4] 
SECTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
History— Ord. No. 2007-37, 5-7-2007. 
 
20-8-1 - APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER 
This Chapter shall apply to all offenses, not including parking violations, vehicle sticker violations, dog and cat licensing violations and all other offenses covered by Section 20-1-1, et seq. of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
20-8-2 - ISSUANCE OF CITATION 
A peace officer or conservator of the peace, including but not limited to an environmental health officer, building official, building inspector, zoning official, city forester, forester, city engineer, public works director and assistant director of public works, is authorized to issue a ticket for a violation of Articles 5, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, and 22 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code and of the City of Park Ridge Zoning Ordinance. In lieu of issuing a ticket that requires an appearance in court or before the Administrative Hearing Officer, may issue a citation to the offender that requests the offender to make payment in an amount applicable to the alleged violation as set forth in Section 20-8-5 as settlement of said violation claim; and informing the offender that upon failure to settle, the offender will be required to appear before the Administrative Hearing Officer to contest the violation. 
In addition to the Articles set forth above and described in more detail in Section 20-8-5, citations may also be issued for such other violations as the Director of Community Preservation and Development or the Director of Public Works may, by policy, determine to be appropriate for settlement and compromise as described in this Chapter. In determining which violations shall be subject to such a settlement and compromise, the Director of Community Preservation and Development and/or the Director of Public Works shall give consideration to the severity of the violation, the necessity for judicial imposition of a penalty, the administrative impact of court appearances by peace officers, as defined above, and the effectiveness of such procedures in determining and correcting violations. In the case of violations of a continuing nature, the violator may be required to present evidence of correction of the violation before the citation may be settled and compromised.  
20-8-3 - PAYMENT WITHIN FOURTEEN DAYS 
Pursuant to said citation, the person accused of the violation may settle and compromise the violation claim with respect to such ordinance violation by paying to the City the applicable amount as set forth in Section 20-8-5 hereof, within a period to be specified in said citation - not more than 14 days of the time the citation is issued. The payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the citation.  
20-8-4 - NOTICE TO APPEAR 
In the event that the person issued a citation fails to settle and pay the citation within the prescribed time, or within a period of time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon him), then the individual will be required to appear before the Administrative Hearing Officer for a hearing, as provided for in Section 20-6-1 et seq. of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
20-8-5 - PAYMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
The violation described in a citation issued pursuant to this Chapter may be settled, compromised and paid pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, in the amount set forth on the citation and in the following schedule: 
A.  In the event that payment is made prior to the date specified on the citation, the amount set forth on the citation, which is within the range of $50.00 to $500.00, shall be accepted as settlement and payment. 
B.  In the event that payment has not been made prior to the date specified in said citation, a notice shall be sent to the violator that the original amount set forth on the citation plus a late fee of $15.00 shall be accepted as settlement and payment if paid within 14 days of the notice. 
C.  In the event that payment has not been made prior to the date specified on the notice, a second and final notice shall be sent to the violator that the original amount set forth on the citation plus an additional late fee of $ 25.00 shall be accepted as settlement and payment if paid within 14 days of the notice. 
D.  If the amount listed in the second and final notice is not paid within 14 days of the final notice, the alleged violator will be required to attend a hearing on the date specified in the second and final notice. If the alleged violator does not pay the amount listed in the second notice, including the late fees, within 14 days and does not appear at the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer will enter a finding of guilty and impose a fine and/or costs. The Hearing Officer will issue a Notice of Determination of Liability to the alleged violator in accordance with the default provisions set forth in Section 20-6-10 of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. 
E.  Nothing set forth in Subsections A, B, and C of this Section 20-8-4 shall limit the ability of the Administrative Hearing Officer to set and determine the fine within the minimum and maximum limits for the offense as set forth in the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
F.  Nothing set forth herein shall limit the ability of any alleged violator to request, at any time before the entry of a final determination of liability, a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer to determine liability for the violation or to contest the violation in accordance with Section 20-6-1 et seq. of the Municipal Code of the City of Park Ridge. In addition, nothing set forth herein shall limit the ability of any violator to seek judicial review of a final determination of liability in accordance with Illinois Administrative Review Law.  
20-8-6 - FEE FOR COLLECTION 
In addition to any other remedy or method provided in this code or by other law for collection of fines or other debts owed to the City, services of a commercial collection agency may be used. The Finance Director shall establish rules regarding circumstances in which a collection agency will be used. Any fine or other debt owed to the City, which is referred to a collection agency, shall be increased by an amount sufficient to offset the additional cost to the City of the collection agency services.  
20-8-7 - NOTICE TO APPEAR FOR COMMISSION PROCEEDINGS 
Any person who is required to appear before a City board or commission in connection with a ticket, citation, or other notice of violation must be provided with advance notice of the date and time of the hearing or meeting of the board or commission. Notice of the hearing or meeting date may be given in any of the following ways: (i) by first class mail, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at the respondent's last known address or if the respondent is a business entity, at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business; (ii) by personal service; (iii) by posting upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation when the respondent is the owner or person in control of the property; or (iv) by any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , § 4, 1-18-2016)  
ARTICLE 21 - HELISTOPS 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - REGULATION OF HELISTOP FACILITIES 
SECTION 
 
21-1-1 - DEFINITIONS 
Helicopter: Any vehicle whose support in the air is normally derived from the vertical component of force produced by airfoils mechanically rotated about an approximately vertical axis. 
Helistop: Any area used or to be used for the landing or take-off of helicopters or other steep gradient aircraft capable of hovering, but does not afford re-fueling, maintenance or repair facilities and is for the accommodation of a single helicopter. 
A.  Public Helistop: Any helistop which is open for use to any helicopter capable of using such helistop regardless of ownership or control. 
B.  Private Helistop: Any helistop which is owned or controlled by the owner or occupant of the premises for the exclusive use of said owner, occupant, his guest or patrons.  
21-1-2 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to construct, establish, maintain or operate a helistop within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained a permit to do so. 
(Ord. 2012-42, 9-4-2012)  
21-1-3 - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE 
Application for a helistop permit shall be made in writing to the City Manager on forms prescribed therefor. The City Manager shall make an investigation as to the financial responsibility and general fitness of the applicant and shall make strict inquiry and investigation of the proposed helistop as to whether or not it will jeopardize the public welfare and safety because of its location, layout or proposed method of operation and whether or not there is a public need for it and if it is in the public interest if it is proposed as a public facility. Within 60 days after an application has been submitted or as soon as FAA airspace approval is received, whichever is later, the City Manager shall made a determination approving or disapproving the same. No permit shall be issued unless the application therefor shall be approved by the City Manager and any disapproval shall contain a statement of the reasons for such disapproval. All applications for the issuance of a renewal permit hereunder shall likewise be submitted to the City Manager for approval. Helistop permits shall not be transferable and shall expire on April 30 next after their issuance.  
21-1-4 - STANDARDS FOR APPLICATION; APPROVAL 
The City Manager shall not issue a permit to an applicant unless: 
A.  The applicant provides evidence satisfactory to the City Attorney that the premises on which the helistop is located or proposed to be located is not subject to enforceable deed restrictions that would prohibit its use for such purpose; and 
B.  The applicant presents written airspace approval of the Federal Aviation Administration for the operation of the proposed or established helistop. 
In determining whether an application shall be approved for a permit for the use and operation of any proposed helistop, the City Manager shall take into consideration whether the financial responsibility, experience, character and general fitness of the applicant are such as to command the confidence of the public in the safe and efficient operation of the helistop. The City Manager shall further take into consideration the location, size and layout of the proposed helistop; the relationship of the same to established airports, heliports and helistops and/or to a nation-wide, state-wide or City-wide plan for airports, heliports or helistops; whether there are safe areas available for expansion purposes if expansion is anticipated; whether the adjoining area is free from obstruction based on a proper glide ratio; the nature of the terrain; the nature of the uses to which the proposed helistop will be put, and if there is a public need and it is in the public interest if it is proposed as a public facility.  
21-1-5 - ABANDONMENT, ALTERATION OR CHANGE OF STATUS 
It shall be unlawful and an offense to abandon, alter or change the status of any helistop for which a permit has been issued without prior written approval of the City Manager and written airspace approval of the Federal Aviation Administration. Application to enlarge, modify, activate, deactivate or reline or otherwise substantially change the surface of that part of a helistop that is used or intended to be used for the landing or take-off of helicopters shall be submitted in writing to the City Manager 30 days prior to the intended commencement of such alteration and shall not be commenced until written airspace approval has been obtained from the Federal Aviation Administration and the City Manager has been provided with a true copy thereof.  
21-1-6 - APPLICATION MISREPRESENTATION 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to misrepresent the kind and character of any helistop to be operated or any other fact or statement made in an application for a permit hereunder. Any misrepresentation made for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this Chapter shall be cause for revocation of permit in the mode and manner prescribed in Section 21-1-11 hereof.  
21-1-7 - LANDINGS AND TAKE-OFFS OF HELICOPTER; EXCEPTIONS 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to take off in or land any aircraft within the City at any point, except at helistops for which a permit has been issued.  
21-1-8 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish and promulgate rules and regulations in connection with the granting of permits and the design, construction, establishment, maintenance and operation of helistops as may be necessary to safeguard the public upon or beyond the limits of helistops, which rules and regulations may include, but not be limited to, provisions as to size and minimum operating requirements and standards, provisions for control and prevention of fire hazards, prevention of traffic congestion at helistops, and elimination, control and prevention of all other hazards on helistops which may endanger the lives and property of neighboring residents and airport users. Provided, such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval by the City Council and shall not be in conflict with any rules or regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration. At no time shall any approach, landing or take-off be made in such a direction as to pass over any property used for residential purposes with the City.  
21-1-9 - PUBLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
Whenever the City Manager shall have promulgated rules and regulations, and the same have been placed in effect as in this Chapter provided, the said City Manager shall have the authority and it shall be his duty within the limits of budgeted funds available to distribute copies of said regulations to holders of licenses issued hereunder as well as other interested persons. Provided, that a copy of such rules and regulations, with the date of promulgation and approval noted thereon, must be filed with the City Clerk.  
21-1-10 - INSPECTION 
For the purpose of insuring compliance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the City Manager or his designated assistants or employees may enter upon, inspect and examine at reasonable hours the premises of any helistop for which a permit has been issued under the provisions hereof, or which is subject to the provisions hereof.  
21-1-11 - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 
The City Manager shall have authority to order the suspension or revocation of any permit issued hereunder for failure to comply with the terms of this Chapter; or failure within the time prescribed, or if no time has been prescribed, within a reasonable time, to develop a proposed site as a helistop; failure to comply with the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder; or for the violation by permit holder of any laws of the State of Illinois or other ordinances of the City. Such order of revocation or suspension shall be accomplished in the following manner: A written notice shall be served upon the permit holder specifying the causes of the contemplated order of suspension or revocation and requiring him to appear before the city Manager at a time and place therein specified not less than five days after service of such notice and show cause why such permit should not be ordered suspended or revoked. At such hearing the permit holder shall be confronted with the evidence supporting the charges against him and he, or his counsel, may introduce evidence relating to such charges; after the hearing the City Manager may within ten days issue his order suspending or revoking such permit. Provided, however, should cited permit holder or his counsel fail to appear for the hearing as provided herein, the order suspending or revoking his permit shall become final upon its issuance.  
21-1-12 - APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL 
The following orders of the City Manager shall be final ten days after the date thereof; any order revoking or suspending any permit issued hereunder; any order disapproving the application for a permit. Prior to the expiration of said ten-day period, but not thereafter, any person aggrieved by such order may appeal therefrom to the City Council by filing written notice with the City Clerk. Upon the filing of such notice, the City Manager shall forthwith transmit to the City Clerk a copy of all his records and orders pertaining thereto. The action of the City Council reversing, sustaining or modifying the order of the City Manager shall be final. Upon any order of the City Manager becoming final, the City Manager shall make appropriate notation on the subject permit, suspension or revocation shall thereupon take effect and it shall be the duty of the City Manager to so notify the interested permit holder.  
21-1-13 - PENALTY 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation shall be permitted to exist, and shall be punishable as such.  
21-1-14 - INJUNCTION, RELIEF 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter may be enjoined by a suit filed by the City in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to other penalty provisions.  
21-1-15 - NONLIABILITY OF CITY 
The City in no event shall be liable for any personal injuries or property damages occasioned in any way in connection with construction, establishment, maintenance or operation of any helistop for which a permit is issued under the provisions of this Chapter.  
21-1-16 - SEVERABILITY 
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect the provisions or application of this Chapter, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.  
21-1-17 - NONAPPLICATION OF PROVISIONS 
None of the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to apply to activities conducted by Federal, State or municipal governments or agencies.  
ARTICLE 22 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
CHAPTER:  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 
 
22-1-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article.  
22-1-2 - LEGISLATIVE FINDING 
It is hereby found that there exist, and may in the future exist, within the City, premises, buildings, structures or parts thereof, which by reason of their structure, equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use or occupancy affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental, and social well-being of persons and families), safety, and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions, and to achieve and maintain such levels of residential environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety, and general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum property maintenance standards are required.  
22-1-3 - PURPOSES 
It is hereby declared that the purpose of this Article is to protect, preserve, and promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of the people, to prevent and control the incidence of communicable diseases, to reduce environmental hazards to health, to regulate privately and publicly owned buildings or structures for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health, and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all buildings now in existence or hereafter constructed. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of this Article is to insure that the quality of housing is adequate for protection of public health, safety and general welfare, including: Establishment of minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, and thermal conditions, for safety from fire and accidents, for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy, and for an adequate level of maintenance; determination of the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of buildings or structures; and provision for the administration and enforcement thereof.  
22-1-4 - SCOPE 
The provisions of this Article shall apply uniformly to the construction, maintenance, use and occupancy of all residential and commercial buildings and structures and accessory structures, where applicable, and shall apply uniformly to the alteration, repair, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of all existing residential and commercial buildings and structures and accessory structures, within the City irrespective of when or under what code or codes such buildings or structures were originally constructed or rehabilitated.  
22-1-5 - TITLE 
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Park Ridge, hereinafter referred to as "this Article."  
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 
 
22-2-1 - DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article: 
Accessory building: A building, structure or part of a building which is secondary or subordinate in capacity or use from the main or principal building or structure on the same premises. 
Approved: Approved by the Housing Inspector or state authority having such administrative authority. 
Building: Any structure designed, built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Dormitory: A building or a group of rooms in a building used for institutional living and sleeping purposes by persons not members of the same family group. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation purposes, including single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers or lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses. 
Dwelling, multiple family: A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family: A dwelling which forms no more than one single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Dwelling, two-family: A dwelling containing two dwelling units only. 
Dwelling unity: A portion of a dwelling in which a room or group of rooms forms a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation. 
Egress: An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit from buildings. 
Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Housing Inspector or state authority having such administrative authority. 
Guest: An individual who shares a dwelling or a dwelling unit in a non-permanent status for not more than 30 days, without payment of rent. 
Habitable room: Any room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, corridors, closets, storage spaces, stairways, utility rooms or similar spaces. 
Heated water: Water heated to a temperature of not less than 120° F at the outlet. 
Heating device: All furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking and heating stoves, and ranges, and other similar devices. 
Household: A parent or parents and children of such parent or parents or a group of not more than five persons who are not related as parents and children but who maintain a common household in a dwelling or dwelling unit. This definition does not include convents, sororities, fraternities or similar uses and does not include occasional guests or domestic employees. 
Housing inspector: The administrative official of the City designated as such by the Director of Community Preservation and Development. 
Infestation: The presence, within or around a building of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
Litter: Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste. Litter includes, but is not limited to any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, wood, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of dead animal, animal or human excreta, any nauseous or offensive material or liquid of any kind, any object which creates a public health or safety hazard, public nuisance or a fire hazard or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly. 
Meaning of certain words: Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming units," "building," "premises," "structure" are used in the Article they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
Occupant: Any individual, over one year of age, living, sleeping, working, cooking, or eating in or having possession of a building or portion thereof; except that in dwellings and dwelling units a guest shall not be considered an occupant. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care, control, or management of a building, or part thereof. 
Owner: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
1.  Shall have legal or beneficial title to any premise, building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or 
2.  Shall have charge, care, control of any premise, building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Article and of Rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
Permissible occupancy: The maximum number of individuals permitted to reside in a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or dormitory. 
Person: Shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation association, partnership, cooperative or governmental agency. 
Plumbing: Shall mean and include all the following supplied facilities and equipment: Gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and other similar supplied fixtures, and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
Premises: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any building or structure. 
Privacy: The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound by unwanted individuals. 
Property connected: Connected in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of this City of Park Ridge as from time to time enforced; provided, however, that the application of this definition shall not require the alteration or replacement of any connection in good working order and not constituting a hazard of life or health. 
Rooming house: Any dwelling, other than a hotel or motel, or that part of any dwelling, containing one or more rooming units, and/or one or more dormitory rooms and in which persons either individually or as families are housed with or without meals being provided. 
Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes. 
Space heater: A self-contained, heating appliance of either the convection type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only a limited space. 
Supplied: Paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner, operator, or agent. 
Temporary housing: Any tent, trailer, mobile home, or any other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached in the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Toxic substance: Any chemical product applied on the surface of or incorporated into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels. 
Vermin proofing: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress and egress of insects, rodents, birds and other pests to or from a given space or building, or from gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by insects, rodents, birds and other pests by climbing, burrowing or other methods, by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing and other methods approved by the Housing Inspector. 
Undefined words: Words not specifically defined in this Article shall have the common definitions set forth in a standard dictionary. 
(Ord. 2011-19, 3-21-2011)  
CHAPTER 3 - SANITATION RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS 
SECTION 
 
22-3-1 - PREMISES FIT FOR OCCUPANCY 
No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling or dwelling unit unless it and the premises are free of any accumulation of litter, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State and the City.  
22-3-2 - OWNER MAINTAINS PREMISES 
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a sanitary condition and free of any accumulation of litter, the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.  
22-3-3 - OCCUPANT MAINTAINS PREMISES 
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a sanitary condition and free of any accumulation of litter that part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he occupies and controls.  
22-3-4 - STORAGE OF LITTER 
Litter storage and disposal shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Park Ridge Municipal Code.  
22-3-5 - EXTERMINATION 
Every occupant of a single family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of vermin including insects, rodents, birds or other pests, on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a vermin proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.  
22-3-6 - SANITARY AND OPERABLE 
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing and electrical fixtures, every other facility and piece of equipment or utility therein in a safe, sanitary, and operable condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.  
CHAPTER 4 - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES FOR TENANT OCCUPIED DWELLING UNITS 
SECTION 
 
22-4-1 - KITCHEN FACILITY 
Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall be equipped with the following: 
A.  A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the Housing Inspector and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the Housing Inspector. 
B.  A stove, or similar device for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 45° F but more than 32° F under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient, installation and operation of said store, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided.  
22-4-2 - TOILET FACILITY 
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a non-habitable room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be operated properly, and shall be properly connected to a sewer system which is approved by the Housing Inspector. In dwelling units with a single toilet facility, access to such room shall be provided without passing through a sleeping room.  
22-4-3 - LAVATORY 
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or, if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the Housing Inspector and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and which is properly connected to a sewer system approved by the Housing Inspector. Water inlets for lavatory sinks shall be located above the overflow rim of these facilities.  
22-4-4 - BATHING FACILITY 
Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the Housing Inspector and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the Housing Inspector. Water inlets for bathtubs shall be located above the overflow rim of these facilities.  
22-4-5 - ACCESS 
One means of access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other dwelling unit.  
CHAPTER 5 - MAXIMUM DENSITY REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 
 
22-5-1 - AMOUNT OF SPACE 
Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall contain at least 350 square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant and at least 150 additional square feet of habitable floor space for every additional occupant. Total habitable floor space shall exclude rooms or portions of rooms used for cooking purposes. Each bedroom shall have at least 80 square feet of habitable floor space for the first occupant of that bedroom and at least 50 additional square feet of habitable floor space for each additional occupant of that bedroom. Floor space where the ceiling height is less than seven feet may not be included in calculating total habitable room area. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2011-19, 3-21-2011)  
22-5-2 - NUMBER OF PEOPLE 
Not more than one household shall occupy a dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 2011-19, 3-21-2011)  
CHAPTER 6 - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION 
SECTION 
 
22-6-1 - LIGHTING 
Every room used for cooking or sleeping purposes shall have at least one window facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, computed on the basis of clear glass surface, for every room used for cooking or sleeping purposes shall be seven percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever a window of any such room faces or abuts on any structure, located less than three feet from the window or a window is below grade and the window well enclosure or the earth is less than three feet from the window, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
22-6-2 - VENTILATION 
Every habitable room, water closet compartment, bathroom and any room used for eating or cooking shall have at least one window which can easily be opened or such other device as well adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every room used for cooking or sleeping purposes shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size as required in 22-6-1, except where there is supplied some device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Housing Inspector. All openings to the outside shall be screened to prevent the entrance of insects, birds, rodents and other pests.  
22-6-3 - MINIMUM ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS 
Every dwelling or dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. The minimum capacity of such services and the minimum number of outlets and fixtures and some specific electrical regulations shall be as follows: 
A.  Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be supplied with at least two 15-ampere circuits and such circuits shall not be shared with another dwelling unit. 
B.  Every single-family dwelling shall be supplied with at least four 15-ampere circuits. 
C.  Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate wall type duplex electric convenience outlets, or one such duplex convenience outlet and one supplied wall or ceiling type electric light fixture. No duplex outlet shall serve more than two fixtures or appliances. 
D.  Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring. 
E.  Non-habitable rooms, such as water closet compartments, bathrooms, laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and public halls shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. 
F.  Every switch, outlet, and junction box shall be covered by a protective plate. 
G.  Electrical wires shall not be frayed or bare. 
H.  The capacity of the wires shall not be exceeded by the fuse or circuit breaker capacity. 
I.  The electrical service panel shall be properly grounded to the water pipe of the City water system.  
22-6-4 - HALLWAY LIGHTING 
Every public hall and stairway inside or outside of every two-family or multiple family dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or artificial light at all times so as to provide all parts thereof with at least ten foot-candles of light at the tread or floor level. Every public hall and stairway inside or structures containing not more than two dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed instead of full-time lighting.  
CHAPTER 7 - MINIMUM THERMAL STANDARDS 
SECTION 
 
22-7-1 - ADEQUATE HEAT PROVIDED 
Every dwelling shall have heating equipment and appurtenances which are properly installed and are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of at least 68° F at a distance of 36 inches above floor level when the outside temperature is ten degrees below zero Fahrenheit.  
22-7-2 - HEATING DEVICES VENTED 
No owner or occupant shall install, operate or use a heating device, including hot water heating units, which employs the combustion of carbonaceous fuel, which is not vented to the outside of the structure in an approved manner, and which is not supplied with sufficient air to continuously support the combustion of the fuel. All heating devices shall be constructed, installed, and operated in such a manner as to minimize accidental burns.  
22-7-3 - SUFFICIENT SUPPLY OF HEAT 
In every dwelling unit and/or rooming unit when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the occupant, a temperature of at least 68° F shall be maintained in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments at a distance of 36 inches above the floor level.  
CHAPTER 8 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO THE SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
SECTION 
 
22-8-1 - STRUCTURES SAFE 
Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch, sidewalk, driveway, parking space and every appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.  
22-8-2 - STRUCTURES WEATHER TIGHT 
Every foundation, roof and exterior wall, door, skylight and window shall be reasonably weather-tight, water-tight, damp free and vermin proof and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Exterior surface materials including but not limited to wood and metal shall be properly coated when required for weatherproofing to prevent deterioration.  
22-8-3 - GUTTERS 
Gutters, leaders and downspouts on any building or structure, if provided, shall be maintained in good working condition as to provide drainage of stormwater. Downspout installations shall conform to the appropriate ordinances and regulations of the City.  
22-8-4 - FENCES 
All fences shall be constructed of approved fencing materials, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not create a harborage for vermin. The permissible height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the City.  
22-8-5 - ACCESSORY BUILDING 
Accessory buildings present or provided by the owner, agent, or tenant occupant on any premises shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and free of insects, rats, and other vermin.  
22-8-6 - EQUIPMENT AND UTILITY CONFORMANCE 
Every plumbing and electrical fixture and pipe, every chimney, flue and smoke pipe, and every other facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is present in a building or structure, or which is required under this Article, shall be constructed and installed in conformance with the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City and the State, and shall be maintained in a satisfactory and sanitary working condition such that it will function safely and effectively.  
22-8-7 - FREE OF HAZARDS 
Every owner of a building or structure shall provide and maintain the building or structure free from hazards to health due to the presence of toxic substances, e.g., lead-base paint, or due to any other gas, vapor, fume, particulate matter or due to any other hazardous condition as determined by the Housing Inspector in accordance with national, state and regional standards and regulations. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
22-8-8 - UTILITY SHUTOFFS 
No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any gas, water or electrical utility service or supply, or any equipment or facility which is required under this Article to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the Housing Inspector.  
22-8-9 - CONSTRUCTION CONFORMANCE 
Whenever a building is constructed, altered or remodeled, the construction, materials and installation and use of equipment shall conform with the building, electrical, plumbing and fire protection statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the City and the State.  
22-8-10 - CONDITION OF SIGNS 
All signs, canopies and marquees shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. The permissible size and other characteristics of all signs shall conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City.  
22-8-11 - GRAFFITI 
All buildings and structures shall be free of messages, drawings, or slogans written, drawn or painted on the exterior surface except for approved signs that conform to the appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City.  
22-8-12 - CLOSING WINDOWS AND OTHER OPENINGS 
Any building that is not secured and is abandoned or vacant shall have all unsecured wall openings including but not limited to, windows, doors, and porch openings boarded up or otherwise closed up until the building is properly secured. No building opening shall be boarded up or otherwise closed for more than 60 days, unless approved by the Housing Inspector or Building Official. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006; Ord. 2010-29, 3-15-2010)  
22-8-13 - SHINGLES 
Roll roofing shall not be used for covering a building roof that has slope in excess of 17 percent (two in 12-inch pitch) unless approved by the Housing Inspector or Building Official. Roll roofing and shingles shall not be used as building siding unless approved by the Housing Inspector or Building Official.  
22-8-14 - DOWNSPOUT/SUMP DISCHARGES 
All downspouts and/or sump pumps shall be installed in such a manner that the flow of discharge shall be directed away from interior side lot lines. Downspouts shall be located within five feet of a front or rear corner of a building and must be directed towards the front or rear of the property unless attached to a drainage system approved by the Building Official. The point of discharge shall be four feet or more from any interior side lot line and ten feet or more from any other lot line. Downspouts for detached accessory buildings shall be located in a manner to minimize discharge of water onto neighboring properties. The point of discharge for downspouts on detached accessory buildings shall be located at least two feet from any property line. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 10 - INSPECTIONS: POWERS OF THE HOUSING INSPECTOR 
SECTION 
 
22-10-1 - POWERS 
The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized to inspect buildings or structures and the surrounding premises subject to this Article, for the purpose of determining whether there is compliance with its provisions and to that end shall make such orders, requirements, decisions, and determinations as are necessary with respect to the enforcement of this Article. While in the performance of his duties, he shall have the authority of a conservator of the peace.  
22-10-2 - ENTRY REFUSAL 
If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a building or structure, fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his control or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by this Article is sought to be made, the Housing Inspector may petition a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this Section with respect to such buildings or structures. If the Housing Inspector has probable cause to believe that any violation of this Article exists at any premises subject to this Article, he may enter the premises pursuant to an administrative search warrant issued for purposes of inspection.  
22-10-3 - INTERFERENCE WITH THE HOUSING INSPECTOR IN THE PERFORMANCE OF HIS DUTIES 
Any person who shall in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent the Housing Inspector from discharging or performing his duty shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
CHAPTER 11 - REPAIRS OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
SECTION 
 
22-11-1 - MAKING REPAIRS 
Whenever an owner, operator, or agent of a building or structure fails, neglects, or refuses to make repairs or other corrective action called for by the order of notice of violation issued pursuant to this Article, the City may undertake such repairs or action, when a failure to make them will endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.  
22-11-2 - NOTICE TO MAKE REPAIRS 
Notice of the intention to make such repairs or take other corrective action shall be issued to the owner, operator, or agent and any lien holders of record.  
22-11-3 - ALLOWING ACCESS TO MAKE REPAIRS 
Every owner, operator, or agent of a building or structure who has received notice of the intention of the City to make repairs or take other corrective action shall give entry and fee access to the agent of the City for the purpose of making such repairs. Any owner, operator, or agent of a building or structure who refuses, impedes, interferes with or hinders, or obstructs entry by such agent pursuant to a notice of intention to make repairs or take other corrective action shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $2,500.00 per day for each such failure to comply with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
22-11-4 - PAYMENT FOR COST OF REPAIRS 
When repairs are made or other corrective action taken by the City, cost of such repairs and corrective action shall constitute a debt in favor of the City against the owner of the repaired structure. In the event such owner fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the City the amount of this debt, it shall be recoverable in a civil action against the owner or his successor brought in a court of competent jurisdiction by the City which shall possess all rights of a private creditor.  
CHAPTER 12 - DESIGNATION OF UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
SECTION 
 
22-12-1 - UNFIT BUILDING 
Any building or structure shall be designated as unfit for human occupancy of use when any of the following defects or conditions are found, and when such defect creates a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or of the public or endangers the property of the occupant, owner or public: 
A.  The building is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, and/or vermin infested and/or contains hazardous levels of lead-based paint or other substances and/or contains unsafe plumbing and electrical fixtures, pipes, equipment or facilities. 
B.  The building lacks illumination, ventilation and/or required sanitation facilities. 
C.  The general condition of the Building, structure and premise is unsanitary, unsafe and/or unhealthful.  
22-12-2 - POSTING UNFIT BUILDINGS 
Whenever any building or structure has been designated as unfit for human occupancy or use, the Housing Inspector shall placard the building or structure, indicating that it is unfit for human occupancy or use, and, if occupied, shall order the building or structure vacated within a reasonable time, such time to be not less than 24 hours or more than three days.  
22-12-3 - USING UNFIT BUILDINGS 
No building or structure which has been designated as unfit for human occupancy or use, has been placarded as such and vacated shall be used or occupied again until written approval is secured from the Housing Inspector and the placard removed by the Housing Inspector.  
22-12-4 - RESCINDING UNFIT DESIGNATION 
The Housing Inspector shall rescind the designation as unfit for human occupancy or use, and remove the placard when the defect or condition upon which such designation and placarding was based has been removed or eliminated and the building or structure is deemed by the Housing Inspector as a safe, sanitary, and fit place for human occupancy or use.  
22-12-5 - REMOVAL OF PLACARD 
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or structure which has been designated as unfit for human occupancy and use, and has been placarded as such.  
CHAPTER 13 - DEMOLITION OF ANY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE DESIGNATED AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION 
SECTION 
 
22-13-1 - ORDERING DEMOLITION 
The City shall order a building or structure to be demolished if it has been designated as unfit for human occupancy or use, has been placarded as such, has been vacated, and has not been put into proper repair so as to rescind the designation as unfit for human occupancy or use. The City may also order a building or structure, or an uncompleted building or structure that has been abandoned, to be demolished.  
22-13-2 - NOTICE OF DEMOLITION 
The owner, operator or agent and any lien holders of record of any building or structure which has been ordered demolished shall be given written notice of this order and shall be given at least 15 days to demolish such structure.  
22-13-3 - COURT ORDER 
When the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to demolish an unfit unsafe, or unsanitary building or structure within the 15-day time period, the City may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for a demolition order.  
22-13-4 - DEMOLITION CONDITIONS 
Whenever a building or structure is demolished, whether carried out by the owner or by the City, such demolition shall include the filling in or the excavation on which the demolished building or structure was located in such manner as to eliminate all potential danger to the public health, safety, or welfare arising from such excavation.  
22-13-5 - EXTERMINATION PRIOR TO DEMOLITION 
All demolition shall be preceded by an inspection of the premises by the Housing Inspector to determine whether or not extermination procedures are necessary. If the premises are found to be infested, appropriate extermination measures to prevent the spread or infestation to adjoining or other areas shall be instituted before, during and after demolition.  
CHAPTER 14 - EMERGENCIES, REGULATIONS AND PENALTIES 
SECTION 
 
22-14-1 - ABATING A HAZARD 
Whenever an emergency exists, which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the City may take such action as is appropriate to correct or abate the emergency.  
22-14-2 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
Whenever a section of this Article has been violated, the Housing Inspector or his/her designee shall issue a written notice setting forth the alleged violations and advising the owner or any occupant, operator, or agent, that such violations must be corrected. 
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-9-2006)  
22-14-3 - PENALTIES 
A.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any residential property owner/occupier violating any of the terms or provisions of this Article or failing to comply with an order of the Housing Inspector, shall be fined not less than $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, and $500.00 for each subsequent offense but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. For purposes of this paragraph A, residential property owner/occupier shall mean a person who occupies or dwells in a residential dwelling unit of which the same person is the legal or beneficial owner or the owner of residential property that is not offered to tenants for occupancy. 
B.  Unless another fine or penalty is specified, any contractor, commercial property owner, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this Article or failing to comply with an order of the Housing Inspector, shall be fined not less than $200.00 for the first offense, $400.00 for the second offense and $1,000.00 for each subsequent offense but not more than $2,500.00 for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. For purposes of this paragraph B, commercial property owner shall include the landlord of a residential dwelling unit that is tenant occupied or offered to tenants for occupancy. 
(Ord. 2010-29, 3-15-2010)  
ARTICLE 23 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION CODE[1] 
CHAPTER: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History— Ord. 2010-08, 1-18-2010. 
 
CHAPTER 1 - IN GENERAL 
SECTION 
 
23-1-1 - DECLARATION 
A.  Over the last few decades, substantial re-development has taken place in and around the City. This development has been accompanied by shifts of population and changes in residential and commercial land use. This kind of growth and development threaten longstanding and historically or architecturally significant properties and areas within the City. These properties and areas are important sources of the City's traditions and stability. 
B.  In the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, and pursuant to sound urban planning principles, those properties and areas that have special historical, architectural, community or aesthetic significance should be preserved, enhanced and restored for use. The City's economic vitality and tax base will be maintained and enhanced by respecting Park Ridge's heritage and older neighborhoods. 
C.  Many of our citizens reside in or own historically or architecturally significant properties. These persons should be encouraged to maintain such architectural or historic significance of their properties. Property owners should be made aware of the economic benefit of such maintenance and the pride of such maintenance should be recognized by the City. 
D.  The preservation of significant properties, buildings and historic structures will serve to: 
1.  Stabilize and improve the economic vitality and value of the City in general, and of designated sites and improvements in particular; 
2.  Preserve the City's existing housing stock; 
3.  Provide an opportunity for property owners to preserve the City's built environment; 
4.  Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; 
5.  Enhance the City's appeal to visitors so as to support and stimulate commerce; 
6.  Promote and encourage the continued private ownership and use of designated sites and improvements to the maximum extent consistent with the above objectives.  
23-1-2 - PURPOSES 
The purposes of this Article are to: 
A.  Establish the Commission and its governing rules. 
B.  Establish standards and a procedure for the designation of landmarks and historic districts. 
C.  Establish standards and a procedure for reviewing requests to perform an alteration of a designated landmark and alterations within a designated historic district. 
D.  Provide for appeals from decisions of the Director regarding proposed work on a designated landmark or historic district site.  
23-1-3 - DEFINITIONS 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: When defined words are used within this Article, each will be shown in italics. 
Adaptive use. Rehabilitation of an historic structure for use other than its original use. An example would be a residence converted into offices. 
Addition. New construction added to an existing building or structure. 
Alteration. Any change or modification, including, but not limited to demolition or addition to the structural aspect, the materials, color, texture or details of all or a part of the exterior of any improvement or site. Changing of the boundaries of a landmark or historic district shall be deemed an alteration. "Alteration" shall not include normal repair or maintenance. 
Application for designation. The official written request received by the Commission, asking that property within the City be designated as either a landmark or an historic district. 
Certificate of Appropriateness. A certificate issued by the Commission authorizing the performance of alterations, construction or demolition on property and improvements with a landmark or historic district designation. 
Certificate of Economic Hardship. A certificate issued by the Commission authorizing the performance of alterations, construction or demolition even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has previously been denied. 
Commission. The Park Ridge Historic Preservation Commission. 
Construction. Any act or process whereby a new improvement is built, an existing improvement is structurally changed or is expanded in size or area, or a new structure is built on site where a previous improvement was demolished. 
Demolition. An act or process which destroys a site or improvement in its entirety, or which destroys a part of a site or improvement and permanently impairs its structural, historic or architectural integrity. 
Designated site. That specification, pursuant to this Article, as a landmark or historic district. 
Design guidelines. The manual, entitled "City of Park Ridge Historic Districts and Landmarks Guidelines," recommended by the Commission and approved by the City Council, which sets forth the appropriate standards for restoration, rehabilitation, Certificate of Appropriateness and preservation of improvements or sites. 
Director. The City's Director of Community Preservation and Development or any person that the Director has appointed, in writing, to act in his or her stead. 
Exterior architectural feature. The architectural style, design, general arrangement and components or the outer surfaces of an improvement that are subject to public view. Exterior architectural features shall include, by way of example, but not by limitation, the kind, color or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to an improvement as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by such outer surfaces. An alley shall not be considered a public street or thoroughfare for the purposes of this definition. 
Final administrative decision. Any decision governed by this Article, from which there is no further administrative appeal to any agency of the City of Park Ridge. 
Historic district or district. An area of the City with defined geographic boundaries, containing two or more zoning lots and designated as an "historic district" under this ordinance. 
Improvement. Any building, structure, wall, fence, steps, paving, gate, sign, light, general arrangement of place or area, kind, texture or quality of building material, landscaping or landscape architecture, work of art, commemorative structure or other object which is or may be erected or arranged upon real estate. 
Landmark. An improvement or site designated as a "landmark" by the Commission, pursuant to procedures prescribed in this Article. 
Members. Unless otherwise stated, any reference in this Article to "members" shall mean voting members. 
Normal repair and maintenance. Work to be performed on an existing improvement or site for the purpose of maintaining and retaining the existing condition of the improvement or site. Normal repair and maintenance shall not be deemed an alteration. 
Owner. For purposes of the right to speak at a public hearing or the right to appeal a decision, owner shall mean the actual legal or beneficial owner of the property in question. The word "owner" shall include both the singular and plural. 
Owner of record. The person, corporation or other legal entity that holds legal title to real property as shown on the tax assessor's rolls. 
Period of Interim control. That period of time between the filing of an application for designation and the final administrative decision with respect to that application. 
Public view. The sight perspectives of an improvement or site from a public right-of-way or public place. An alley shall not be considered a public right-of-way for the purposes of this definition. 
Recognized Authority. A person who, in the field of the regulated designation, has: (1) published writings; or (2) has taught at the undergraduate college level or beyond; or (3) who has regularly consulted in the field of historic preservation on at least a statewide basis. 
Rehabilitation. The process of returning an improvement or site to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an appropriate current use while preserving those portions and features of the improvement or site which are significant to its historic, architectural or cultural value. 
Restoration. The act or process of taking an improvement's or site's appearance back to a specific period of time by removing later work and/or by replacing missing features to accurately match or portray the original improvement or site. 
Significant or significance. That characteristic of an improvement, site or district, due to its: (1) association with an historic or historically prominent or noteworthy event; or (2) its association with a person or time period; or (3) being an example of a prominent architectural style, that such improvement, site or district is brought within the purview of this Article. 
Site. Any real property or feature of real property within the City; the use of which is, in any way, regulated or affected by this Article. "Site" shall include a specific real property and any or all of the improvements. 
Structure. Any building, wall, fence, sign, fixture, steps or other elements attached or intended to be attached to the land.  
23-1-4 - GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR CONSTRUING ALL THE REQUIREMENTS AND EACH OF THE PROCESSES OF THIS ARTICLE 
A.  No provision in this Article shall be construed as repealing any other regulation of the City. 
B.  Any permit or license required by any other regulation of the City shall be in addition to any permit or certificate required by this Article. However, where a Certificate of Appropriateness is required, no other permit or license may be issued by any department of the City until a final determination on the Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued by the Commission. 
C.  A site or district receiving a designation pursuant to this Article shall, in all instances, continue to be governed by the City Zoning Ordinance. 
D.  Whenever there is a conflict between a provision of this Article or a regulation adopted pursuant to it and the provisions of any other regulation of the City; the more restrictive shall apply. 
E.  Any notice required by this Article shall be in writing. 
F.  Any public hearing held pursuant to this Article shall be publicized and conducted in accordance with Section 3 of the City Zoning Ordinance. Unless otherwise stated, all time frames for reviews, hearings, recommendations and decisions shall be consistent with the time frame set forth for zoning amendments in Section 4.8 of the City Zoning Ordinance. Failure to send notice where the address of an owner of record cannot be found shall not defeat any action taken pursuant to this Article. 
G.  Any reference to days shall mean calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
H.  Any reference to the term "Commission" shall also refer to any designee of the Commission. 
I.  Any decision or determination required of the Commission shall be by a majority vote of the members present at any meeting where a quorum is present, except as noted in 23-4-2.A.2 of this Article. 
J.  Any decision, determination or recommendation of the Commission and required by this Article shall be in writing and include findings of fact. 
K.  Any final administrative decision may be reviewed only pursuant to Article III of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. 
L.  In any instance in which the Director has decision-making authority; petitioner shall have the right to require that such authority be vested solely in the Commission in the same manner as set forth in subsection D of Section 4.4 of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-1-5 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
An Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed to carry out the purposes of this Article 23, in accordance with Article 4, Chapter 16 of the City Code.  
23-1-6 - DIRECTOR 
A.  The Director of Community Preservation and Development shall have the responsibilities of Director as set forth in this Article. 
B.  The Director shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of all proceedings and actions of the Commission. This record shall be open to the public for inspection and shall be kept and maintained at the Director's office. 
C.  The Director shall submit, at a minimum, a quarterly report of the Commission's activities to the City Council. 
D.  The Director shall be authorized to prepare and serve citations for violations of this Article. 
E.  The Director shall keep a register of all landmarks and historic districts which have been so designated pursuant to this Article. This register shall include the information required of each designation, along with appropriate maps.  
23-1-7 - PENALTIES 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined as provided in Section 1-1-12 of this Code.  
23-1-8 - OTHER REMEDIES 
In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the City may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, abate or correct a violation of this Article. This shall include, but not be limited to, requiring the restoration of a site to its appearance prior to the violation.  
CHAPTER 2 - PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO ALL DESIGNATIONS 
SECTION 
 
23-2-1 - APPLICATION FOR ANY DESIGNATION 
A.  Applications shall be filed with the Director on forms provided by the Commission. With respect to the property proposed for designation, the application shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant. 
2.  The name and address of the owner of record, if it is not the same as the applicant. 
3.  If the applicant is the owner, the name and address of both the legal and beneficial owner. 
4.  The legal description and common street address or addresses of the property. 
5.  A map delineating the property's boundaries and location. 
6.  A written statement describing the property or properties and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed designation. 
7.  Such other information as may be required by the Director or the Commission. 
B.  No application relating to the same property may be filed during the 12 months following a denial.  
23-2-2 - NOTIFICATION AND PRELIMINARY REVIEW AS TO ANY APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION 
A.  Upon receipt of a fully completed application for designation, the Director shall in the case of historic districts, schedule a preliminary review by the Commission. In the case of landmarks, the Director shall schedule a preliminary review only if requested by the applicant. The Director shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the preliminary review. 
B.  The Director shall also notify the Department of Community Preservation and Development and the Department of Public Works that an application for designation has been received. The notification shall request that each such department report to the Commission any matters that might be relevant to the determination of whether or not the subject property should receive the requested designation. 
C.  The Director shall notify the applicant if additional materials are required. 
D.  At the preliminary review, the Commission shall consider the application and decide whether it appears that there is sufficient merit to the application for designation to proceed to a public hearing. If the Commission determines that the property or district clearly will not meet the standards for designation as set forth in this Article, it shall enter a formal denial of the application for designation, which shall constitute a final administrative decision. 
E.  If the Commission finds, upon completing the preliminary review, that an application merits further consideration, then a public hearing shall be scheduled.  
23-2-3 - PUBLIC HEARING ON ANY APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION 
A.  The Director shall notify the applicant and owner or owners of the subject property(s) as to the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing. 
B.  The Director shall also publish newspaper notice of the public hearing in the same manner as required for a map amendment to the City Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  The applicant shall produce the following information at the hearing: 
1.  All information that was required to be submitted on or with the application for designation; 
2.  Clear photographs of the improvements on the subject property(s), together with information as to the age, condition and current and historical use of each improvement; 
3.  Proposals for the restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of the subject property(s); and 
4.  Any other materials required by the Commission. 
D.  The applicant, the owner of the subject property(s) and property owners immediately adjacent to the subject property(s) shall be entitled to speak at the public hearing. The Commission may accept comments from any other interested parties. The commission shall review and evaluate the information that it deems appropriate according to the standards set forth in Chapter 3. A record of the proceedings shall be made and retained as a public record. 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-2-4 - PROCEDURES FOR ALL DESIGNATION APPLICATIONS 
A.  Commission Action. 
1.  The Commission shall either deny or issue a written recommendation to the City Council to grant or grant with modifications, the requested designation. 
2.  The Commission may not recommend modification of the area of a proposed designation such that the site extends beyond the exact physical boundary of the subject property as described in the application. 
B.  Decisions of the Commission. 
1.  Each decision, as applicable, shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact. 
2.  A decision denying an application for any designation shall be a final administrative decision. 
3.  The Director shall forward copies of all decisions to the applicant, the owner of the subject property(s), the City Clerk and the City Manager. 
4.  The City Manager shall place the matter on the City Council agenda for the consideration of an ordinance by the City Council.  
CHAPTER 3 - LANDMARKS 
SECTION 
 
23-3-1 - LANDMARK DESIGNATION STANDARDS 
The Commission shall consider the following when making a decision with respect to a site for landmark designation: 
A.  The site's significance with respect to the historic, cultural, artistic, social, ethnic or other heritage of the nation, state or community. 
B.  The site's significance as it may be representative of an architectural or engineering type lending itself to the study of a style, period, craftsmanship, method of construction or use of indigenous materials. 
C.  The site's association with an important person or event in national, state or local history. 
D.  The site's identity as a notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or artist whose individual genius has influenced an era. 
E.  The site's identity as an established and familiar visual feature in the community owing to its unique location or physical characteristics. 
F.  Criteria promulgated by the U.S. Department of the Interior for the National Register of Historic Places. 
G.  The preferences of the owner. 
H.  The economic and functional potentials of the site. 
Paragraphs (A) through (F) must be supported by a detailed narrative: (1) authored by a recognized authority in the field of significance; or (2) which refers to and describes historical texts or historical records. (The Commission shall have the sole authority to determine whether or not a person is a recognized authority).  
23-3-2 - PERSONS WHO MAY APPLY FOR LANDMARK DESIGNATION 
A.  Any person or entity; so long as the application is accompanied by the signed consent of the owner of record, or 
B.  The Commission by a three-fifths vote of all members then appointed, may apply for a landmark designation for a site located within the corporate limits of the City. The consent of the owner of record requirement, as set forth in A. above, shall still apply.  
23-3-3 - DESIGNATION BY THE CITY COUNCIL 
A.  No property or improvement may receive designation as a landmark except upon: 
1.  Approval of an ordinance by the City Council; and 
2.  Execution of an affidavit consenting to the proposed designation by the owner or owners of the site on a form provided by the City; 
B.  If a designation is granted by the City Council, a copy shall also be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.  
23-3-4 - ALTERATIONS OF DESIGNATED LANDMARKS 
No alteration may be performed on any site designated as a landmark except pursuant to Chapter 5 of this Article.  
23-3-5 - FLOOR AREA RATIO BONUS 
Any residence designated as a landmark shall be entitled to the floor-area-ratio bonus set forth in Section 7.5(D) of the Zoning Ordinance. Such residence must comply with all other bulk requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  
CHAPTER 4 - HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
SECTION 
 
23-4-1 - HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION STANDARDS 
The Commission shall consider the following when making a decision with respect to an application for historic district designation: 
A.  Any and all of the standards set forth in Section 23-3-1; 
B.  Whether the properties, sites and structures taken together, represent one or more periods or styles of architecture reflective of the history of the City. (Each such property, site or structure will not necessarily be of such historic or architectural significance to be designated as a landmark). 
C.  Whether there exists homogeneity of architectural design or dates of construction throughout the proposed District; 
D.  Whether the District is identifiable by clear and distinctive boundaries; 
E.  Whether there exist particular, distinguishing architectural or land use characteristics throughout the proposed District. 
Paragraphs A through E must be supported by a detailed narrative: (1) authored by a recognized authority in the field of significance; or (2) which refers to or describes historical texts or historical records. (The Commission shall have the sole authority to determine whether or not a person is a recognized authority). 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-4-2 - APPLICATION FOR AN HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION 
A.  Entities that may apply. 
1.  Any person or entity; or 
2.  The Commission by a three-fifths vote of all members then appointed may apply for an historic district designation of property located within the corporate limits of the City: 
B.  Qualification of Application. 
1.  No application shall be accepted unless the owners of at least 50% plus one of the zoning lots within the proposed district have, by affidavit, consented to such application. One vote shall be allotted to each zoning lot within the proposed historic district. 
2.  Proof of notice of the request to vote to consent to or oppose the designation must be provided for each zoning lot. 
C.  Pre-application Meeting with Staff. 
1.  Prior to any application being submitted for designation as an historic district, the applicant must schedule a meeting with the Director. The purpose of the meeting with the Director shall be to assure that all owners are fully informed, to discuss and to assure receipt of a complete package of information which shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A copy of the current guidelines and ordinance. 
b.  Application papers. 
c.  Sample materials and aids for information, notices and meetings. 
d.  Sample form(s) for documentation of owners' consent, objection or undecided or non-responsive positions. 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-4-3 - DESIGNATION BY THE CITY COUNCIL 
A.  No property or improvement may receive designation as an historic district except upon: 
1.  Approval of an ordinance by the City Council; and 
2.  Consent by affidavit by the owners of record of not less than 50% plus one of the zoning lots within the district; 
B.  If a designation is granted by the City Council, a copy shall also be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds. 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-4-4 - ALTERATION OF AN IMPROVEMENT WITHIN AN HISTORIC DISTRICT 
No alteration may be performed on an improvement within an historic district except as set forth in Chapter 5 of this Article.  
23-4-5 - FLOOR AREA RATIO BONUS 
Any residence within an historic district shall be entitled to the floor-area-ratio bonus set forth in Section 7.5(D) of the Zoning Ordinance. Such residence must comply with all other bulk requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.  
CHAPTER 5 - ALTERATION OF DESIGNATED SITES 
SECTION 
 
23-5-1 - JURISDICTION OF COMMISSION WITH RESPECT TO ALTERATIONS 
Alterations to designated landmarks or districts may be performed only pursuant to the following: 
No alteration may be performed on property that is within an historic district or that has been designated as a landmark, without a Certificate of Appropriateness as approved by the Commission; except (1) where, in the opinion of the appropriate code official, a structure has been damaged by fire or other catastrophic event, and pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Park Ridge building code, must be demolished; or (2) structures owned by the City shall not require a Certificate of Appropriateness where there has been a determination by the City Council that the alteration, including demolition, is in the best interest of the City. 
In either case, the applicable code official shall forward a copy of the demolition notice to the Commission.  
23-5-2 - STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR OBTAINING A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
The Commission shall consider the following criteria, as each may be applicable, in determining whether or not a Certificate of Appropriateness may be granted: 
A.  The extent to which the proposed alteration will affect any exterior architectural feature of the site. 
B.  Whether any proposed alteration will have a positive effect on and harmonize with the external appearance of the site as a whole or on neighboring properties. 
C.  The extent and process of any demolition associated with the proposed alteration. 
D.  Whether the proposed work will result in the loss of vegetation, the keeping of existing vegetation or the addition of new vegetation on the site. 
E.  The effect of the proposed alteration on the appearance of the landscape scheme for the whole site. 
F.  When the proposed alteration is for an improvement, a report from the building inspector on the state of repair and structural stability of the improvement. 
G.  Any changes in the essential character of the area which would occur as a result of approval of the Certificate of Appropriateness. This is especially important if the proposed work is to take place in an historic district. 
H.  Whether the proposed work will conform to the following design criteria: 
1.  Height. The height of any proposed new structure or any proposed additions or alterations should be compatible with the existing structure and with surrounding structures. 
2.  Proportions of front facade. The relationship between the width and height of the proposed structure or the existing improvement with the proposed additions or alterations should be compatible with and in proportion to each other and to nearby structures. 
3.  Relationship of doors and windows. The relationship between and among doors and windows, pursuant to the proposed alteration, should be compatible with and in proportion to each other and with the existing improvements. 
4.  Relationship of building mass and space. The relationship of an improvement, pursuant to the proposed alteration, to the open space between the structure and adjoining structures should be proportionate and compatible. 
5.  Roof shape. The design of the roof and the alteration should be compatible with the existing roof and nearby structures. 
6.  Landscaping and appurtenances. Landscaping and the use of appurtenances, pursuant to the proposed alteration, should remain sensitive to the individual structure, its occupants and their needs. Further, the landscape treatment should remain compatible with surrounding structures and landscapes. 
7.  Scale of structure. The scale of the structure after the proposed alteration should be compatible with surrounding structures. 
8.  Directional expression of front elevation. The proposed alteration should have no negative impact on the manner in which the street facades blend with other structures. When the existing and adjacent structures have a dominant horizontal or vertical expression, this should be carried over and reflected in the alteration. 
9.  Architectural details. Architectural details and materials should be incorporated as necessary to relate the new with the old and to preserve and enhance the inherent characteristics of the existing structures and neighboring properties. 
10.  Other guidelines. Any other specific guidelines which the Commission may recommend for approval by the City Council. 
For purposes of remedying emergency conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property, the Commission may waive the procedures set forth in this Article and grant immediate approval for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Commission shall state its reasons in writing for such immediate approval.  
23-5-3 - PROCESSING OF APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
A.  Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The application for any Certificate of Appropriateness shall be filed with the Director on a form provided by the Commission. The application shall be accompanied by such information, plans, elevations, specifications and other documents as may be required. Any applicant may request a meeting with the Commission before submitting an application and may consult with the Commission during the review of the application. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness may be filed only by the owner of the subject property. The Director shall forward the matter to the Commission to review the application. 
B.  Director's Review of Certificate of Appropriateness. The Commission may delegate to the Director the authority, by motion, to review applications and the Director may grant Certificates of Appropriateness under the following conditions: 
1.  The Director determines that the proposed alteration is so clearly appropriate and so consistent with the purpose of this Article that further review is not required. 
2.  The Certificate of Appropriateness being requested meets the criteria, as specified by the Commission for a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
3.  There is no request for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
4.  The Certificate of Appropriateness is reported to the Commission at its next regular meeting. 
If the Director grants the Certificate of Appropriateness, no meeting of the Commission shall be required. The granting of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Director shall be a final administrative decision. If the Director does not make the findings required in this subsection, the application shall be forwarded to the Commission and it shall be processed according to C below. The Director may not act on a Certificate of Appropriateness for City owned property. 
C.  Processing of Application for a Certificates of Appropriateness. 
1.  Commission Review of Certificate of Appropriateness for all Property except City owned Property 
a.  An initial review shall be scheduled with Commission. If the Commission finds the proposed work to be so clearly appropriate and in accordance with the purposes of this Article, it may grant a Certificate of Appropriateness without any further meetings. If the Commission does not so find, then a meeting shall be scheduled within 45 days of the initial review by the Commission. The applicant shall be notified of the time, date, place and purpose of such meeting. 
b.  The owner of the subject property and immediately adjacent property owners shall be entitled to speak at the meeting. The Commission may accept comments from other interested parties. 
c.  The Commission shall render a decision to grant, deny or modify the requested Certificate of Appropriateness on the basis of the criteria set forth in Section 23-5-2, within 30 days after the meeting. The decision of the Commission shall be a final administrative decision. 
d.  If the Certificate of Appropriateness is granted, but with modifications, the applicant shall have 15 days to notify the Director, in writing, if the Applicant agrees to the modifications. If no such written notification is given, the modified application shall be deemed denied. 
e.  Following a denial, a Certificate of Appropriateness may not be resubmitted within the next 12 months. 
2.  Commission Review of a Certificate of appropriateness for City Owned Property. 
a.  With respect to City owned property, the Commission shall follow this Chapter 5; but, rather than making a final determination, shall forward its recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall make a final decision with respect to the Certificate of Appropriateness for City owned property. 
(Ord. 2011-55, 10-3-2011)  
23-5-4 - CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP 
A.  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, the Commission may issue a Certificate of Economic Hardship in circumstances where the maintenance of the site is economically difficult or not feasible. The procedure for securing a Certificate of Economic Hardship shall be the same as that for a Certificate of Appropriateness, except that only the Commission may grant a Certificate of Economic Hardship. A Certificate of Economic Hardship may allow an alteration in circumstances where a Certificate of Appropriateness would not otherwise be available. 
B.  Economic hardship may be considered by the Commission if the applicant, at the time of the meeting, has produced the following information in an affidavit signed by the owner of and with respect to the subject property: 
1.  The amount paid, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased (including description of the relationship between the current owner and the person from whom purchased); 
2.  The assessed value according to the two most recent assessments; 
3.  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
4.  Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years; 
5.  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years; 
6.  Any listing sheet for sale or rent along with the price asked and offers received, if any; 
7.  Any uses that have been proposed or considered by the owner; 
8.  If income-producing, the annual gross income from the subject property for the previous two years, and the itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years; 
9.  Any other information, including the current tax bracket of the owner, applicant or principle investor in the property. 
C.  The Commission shall then consider the application in light of the following: 
1.  Items 1 through 9 of B above; and 
2.  Whether or not the site can be put to a reasonable use without the alteration; and 
3.  Whether or not the owner can obtain a reasonable economic return on the subject property without the alteration. 
D.  If the Commission finds that, without approval of the proposed work, the property and improvements cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return, then the application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed six months. During this period of delay, the Commission shall investigate plans that may enable another reasonably beneficial use or that will provide a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property and improvements. Such plans may include, but are not limited to, a relaxation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
E.  If by the end of this six-month period the Commission has found that, without approval of the proposed work, the property and improvements cannot be put to a reasonably beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return, then the Commission shall issue a Certificate of Economic Hardship approving the proposed work. If the Commission finds otherwise, it shall issue, deny or modify the requested Certificate of Appropriateness as provided in Section 23-5-3.  
23-5-5 - RESCISSION OF A DESIGNATION 
A designation may be rescinded by the City Council only after a hearing permitting public discussion and upon the recommendation of the Commission. At a minimum, the person petitioning for rescission must show that the circumstances which supported the designation have, through no fault of the petitioner, changed. 

ZONING ORDINANCE CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published in May 2016 
____________ 

> 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Zoning Ordinance to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Zoning Ordinance and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Zoning Ordinance and are considered "Omitted." 
    Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Zoning Ordinance gain a more complete picture of the ordinance's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/Omitted Supp. No. 2016-19 Omitted 1 2016-25 Omitted 1 2016-26 Omitted 1 2016-49 Included 1 2017-21 Omitted 2 2017-23 Included 2 2017-33 Included 2 2018-25 Included 3 2018-28 Included 3 2019-09 Included 4 2019-14 Included 4  
Section 1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 

1.1 - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Park Ridge." 
1.2 - Intent. 
    The intent of this document is to establish a comprehensive land use regulation code to serve the city. The regulations enumerated are based upon the city's comprehensive plan, and the overall city policies and objectives. These regulations are intended to serve the city as it deals with future growth. Furthermore, this ordinance is enacted by the Corporate Authorities of the city pursuant to the authority granted them under the constitution of the State and all of the city's home rule powers. Any reference to this ordinance shall include amendments to this ordinance. 
1.3 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to: 
(a)  Promote public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. 
(b)  Secure adequate light, air and open space, and safety from fire and other dangers. 
(c)  Conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the municipality. 
(d)  Lessen or reduce congestion in public streets. 
(e)  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, utility systems, schools, parks and other public facilities. 
(f)  Protect the air, water and land resources of the city from the hazards of pollution. 
(g)  Insure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas, and buildings and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance. 
(h)  Preserve and maintain the essential character of the city as it exists as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance. To preserve and protect the natural features and historic locations of buildings and groups of buildings, as well as buildings, groups of buildings, neighborhoods and communities of distinguished architectural character and appearance. 
(i)  Regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings. 
(j)  Establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on, or along, any street, traffic-way, drive, parkway, or storm or floodwater runoff channel or basin. 
(k)  Regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces, within and surrounding such buildings. 
(l)  Classify, regulate and restrict the location of commercial business, and the location of buildings designed for specified commercial, residential and other uses. 
(m)  Divide the entire municipality into districts of such number, shape and area, and of such different classes (according to use of land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot area, density, area of open spaces, or other classification) as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. 
(n)  Fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform. 
(o)  Prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located. 
(p)  Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures. 
(q)  Promote the economic diversity of the community and enhance opportunities for participation in the economic and social systems of the community. 
(r)  Define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies. 
(s)  Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
1.4 - Applicability. 
(a)  Territorial application . This ordinance shall apply to all land, uses, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city, including those owned by other municipal corporations and government bodies. 
(b)  General application. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare, and shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which this ordinance was adopted. 
(c)  General prohibition . Except as otherwise provided by this ordinance, no portion or whole of any building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure, in whole or in part, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless it conforms with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Private agreements . This ordinance is not intended to nullify any private agreement or covenant. However, where this ordinance is more restrictive than a private agreement or covenant, this ordinance shall control. 
(e)  Other laws and regulations . Unless otherwise specifically provided, the ordinance shall control over less restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations, and more restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations will control over the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.5 - Transition rules. 
    In determining the applicability of this ordinance, with respect to the previously applicable zoning regulations, the following rules shall apply. 
(a)  Existing illegal uses and structures . A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of, but is made legal by the provisions of this ordinance, is deemed lawful as of the effective date of this ordinance. However, if that structure or use does not conform with each and every requirement of this ordinance, then that structure or use shall remain unlawful. 
(b)  Existing permitted uses . If property is used in a manner that was classified as a permitted use prior to the effective date of this ordinance; and that use is classified as a special use by this ordinance, that use shall be deemed a lawful special use. However, any subsequent addition, enlargement or expansion of that use shall be required to conform to the procedural and substantive requirements for special uses pursuant to this ordinance. 
(c)  Certain uses rendered nonconforming . If property is used in a manner that was a lawful use before the effective date of this ordinance, and this ordinance no longer classifies that use as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which it is located, that use shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use and shall be controlled by the provisions of section 15 (Nonconformities). 
(d)  Certain buildings, structures and property rendered nonconforming . If a building, structure or property existing on the effective date of this ordinance does not meet all standards set forth in this ordinance, that building, structure or property shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be controlled by the provisions of section 15 (Nonconformities). 
(e)  Previously issued building permits . If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and if construction has begun within 180 days of the issuance of that permit and diligently pursued to completion, the building or structure may be completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under an occupancy certificate for the use originally intended. 
(f)  Previously granted special uses and variances . All special uses and variances granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. The recipient of the special use or variance may proceed to develop the property in accordance with the plans approved by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals and any applicable conditions. However, if the recipient has failed to act on the special use or variance before the approval expires, including any periods of extension granted, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
(g)  Pending applications . If an application is pending on the effective date of the ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern that application. 
1.6 - Severability. 
    If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this ordinance. The effect of the judgment shall be confined to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which judgment or decree was rendered. 
1.7 - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this ordinance is the date of adoption, this date May 9, 2007. 
1.8 - Repeal of previous zoning ordinance. 
    After the effective date of this ordinance, all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the city, as adopted on September 2, 1975, as amended from time to time, are expressly repealed in their entirety. This repeal only applies to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 2 - COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND OFFICIALS 

2.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to outline the specific powers of the different commissions, boards and officials as they relate to this Zoning Ordinance. 
2.2 - City council. 
    In addition to its general, plenary and home rule powers in all City planning and zoning matters, the City Council shall have the following specific powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To make final decisions on applications for major zoning variances (Section 4.4). 
(b)  To make final decisions on special use applications (Section 4.6). 
(c)  To make final decisions on planned development applications (Section 5). 
(d)  To make final decisions on zoning amendment applications (Section 4.8). 
2.3 - Zoning board of appeals. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and make final decisions on appeals of any zoning interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Administrator (Section 4.3). 
(b)  To make final decisions on applications for minor variances and to make recommendations to the City Council on applications for major variances (Section 4.4). 
(c)  To hear and report to the Mayor and City Council on such other matters as may be referred to it by the Mayor and City Council. 
2.4 - Planning and zoning commission. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To review and make final decisions on certain site plan reviews (Section 4.5). 
(b)  To make recommendations to the City Council on special use applications (Section 4.6) 
(c)  To make recommendations to the City Council on planned development applications (Section 5). 
(d)  To make recommendations to the City Council on zoning amendment applications (Section 4.8). 
(e)  To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to make reports of its recommendations to the City Council, and to adopt rules, procedures and guidelines pertaining to the administration and interpretation of those sections of the Ordinance over which the Commission is granted jurisdiction. 
2.5 - Zoning administrator. 
    The Director of Community Preservation and Development, or his/her designee shall be considered the Zoning Administrator, and shall have the following powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance: 
(a)  To review and make decisions on zoning interpretations (Section 4.2). 
(b)  To review and make final decisions on applications for administrative zoning variances (Section 4.4). 
(c)  To review and make final decisions on administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). 
(d)  To receive and process all applications for zoning certificates (Section 4.9). 
(e)  To review and make decisions on applications for sign permits (Section 4.10). 
(f)  To receive and forward applications for zoning appeals, zoning variances, site plan reviews, special uses, planned developments, zoning amendments, and other administrative reviews required by this Ordinance to the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, as indicated. 
(g)  To conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine whether there is compliance with this Ordinance, and, in case of any violation, order corrective action. 
(h)  To maintain permanent and current records as required by this Ordinance including, but not limited to, all relevant information and official action on inspections and violations, zoning appeals, zoning variances, site plan reviews, special uses, planned developments, zoning amendments, zoning certificates and other administrative reviews. 
(i)  To maintain and make available the City's Official Zoning Ordinance Text and Map, and all permanent and current records required by this Ordinance. In accordance with State Law, to prepare and have available in book, pamphlet or map form, on or before March 31 st of each year, the compiled text of the Zoning Ordinance, together with the Official Zoning Map, including all amendments in effect on the preceding December 31 st . 
(j)  To maintain for public distribution an adequate supply of the compiled text of the Zoning Ordinance Text, including the Official Zoning Map, and appropriate forms and instructional material for all required hearings and review procedures provided for herein. 
Section 3 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

3.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to outline the general application, notice and public hearing procedures for the zoning applications and approvals found within this Zoning Ordinance. 
3.2 - Application. 
(a)  Authorization. An application for a zoning appeal, zoning variance, site plan review, special use, planned development or sign permit may be filed by an owner of any property in the City. An application for a request for a zoning interpretation or a zoning amendment may be filed by an owner of any property in the City or by the City. 
(b)  Filing. 
(1)  An application for a zoning interpretation, zoning appeal, zoning variance, site plan review, special use, planned development, zoning amendment, zoning certificate or sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The application shall be on forms provided by the City and shall be filed in such number as the instructions provide. All plans shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of the proposal. The application shall include information, plans and data as specified in Appendix B (Application Requirements) and sufficient to determine whether the application conforms with the requirements set forth in this Ordinance. 
(c)  Completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies within fifteen (15) days, and shall take no steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied. Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is complete, the application shall be scheduled for consideration by the appropriate board, commission or official. 
(d)  Fees. Every application shall be accompanied by the required filing fee as established and modified, from time to time, by the City Council in Article 20, Chapter 2 of the City's Municipal Code. The failure to pay such fee when due shall be grounds for refusing to process the application, and for denying or revoking any permit or approval for the subject property. No fees shall be waived, and no fees shall be refunded, except those authorized by the City Council at its sole discretion. 
A current fee schedule, as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, is included in Appendix C (Fee Schedule) for reference only. Applicable fees shall be as set forth in Article 20, Chapter 2 of the City's Municipal Code. 
(e)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant shall have the right to withdraw an application at any time prior to the decision on the application by a City official, commission or board, including the ability to withdraw the application if it has been tabled by a commission or board. There shall be no refund of fees. Requests for withdrawal shall be in writing by the applicant. 
(f)  Successive applications. Within one (1) year of the date of denial, a subsequent application shall not be reviewed or heard unless there is substantial new evidence available, or if a significant mistake of law or of fact affected the prior denial. Such subsequent application then shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying its consideration. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination as to whether the subsequent application is appropriate. If the Zoning Administrator finds that there are no grounds for consideration of the subsequent application, he/she shall summarily, and without hearing, deny the request. 
3.3 - Notice. 
(a)  Published Notices. For all applications that require a public hearing, the City shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The notice shall include the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property. Such notice shall be published no less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the scheduled hearing date. 
(b)  Mailed notice. 
(1)  For public hearings for major and minor zoning variances, special use, planned development applications and zoning map amendments, written notice on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, shall be mailed by regular mail no less than fifteen (15), but nor more than thirty (30), days prior to the public hearing to the occupants of all properties located within two-hundred fifty (250) feet from the property line of the subject property. The notice shall include the date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide the stamped and addressed notices to the Zoning Administrator who shall deposit them in a U.S. postal facility for delivering. The applicant shall also provide an affidavit stating that the stamped notices include each and every property within two-hundred fifty (250) feet. The City shall provide an affidavit stating that the stamped notices were mailed. The two-hundred fifty (250) feet shall be measured from all directions along the perimeter of the subject property. 
(3)  For administrative zoning variances, written notice on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator, shall be mailed by regular mail no less than fifteen (15), but nor more than thirty (30), days prior to the Zoning Administrator's decision to the occupants of all properties located adjacent to the subject property as well as the property located directly across the street. The applicant shall provide the stamped and addressed notices to the Zoning Administrator who shall deposit them in a U.S. postal facility for delivering. If a noticed property owner objects to the administrative variance, such variance shall then be considered a minor variance and subject to the minor variance notice requirements. 
(4)  Giving notice pursuant to this section shall not be construed to prevent the applicant from giving such additional notice as he/she may deem appropriate. 
(5)  The body conducting the hearing shall hear no application unless the applicant complies in all respects all notice requirements. 
(c)  Posted Sign Notices. The City shall post a sign on the subject property for all public hearings for major and minor zoning variances, special uses, planned developments, zoning map amendments, and public meetings for site plan reviews, and Zoning Administrator decisions on administrative variance in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Location and Time Period for Posting Signs. The required posting period shall be no less than fifteen (15) consecutive days, but no more than thirty (30) days, prior to the public hearing, site plan review public meeting, or scheduled date of decision for administrative variances (excluding the day of the hearing, meeting or decision from this period). The sign shall be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk or public right-of-way so that it is visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Properties with more than one (1) street frontage shall be required to post one (1) sign visible from each street frontage. 
(2)  Responsibility for Posting Signs. It is the City's responsibility to erect the sign on the property. It is the applicant's responsibility to maintain it during the required period. The City shall provide an affidavit to the body conducting the hearing or site plan review, verifying compliance with the sign posting requirement. 
(3)  Failure to Post. Failure to post and maintain for the required time may constitute grounds for suspension or continuance of the approval process. 
(d)  Public Examination and Copying of Applications and Other Documents. During normal business hours, any person may examine the application and material submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the application, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Freedom of Information Act. Upon reasonable request, any person shall be entitled to copies of the application and related documents. The Zoning Administrator shall make copies of such materials available for a fee as specified by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
3.4 - Public hearing. 
(a)  Conduct of Public Hearings. 
(1)  A "public hearing" is a formal proceeding mandated by law for the purpose of taking evidence to formulate a decision or recommendation on an issue within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning and Zoning Commission. The primary purpose of a public hearing is to allow interested parties an opportunity to listen, comment on and ask questions regarding evidence presented at any legislatively mandated proceeding. 
(2)  Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning and Zoning Commission, including public hearings, shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. 
(3)  Any party to a public hearing may arrange for the proceedings to be recorded and transcribed by a certified shorthand reporter at that party's expense. The City may request a transcript at the applicant's expense. A copy of any transcript prepared shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning and Zoning Commission and kept in the case file. The Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning and Zoning Commission, at its discretion, may direct that the proceedings be recorded at the expense of the person initiating the action (the "Petitioner"), which is the subject of the public hearing and may require the petitioner to deposit funds sufficient to cover the cost of such recording and transcribing. 
(4)  The Chair, with the consent of two thirds (?) majority of the body present, may limit individual testimony to a specific time to provide a reasonable opportunity for all interested persons to testify. 
(5)  At a public hearing, a petitioner may appear on his or her own behalf or may be represented by an attorney or other agent qualified by law to represent the petitioner. 
(6)  In addition to the petitioner, any person having an interest in the action which is the subject of the public hearing ("Interested Party") may appear at the public hearing and give testimony. If an attorney is representing an Interested Party, the attorney shall file an appearance with the Board or Commission and serve a notice of appearance on the petitioner not less than three (3) business days prior to the public hearing. Failure to give such notice of appearance may be grounds for continuing the public hearing to a later date. 
(7)  An Interested Party wishing to testify at the public hearing shall state for the record his or her name and address. 
(8)  An Interested Party wishing to ask questions of a witness may, at the time indicated by the Chair, direct questions to the witness from the podium. An Interested Party shall give his or her name and address before questioning a witness. This opportunity for questioning a witness shall not be used by the questioner to offer testimony or evidence from the podium. 
(9)  All persons offering testimony at a public hearing shall testify under oath. An attorney shall be sworn if he or she offers testimony but not if he or she is questioning witness, summarizing witness testimony, or addressing the Commission on procedural issues. Testimony may be given only from the witness stand. 
(10)  Minutes, a transcript or summary notes will be distributed with the agenda for the next regular meeting, or as soon as such may be reasonably available. 
(b)  Continuances. The Chairperson, with approval of the body conducting the hearing, may change or continue the regular public hearing date and time. In order to reopen the hearing, no new notice shall be required if a hearing is continued to a specific date, provided that a public announcement of the future date, time and place of the continued hearing is made at the hearing, and placed in the minutes. If the hearing is adjourned, rather than continued to a specific date, in order to reopen the hearing, all notices must be given that would have been required for the initial public hearing. 
Section 4 - APPLICATIONS AND APPROVAL PROCESSES 

4.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to delineate the scope of applicability, specific procedures and requirements, and approval criteria that are applicable to each zoning application and approval. 
4.2 - Zoning interpretation. 
(a)  Purpose. This interpretation authority is not intended to add or change the essential content of the Ordinance. The interpretation authority is intended to recognize that the provisions of this Ordinance, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific zoning issue. Such issues may often be addressed by reference to general circumstances that the specific provision was intended to address. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for zoning interpretations may be filed by an owner of any property in the City. In addition, the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission may request that the Zoning Administrator render an interpretation. Requests initiated by the City require an application, but are exempt from fees. The interpretation must be for the purpose of furthering some actual development. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. The Zoning Administrator shall review and make final decisions on requests for interpretations. Nothing in this Section shall require the Zoning Administrator to make an interpretation if he is of the opinion that the exposure to liability for the City on account of the interpretation outweighs the benefit to the requestor. 
(d)  Procedure. All applications for interpretations shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall review a request for an interpretation and render the interpretation within a reasonable time. The Zoning Administrator shall have the ability to request additional information prior to rendering an interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
4.3 - Appeal of a zoning administrator determination. 
(a)  Purpose. The zoning appeals process for review of decisions of the Zoning Administrator is intended to provide appropriate checks and balances on administrative authority. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for appeals may be filed by any owner of any property in the City that is directly affected by a decision made under this Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Authority and execution. The Zoning Board of Appeals may review only those determinations of the Zoning Administrator which result from requests made pursuant to this Ordinance. Other decisions and actions of the Zoning Administrator cannot be appealed under this process. 
(d)  Procedure. All applications for appeals shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing, in accordance with Sections 3.4 (Public Hearing), within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. If, in the Zoning Board of Appeal's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Board to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Board may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. Notice shall be given in accordance with Sections 3.3 (Notice). The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide the appeal within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination. (See Appendix B for Flowchart 1: Appeals Process) 
(e)  Limitations on Appeals. A decision may only be appealed if an application is filed within thirty (30) days of that decision. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
4.4 - Zoning variance. 
(a)  Purpose. The variance process is to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen applications of this Ordinance that create particular hardships. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for zoning variances may be filed by an owner of any property in the City for that property. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. Variances may be authorized by the terms of this Ordinance. Minor and major variances, in accordance with the standards of, and as defined by, Paragraph D.2 (Minor Variance) and D.3 (Major Variance), may be authorized only after a public hearing, where the Zoning Board of Appeals has made findings of fact in accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below, that owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in practical difficulties or particular hardship for the owner of land or a structure. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant certain administrative variances, in accordance with the standards of, and as defined by, Paragraph D.1 (Administrative Variance) and only after making findings of fact in accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below. 
(d)  Procedure. All applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall make a determination whether the application is for an administrative variance, a minor variance or a major variance. In the case of a minor or major variance, the Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. (See Appendix B for Flowchart 2: Variance Process.) (Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
(1)  Procedure for Administrative Variance. 
a.  The Zoning Administrator is authorized to render final decisions on application for variances from the regulations of this Ordinance in the following instances and in no others: 
i.  A variance of the applicable minimum lot size requirements for single-family and two-family dwellings may be granted by the Zoning Administrator if the substandard lot has an existing structure constructed upon it at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. If the lot is vacant, the Zoning Administrator is not authorized to grant any part of the request. In some instances, a lot width or lot area that does not meet Ordinance requirements may be controlled by the provisions of Section 15.5 (Nonconforming Lots of Record). 
ii.  A variance to applicable off-street parking and loading requirements by no more than five percent (5%). 
iii.  A variance to the regulations contained in Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) relating to the storage of recreational vehicles in required front and corner side yards in cases where physical access to an interior side or rear yard is impractical. 
b.  The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and make findings of fact in accordance with Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request. The Zoning Administrator shall render a decision within thirty (30) days of the date indicated on the required notice. If, in the Zoning Administrator's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable him to properly discharge his responsibilities, he may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the thirty (30) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. The Zoning Administrator may also, at his discretion, determine that, because of its nature, a variance application shall be resubmitted in accordance with the procedures for a minor or major variance, as described in Paragraphs D-2 (Minor Variance) or D-3 (Major Variance) below. 
c.  If any noticed property owner objects to the administrative variance application in writing, prior to the date the Zoning Administrator is scheduled to render a decision, the application shall be resubmitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals as a minor variance. Minor variance application, notice and public hearing requirements shall be required. 
d.  If the Zoning Administrator denies the application for an administrative variance, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Appeals must be filed within thirty (30) days of the Zoning Administrator's denial in accordance with Section 4.3 (Zoning Appeal). 
(2)  Procedure for Minor Variance. 
a.  The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to render final decisions on applications for variances from the regulations of this Ordinance in the following instances and in no others: 
i.  A variance of the applicable minimum lot size requirements for single-family and two-family dwellings may be granted for a vacant lot provided that the minimum lot area shall not be reduced more than ten percent (10%), nor shall the minimum lot width requirements be reduced more than twenty-five percent (25%). If the requested variance exceeds this limitation (either lot area or lot width), the Zoning Administrator is not authorized to grant any part of the request. No variance may create a substandard lot out of an existing conforming lot. In some instances, a minimum lot width or lot area that does not meet Ordinance requirements may be controlled by the provisions of Section 15.5 (Nonconforming Lots of Record). 
ii.  A variance of the applicable bulk regulations, including minimum yard areas and maximum height and lot coverage requirements by no more than twenty percent (20%), and a variance of the floor area ratio for existing buildings by no more than ten percent (10%) of total floor area. No variance may be considered for floor area ratio of new construction. 
iii.  A variance to applicable off-street parking and loading requirements by no more than twenty-five percent (25%). 
iv.  A variance of the regulations pertaining to restoration of damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures contained in Section 15 (Nonconformities). 
v.  A variance to the maximum height of fences by no more than twenty percent (20%). 
b.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, with respect to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below. If, in the Zoning Board of Appeal's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Board to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Board may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. Following the close of the public hearing and findings of fact, the Board shall grant or deny the minor variance within forty-five (45) days. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the location, construction, design and use of the property benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate to protect the public interest, adjacent property and property values. Failure to maintain such conditions or restrictions as may be imposed shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variance. The terms of relief granted, including any conditions or restrictions, shall be specifically set forth in the concluding statement separate from the findings of fact. 
(3)  Procedure for Major Variance. 
a.  Major variances, defined as any variance other than those described in Paragraphs (d)(1) (Administrative Variance) and (d)(2) (Minor Variance) above, shall be reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in a public hearing, but the Board shall have no authority to grant final approval for or denial of such major variances. 
b.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend findings of fact to the City Council, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, with respect to each of the standards in Paragraph E (Findings of Fact) below. If, in the Zoning Board of Appeal's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Board to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Board may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall vote to recommend approval or approval with conditions, or to recommend denial of the application. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, forward its recommendation to the City Council. 
d.  The City Council shall consider the major variance within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation. The City Council shall have the authority to approve the major variance by enactment of an ordinance, with or without conditions, or to deny the major variance. If the Zoning Board of Appeals recommends denial of the major variance, the major variance cannot be approved by the City Council except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all Aldermen. The City Council may also refer the application back to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration. 
e.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the City Council may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the location, construction, design and use of the property benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate to protect the public interest, adjacent property and property values. Failure to maintain such conditions or restrictions as may be imposed shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variance. The terms of relief granted, including any conditions or restrictions, shall be specifically set forth in the ordinance approving the major variance. 
(e)  Findings of Fact. 
(1)  No variance from the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted unless the Zoning Administrator (administrative variance), the Zoning Board of Appeals (minor variance) and City Council (major variance) makes specific written findings of fact based directly on the standards and conditions imposed by this section. This requirement may be satisfied by incorporating the findings of fact into the meeting minutes of the Zoning Board of Appeals or City Council, the Zoning Administrator's report, the ordinance approving the variance, or other written record. 
These standards are as follows: 
a.  The strict application of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance will result in undue hardship. 
b.  The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances. 
c.  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator, Zoning Board of Appeals or City Council, in making its findings of fact, may inquire into the following evidentiary issues, as well as any others deemed appropriate: 
a.  The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property impose a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out. 
b.  The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having a proprietary interest in the property in question nor by any person in privity with the person having a proprietary interest. 
c.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
d.  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
e.  The proposed variance is consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
f.  The value of the property in question will be substantially reduced if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the district in which it is located. 
(f)  Variance Less Than Requested. A variance less than that requested may be granted by the appropriate administrative body when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the entire relief requested. 
(g)  Limitations on Variances. 
(1)  A variance shall expire and be of no further effect unless application for a zoning certificate is made within twelve (12) months of the grant of the variance; and 
(2)  Construction, pursuant to a building permit has been commenced within twelve (12) months of the grant; and 
(3)  An occupancy certificate is obtained and a use is commenced within twenty-four (24) months of the grant. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant additional extensions of time, not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each, upon written application made within the initial time periods without further notice or hearing. However, this power to so extend the time period shall not include the power to grant additional relief by expanding the scope of the variance. 
(h)  Limitations on Denials. If an application for a variance has been denied, by either the City Council or the Zoning Board of Appeals, no application for substantially the same variance may be filed for a period of one (1) year from that date of denial. Whether the application is for "substantially the same" variance shall be within the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2011-61, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 2016-49 , §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2016) 
4.5 - Site plan review. 
(a)  Purpose. The site plan review process is intended to promote orderly development and redevelopment in the City, and to assure that such development or redevelopment occurs in a manner that is harmonious with surrounding properties, is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and promotes the general welfare of the City. This section provides standards by which to determine and control the physical layout and design to achieve the: 
(1)  Compatibility of land uses, buildings and structures. 
(2)  Protection and enhancement of community property values. 
(3)  Efficient use of land. 
(4)  Minimization of traffic and safety hazards, and efficient parking layout. 
(5)  Minimization of adverse impacts on the environment, including the incorporation of sustainable design and green architecture techniques. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for site plan reviews may be filed by an owner of any property in the City for that property. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. All projects requiring a building permit, with the exception of those for single-family or two-family dwellings, shall first require that a site plan review be submitted for review and approval by the City. All applications are subject to site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, except where allowed as an administrative site plan review, as noted in Section D.1.a. 
(d)  Procedure. Applications for site plan review shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is complete, the application shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless such application is eligible for administrative site plan review. (See Appendix B for Flowchart 3: Administrative Site Plan and Site Plan Review Process.) 
(1)  Applications for Administrative Site Plan Review. 
a.  Applications Eligible for Administrative Site Plan Review. The following uses require site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator only. The Zoning Administrator has the authority to require that the Commission review an application intended for administrative site plan review if it is appropriate because of the nature of the request. 
i.  Stealth design of wireless telecommunications antennas, as defined in Section 10.3.R.10, that are permitted uses. 
ii.  Large satellite dish antennas, as defined in Section 11.4.N. 
iii.  New construction and modifications to existing ham radio antennas and equipment, subject to Section 11.4.B (Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment); and except when site plan review is required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as noted in Section 11.4.B. 
iv.  Additions to or interior modifications to permitted uses within the commercial districts, where the existing structure contains a floor area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet. 
v.  All interior building modifications within the Hospital District, including a use change. Any maintenance or repair to buildings or structures within the Hospital District. 
vi.  Outdoor cafes, accessory to a restaurant, subject to Section 11.4.J. 
b.  Procedure for Administrative Site Plan Review. 
i.  A decision on a completed administrative site plan review application shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. 
ii.  If, in the Zoning Administrator's judgment, the site plan review application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Zoning Administrator to properly discharge his responsibilities, the Zoning Administrator may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the thirty (30) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
iii.  The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with conditions or reject the site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant within fifteen (15) days of the action taken. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the site plan pursuant to the standards in Paragraph D (Standards for Site Plan Review). 
iv.  If the Zoning Administrator rejects a site plan, the applicant may resubmit the site plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission, in accordance with the procedures in Paragraph C.2 (Site Plan Review by Planning and Zoning Commission) below. 
(2)  Planning and Zoning Commission Site Plan Review. 
a.  Applications Eligible for Site Plan Review by Planning and Zoning Commission. All applications for site plan review, except those set forth in Paragraph C.1.a above, shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b.  Procedure for Site Plan Review by Planning and Zoning Commission 
i.  A decision on a completed application for site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be rendered within sixty (60) days of the date the complete application is received by the Zoning Administrator. Notice shall be given in accordance with Section 3.3(c) (Posted Sign Notices). 
ii.  If, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the site plan review application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Commission may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
iii.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the site plan within sixty (60) days. The vote on every decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, with respect to site plan review shall be included in the Commission's minutes. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant within ten (10) days of the action taken. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the site plan pursuant to the applicable standards in Paragraph (d) (Standards for Site Plan Review) below. Planning and Zoning Commission approval of a site plan shall be considered a final administrative decision. Planning and Zoning Commission denial of a site plan may be appealed by the applicant as set forth in paragraph iv below. 
iv.  An applicant may appeal the Planning and Zoning Commission's denial of its site plan to the City Council by submitting a written request to the Zoning Administrator within ten (10) days of the notice of the denial. The City Council will consider the applicant's appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the applicant's request. The City Council has the authority to grant the applicant's appeal and approve the site plan, with or without modifications, or deny the applicant's appeal and uphold the denial of the site plan. 
(e)  Standards for Site Plan Review. Each site plan submitted for review shall include the following details: the location of principal and accessory structures, infrastructure, open space, landscaping, exterior lighting, traffic movement and flow, number of parking spaces, design of parking lots, and location of landscaping and screening. 
In reviewing site plans, the relationship of the site plan to the following shall be considered: 
(1)  Degree of conformity with this Ordinance and all other applicable City codes and regulations. 
(2)  Compatibility with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Site Design. The location, arrangement, size, design and general site compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs, including: 
a.  Efficient use of land that responds to the existing off-site utilities and service conditions in order to minimize the demand for additional municipal services, utilities and infrastructure. 
b.  Compatibility with, and mitigation of, any potential impact upon, adjacent property. 
c.  Site illumination designed and installed to minimize adverse impact on adjacent properties, including compliance with the requirements of Section 11.3 (Exterior Lighting). 
d.  Signs in accordance with Section 14 (Signs). If the site plan is submitted for a strip commercial development with multiple tenants, with more than one (1) wall sign, awning or canopy proposed, a master sign plan, in accordance with Section 14.10 (Master Sign Plan Required) is required. 
(4)  Landscaping, Screening and Open Space. Landscaping and the arrangement of open space or natural features on the site should: 
a.  Create a desirable and functional environment for motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists and occupants of residential dwellings, business owners and employees. To achieve such an environment, landscaping may take advantage of open space design features such as bike paths, running paths and outdoor relaxation areas. 
b.  Utilize sustainable design techniques such as: green roofs and other energy efficient design concepts; water conservation; environmental sensitivity; new building technologies; Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) techniques; and xeriscaping (water conservation landscaping). 
c.  Preserve unique natural resources, including measures to preserve and protect existing healthy, mature trees in accordance with the tree preservation ordinance of in Article 15, Chapter 18 of the City's Municipal Code. 
d.  Protect natural resources and landscaping on adjacent sites. 
e.  Design drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation of natural watercourses and patterns of drainage. 
f.  Utilize plant materials suitable to withstand the climatic conditions of the City and microclimate of the site. The use of species native to northeastern Illinois is encouraged. 
g.  Use of screening to buffer the impact of the development on adjacent uses and enhance the appearance and image of the City by screening incompatible uses and certain site elements, as described in Sections 13.13 (Transition Yards) and 13.14 (Screening Requirements), and creating a logical transition to adjoining lots and developments. 
(5)  Circulation and Off-Street Parking. Circulation systems and off-street parking shall be designed to: 
a.  Provide adequate and safe access to the site for motor vehicles as well as alternate modes of transportation, including pedestrians and bicyclists. 
b.  Minimizing potentially dangerous traffic movements. 
c.  Separate pedestrian and auto circulation and provide for bicycle parking or storage insofar as practical. 
d.  Minimize curb cuts by using cross-access easements and shared parking. 
e.  Design off-street parking lots or garages to minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties, particularly through the use of perimeter and interior landscaping, and promote logical and safe parking and internal circulation. 
f.  Clearly define pedestrian access from the parking area to the building(s). A clearly defined visible and identifiable network of pedestrian connections should be provided in and between parking lots, street sidewalks, open spaces and buildings. 
(f)  Amendments to Approved Site Plan Reviews. 
(1)  Application. An application for an amendment to an approved site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Amendment applications shall include a written description of the proposed change, including the reason for such change, and a notation of the location on the approved site plan. 
(2)  Determination of Type of Change. Upon receipt of a complete application and using the following criteria, the Zoning Administrator shall determine within five (5) days whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major change to an approved site plan. Major changes to an approved site plan shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  An increase in the gross floor area. 
b.  A change in building height. 
c.  A change in the number of dwelling units. 
d.  A reduction in open space or required yards. 
e.  A reduction in the number of parking spaces or an increase of more than four (4) parking spaces. 
f.  A change in the number and/or location of accesses to public streets or alleys. 
g.  A change in excess of one (1) foot in the location of walkways, vehicle circulation ways and parking areas, or exterior building or structure walls. 
h.  A change to the landscape plan that results in a reduction in the net amount of plant material. 
A minor change is considered any change that is not a major change, as defined above. 
(3)  Approved Site Plan Review Minor Change Procedure. 
a.  The Zoning Administrator shall approve minor changes to approved site plans within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complete application. The thirty (30) day timeframe shall commence after the determination that the change is a minor change in accordance with Paragraph 2 above. If, in the Zoning Administrator's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable him/her to properly discharge his responsibilities, he may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the thirty (30) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
b.  The Zoning Administrator may also, at his discretion, determine that a proposed change to an approved site plan constitutes a major change and, as such, must be submitted to the full Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the procedures for a major change. 
c.  If the Zoning Administrator does not approve the minor change, the application may be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the procedures for a major change. 
(4)  Approved Site Plan Review Major Change Procedure. 
a.  Once reviewed for completeness, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the complete application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider amendment applications within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. If, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Commission may request additional information from the applicant. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide its decision in writing, along with reasons for approval or denial. In the event that the Planning and Zoning Commission does not render a decision within the prescribed time period, the amendment application shall be deemed to be denied. 
c.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may decide that the proposed change or changes to the approved site plan is such a significant change that it constitutes a new application and is subject to the complete site plan review provisions of this section. 
(5)  Submittal of Revised Site Plan. The Zoning Administrator or Planning and Zoning Commission may determine that a proposed amendment to an approved site plan requires submittal of a revised site plan for proper evaluation. Such revised site plan shall only include those components of the site plan submittal package impacted by the proposed change. Until such revised site plan is submitted, the application shall not be considered complete. 
Nothing within this section shall prevent an applicant from submitting a revised site plan with the amendment application at the time of initial submission. 
(g)  Limitations on Site Plan Review Approvals. If work on any project which is granted site plan approval after the effective date of this Ordinance (06/19/2017) has not begun within two (2) years from the date the site plan approval was granted, the site plan approval shall become null and void and all rights granted pursuant to the site plan approval shall lapse. Upon written application, filed with the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the two-year (2) time limit, the City Council may authorize not more than one (1) extension for a period of not more than one (1) additional year. No public hearing shall be required to grant an extension of time. Major and minor changes to the site plan approval shall have no effect on these expiration or extension times. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2016-49 , § 3, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-33 , § 2, 6-19-2017) 
4.6 - Special use. 
(a)  Purpose. The development and execution of a Zoning Ordinance is based upon the division of the City into districts. Within each district the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are specific uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses may be either public or private, and are of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for special uses may be filed by an owner of any property in the City for that property to use that land for one (1) or more of the special uses provided for in this Ordinance within the zoning district in which the land is situated or to change an existing special use. 
(c)  Authority and Execution. The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall take formal action on special use requests. 
(d)  Procedure. Applications for special uses shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in Section 3.2 (Application). Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (See Appendix B for Flowchart 4: Special Use Process.) 
1.  Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed special use in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) no more than sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). If, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Commission may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty-day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
b.  Following a public hearing on an application for special use, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall vote to recommend approval or approval with conditions or to recommend denial of the special use. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, forward its recommendation to the City Council together with the minutes of the hearing and the Commission's findings of fact. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph (e) (Findings of Fact) below and the standards of Section 4.5(d) (Standards for Site Plan Review). 
2.  Action by the City Council. The City Council shall consider the special use within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. The City Council shall have the authority to approve the special use by enactment of an ordinance, with or without conditions, or to deny the special use. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial of the special use permit, the special use permit cannot be approved by the City Council except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all Aldermen. In granting any special use, the City Council may require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary to assure compliance with the stipulated conditions. The City Council may refer the application back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration. 
3.  Conditions on Special Uses. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. 
(e)  Findings of Fact. 
(1)  No special use shall be recommended for approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless it has made findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, to support each of the following conclusions: 
a.  The establishment, maintenance and operation of the special use in the specific location proposed will not endanger the public health, safety or general welfare of any portion of the community. 
b.  The proposed special use is compatible with adjacent properties and other property within the immediate vicinity of the special use. 
c.  The special use in the specific location proposed is consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission, in making findings of fact, may inquire into the following evidentiary issues, as well as any others it determines to be appropriate: 
a.  Whether property values in the immediate vicinity of the special use will be diminished or impaired. 
b.  Ingress and egress to the subject property and its proposed structures, with particular attention to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, including access by emergency vehicles. 
c.  Off-street parking and loading areas proposed for the special use, with particular attention to the location and adequacy of such facilities. 
d.  The operational characteristics of the proposed special use and their effects on adjacent properties. Particular attention shall be given to the hours of operation, noise, glare, odor, refuse storage and other relevant environmental factors. 
e.  Utilities and storm drainage facilities as proposed, with reference to their location, availability, adequacy and compatibility. 
f.  Screening, landscaping and buffering, with specific reference to the type proposed, the dimensions and character, and the effectiveness in shielding adjacent properties. 
g.  Signs and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety and compatibility and harmony with adjacent properties. 
h.  The quantity and degree of deviation from the applicable requirements of the district in which the subject property is located, as balanced against the desirability of the special use. 
(3)  The findings of fact requirement may be satisfied by incorporating the findings of fact into the meeting minutes of the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, the Zoning Administrator's report, the ordinance approving a special use permit, or other written record. 
(f)  No Presumption of Approval. The listing of a use as a special use within a zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such special use will be approved. Rather each proposed special use shall be evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. Such evaluation will determine whether approval of the special use is appropriate at the particular location and in the particular manner proposed. 
(g)  Limitations on Special Uses. 
(1)  If work on the proposed development has not begun within two (2) years from the date the special use was granted by the City Council, the special use shall become null and void and all rights granted pursuant to the special use shall lapse. Upon written application, filed with the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the two (2) year time limit, the City Council may authorize not more than one (1) extension for a period of not more than one (1) additional year. 
(2)  Whenever an existing special use is changed to or replaced by a permitted use, or whenever a special use is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or where there is evidence of a clear intent on the part of the owner of the special use to abandon same, the special use shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall lapse. In the case where a special use is discontinued, upon written application filed with the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the six (6) month time limit, the City Council may authorize not more than one (1) extension for a period of not more than six (6) additional months. 
(3)  Modification of an element of an existing special use which is material to its nature (such as structural change, relocation or change in use) shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this Ordinance for a new special use. 
(h)  Limitations on Denials. If an application for a special use has been denied, no application for substantially the same special use may be filed for a period of one (1) year from that date of denial. Whether the application is for "substantially the same" special use shall be within the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2011-61, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 2016-49 , §§ 4-6, 7-5-2016) 
4.7 - Planned development. 
    Where permitted within district regulations, planned developments shall be considered special uses, and subject to the process and requirements of both special uses (Section 4.6 (Special Uses) above) and planned developments. See Section 5 (Planned Developments) of this Ordinance for planned development process and requirements. 
4.8 - Zoning amendment. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations imposed and the districts created by this Ordinance may be amended from time to time in accordance with this Section. This process for amending the Zoning Ordinance text or the Zoning Map is intended to permit modifications in response to changed conditions or changes in City policy. Amendments are not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special privileges or rights upon any person or party. 
(b)  Initiation. Applications for zoning amendments (text or map amendments) may be filed by the City or by an owner of any property that is in the City. 
(c)  Procedure. Applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements of Section 3.2 (Application). Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Amendments initiated by the City also require an application, but are exempt from fees. (See Appendix B for Flowchart 5: Zoning Text and Map Amendment Process.) 
(1)  Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment, in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) no more than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). If, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Commission may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph D (Findings of Fact for Zoning Amendments) below. 
c.  Within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward to the City Council its recommendation, together with the minutes of the hearing and the Commission's findings of fact. The Commission recommendation may take the form of approval or denial. If the requested amendment is a text amendment, the recommendation shall include the Commission's proposed language. 
(2)  Action by the City Council. 
a.  Procedure. Subject to the Zoning Amendment Action Table set forth in (b) below; consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation shall be placed on a City Council agenda within thirty (30) days. The City Council may take action in the form of approval or denial. In the case of text amendments, the City Council shall not be bound by the precise language of the Commission recommendations. The City Council may also refer the application back to the Commission for further consideration. 
b.  City Council Zoning Amendment Action Table. The following table describes the action requirements for the various zoning amendments. 
ZONING AMENDMENT ACTION TABLE Type of Amendment Request Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation After Public Hearing Further Action City Council Vote required for Adoption* Text or Map Denial Forwarded to City Council Super majority Text or Map Approval Forwarded to City Council Majority  
*For the purposes of this table a super majority vote shall be defined as six votes of the City Council, including the Mayor. 
c.  Findings of Fact for Zoning Amendments. The Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation and City Council decision on any zoning amendment, whether text or map amendment, is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any particular standard. However, in making a recommendation and decision, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the following standards, as set forth in Table 1: Standards for Zoning Amendments below. 
TABLE 1: STANDARDS FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS Standards Map Amendments Text Amendments The existing use and zoning of nearby property. X The extent to which property values of the subject property are diminished by the existing zoning. X The extent to which the proposed amendment promotes the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the City. X X The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the applicant. X X The suitability of the property for the purposes for which it is presently zoned, i.e. the feasibility of developing the property in question for one (1) or more of the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification. X The length of time that the property in question has been vacant, as presently zoned, considered in the context of development in the area where the property is located. X The evidence, or lack of evidence, of community need for the use proposed by the applicant. X The consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive Plan. X X The consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent and general regulations of this Ordinance. X Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or omission, adds clarification to existing requirements, or reflects a change in policy. X That the proposed amendment will benefit the residents of the City as a whole, and not just the applicant, property owner(s), neighbors of any property under consideration, or other special interest groups, and the extent to which the proposed use would be in the public interest and would not serve solely the interest of the applicant. X X Whether the proposed amendment provides a more workable way to achieve the intent and purposes of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan. X The extent to which the proposed amendment creates nonconformities. X X The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question. X Whether adequate public facilities are available including, but not limited to, schools, parks, police and fire protection, roads, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines, or are reasonably capable of being provided prior to the development of the uses, which would be permitted on the subject property if the amendment were adopted. X The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the overall structure and organization of this Ordinance. X  
d.  Limitations on Denials. If an application for an amendment has been denied, no application for substantially the same amendment may be filed for a period of one (1) year from that date of denial. Whether the application is for "substantially the same" amendment shall be within the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-81, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 2011-61, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 2016-49 , §§ 7, 8, 7-5-2016) 
4.9 - Zoning certificate. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a zoning certificate is to promote Ordinance compliance by establishing a procedure for the City to certify that an application complies with all standards of the Ordinance. 
(b)  Applicability. No structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, remodeled, added to or removed, nor shall any building permit pertaining to the above activities be issued, nor shall any existing structure or vacant land be used for any different use or purpose, unless a zoning certificate shall first have been issued by the Zoning Administrator certifying that the proposed structure or use complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for issuing zoning certificates. Application for a zoning certificate for the construction of a new building or for structural alteration of an existing building shall be made at the same time as the application for a building permit. Application for a zoning certificate for a change in the use of land or of a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application. 
(d)  Limitations on Zoning Certificates. 
(1)  Whenever a building permit is required, an approved zoning certificate shall become null and void six (6) months after the date of issuance of such certificate, unless a building permit is issued within the six (6) month period or an extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  When a building permit is not required, an approved zoning certificate shall become null and void three (3) months after the date of issuance of such certificate, unless the proposed use or other activity not requiring a building permit is commenced or an extension is granted by the Zoning Administrator. 
4.10 - Sign Permit. 
(a)  Applicability. No sign, except those identified as exempt in Section 14 (Signs), shall be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without first obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  Authority and Execution. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for determining compliance with this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator and Building Official shall be responsible for issuing a sign permit. An appeal of a staff decision on the denial of a permit based on the Design Guidelines shall be made to the Appearance Commission pursuant to Article 15 Chapter 7 of the City Code. Appeals regarding an interpretation by the Zoning Administrator regarding Section 14 may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals following the requirements of Section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Permit Issuance. Upon the filing of an application for a permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a sign, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies, and shall take no steps to process the application until the deficiencies are remedied. Once it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall: 
(1)  Examine the plans and specifications and the premises upon which the proposed structure is to be erected. 
(2)  Issue a permit if the structure complies with the requirements of this Ordinance and all other ordinances of the City. If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void. 
(3)  Review and approval or denial of any complete application for wall and ground signs shall be made by the Community Preservation and Development Department. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the application 
(d)  Approval of Selected Permanent Signs. The application for a sign permit for the erection of an awning or canopy sign, ground monument or pole sign, marquee, projecting sign or wall sign shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve all plans and specifications as a condition of granting the sign permit. 
(e)  Approval of Electrified Signs. The application for a sign permit for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the specifications regarding all wiring and connections to the Building Official. The Building Official shall examine the plans and specifications to determine compliance with the Electrical Code of the City as a condition of granting the sign permit. 
(f)  Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect, at such times as deemed appropriate, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this Ordinance. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or insecure, whether in need of repair or removal, or not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(g)  Revocation of Permit. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this section are mere licenses revocable at any time by the City Council. Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee shall remove the sign or other advertising structure without cost or expense of any kind to the City. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the licensee to do so, the City may proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
4.11 - Penalties and fines. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any subsequent violation and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any violation. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 5 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

5.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these planned development regulations is to: 
(a)  Encourage flexibility in the development of land and in the design of structures. 
(b)  Encourage planned diversification in the location of structures. 
(c)  Encourage a creative approach to the use of land that results in better development and design than might otherwise be accomplished under the strict application of other Sections of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective arrangement of land uses, buildings, circulation systems and utilities. 
(e)  Provide for more usable and suitably located open space and recreation areas than might otherwise be provided under the application of other Sections of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Encourage the construction of appropriate aesthetic amenities which will enhance the character of the site. 
(g)  Guarantee quality construction commensurate with other developments within the community, and compatible with the character of the surrounding area and adjoining properties. 
(h)  Facilitate the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan, particularly with respect to areas designated for potential redevelopment within the Plan. 
(i)  Provide for the development of unique land areas and sites that would not be possible under the strict application of the other Sections of this Ordinance. 
(j)  Encourage quality construction and design through an efficient application procedure which is sensitive to the need for expeditious development review. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.2 - Initiation. 
    Applications for planned developments may be filed by an owner of any property in the City for that property, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.3 (Authorization). 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.3 - Authorization. 
    A planned development may be authorized as a special use in all zoning districts except the R-1 and R-2 Districts. A planned development shall be granted in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Section, and the special use provisions of Section 4.6 (Special Use). Unless specifically approved by the ordinance granting or amending the planned development as a special use, the requirements of the underlying district shall apply. The ordinance granting or amending the planned development as a special use may depart from the normal procedures, standards and other requirements of this Ordinance. Planned developments are not intended to serve as a means by which an applicant seeks to circumvent normal zoning or other land use regulations. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may approve, specific conditions when recommending or authorizing a Planned Development. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.4 - General standards for planned developments. 
(a)  The site of the planned development shall be under common ownership and/or unified control. If there are two (2) or more owners, the application for the planned development shall be jointly filed by all such owners. 
(b)  With the exception of the B-4 Uptown Business District, the minimum zoning lot area for planned developments shall be twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. In the B-4 Uptown Business District there shall be no minimum size requirement. 
(c)  The ordinance authorizing the special use for a planned development may grant exceptions to the regulations contained in this Ordinance including, but not limited to, use, density, area, bulk, off-street parking and loading, and signs, as may be desirable to achieve the objectives of the proposed planned development, provided that such exceptions are fully consistent with and authorized by this Section. 
(d)  Planned developments shall be compatible with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the City's Comprehensive Plan. A planned development shall not substantially diminish the market value of surrounding properties, and it shall cause no substantial impairment of the use of those properties. 
(e)  Planned developments shall not adversely affect the natural environment of the community as a whole. Natural assets and features, such as existing trees and native vegetation, shall be protected and preserved to the greatest extent practical. 
(f)  The site shall be accessible to public streets that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be generated by the proposed development. The streets and driveways within the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the uses within the development. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost and installation of additional traffic controls and regulating devices that are required. 
(g)  All proposed streets, alleys and driveways shall be adequate to serve the residents, occupants, visitors or other anticipated traffic. The planned development may be designed to discourage outside through traffic from traversing the development. Access points to public streets, and the location of private streets, alleys and driveways shall be subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission when granting the special use. 
(h)  The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be located to provide for separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement and for maximum pedestrian safety. 
(i)  All planned developments shall provide for underground installation of utilities, including electricity, cable and telephone. Provisions shall be made for acceptable design and construction of storm sewer facilities and appropriate storm retention and detention devices. The construction and maintenance of all utilities, roadways, parking facilities and other site improvements shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and other regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.5 - Exceptions from district regulations. 
(a)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant exceptions to the district bulk regulations where a planned development is located. The planned development is subject to the underlying district regulations unless such exception is granted. Exceptions from district regulations may be granted for planned developments with respect to height, density, bulk regulations and setbacks, off street parking and loading, landscaping and screening and signage, if the City Council finds that allowing such exceptions: 
(1)  Enhances the overall merit of the planned development. 
(2)  Promotes the objectives of both the City and the development. 
(3)  Enhances the quality of the design of the structures and the site plan. 
(4)  Enables the development to offer environmental and pedestrian amenities. 
(5)  Will not cause such an adverse impact on neighboring properties so as to outweigh the benefits of the development. 
(6)  Is compatible with the land use policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(7)  Provides a public benefit to the City, as described in Paragraph C below. 
(b)  The planned development is subject to the underlying district use regulations unless the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends and the City Council permits uses other than those allowed within the district when it is determined by the City Council to be desirable in achieving the objectives of the planned development. However, there must be clear evidence that such uses: 
(1)  Are desirable and appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development; and 
(2)  are not of such a nature, or so located, as to exercise a detrimental influence on the development or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  The underlying zoning district requirements shall apply, unless an exception is granted by ordinance as part of the approved special use. Exceptions to district regulations may be granted where it is determined that such modifications shall not negatively affect the value and enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the flow of traffic. To be granted such exceptions, the planned development applicant must demonstrate superior design and enhanced amenities. In no case shall an exception to district regulations within a planned development be granted unless the applicant demonstrates a substantial benefit to the City. Design characteristics and amenities to be considered in this determination shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Landscaping, buffering or screening within or around the perimeter of the planned development that is in addition to the minimum required by this Ordinance. 
(2)  The provision of underground parking, and additional landscaping and screening of parking lots and structures in addition to the minimum required by this Ordinance. 
(3)  Reduced use of impervious surface materials, including cluster development and use of semi-pervious materials such as grass-crete. 
(4)  Design characteristics including, but not limited to, mixed-use development, circulation systems that utilize alleys or traffic-calming techniques, and a pedestrian-oriented environment. 
(5)  Use of sustainable design and green architecture such as: green roofs and other energy efficient design concepts; water conservation; environmental sensitivity; new building technologies; Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) techniques; and xeriscaping (water conservation landscaping). 
(6)  Community amenities including plazas, malls, formal gardens, places to congregate, outdoor seating, public art, and pedestrian and transit facilities. 
(7)  Preservation of environmental features. 
(8)  Preservation of historic features. 
(9)  Open space and recreational amenities that are available to the public such as: 
a.  Swimming pools. 
b.  Tennis courts. 
c.  Recreational open space accessory buildings. 
d.  Jogging trails and fitness courses. 
e.  Playgrounds. 
f.  Natural water features, wetlands and conservation areas. 
g.  Detention areas which are accessible to occupants or the public via nature trails, boardwalks, and/or perimeter walkways, but only if they are designed as natural water features and are landscaped with native vegetation. 
(10)  Additional public infrastructure improvements in addition to the minimum required by the planned development, such as new or repaved streets, installation of gutters and sewers, and traffic control devices to improve traffic flow. 
(11)  An affordable housing set-aside of twenty percent (20%) or more of all units as either rental or for-sale, according to the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) guidelines. 
(12)  A senior housing set-aside, either rental or for-sale. 
(13)  Provision of accessible dwelling units with accessible features beyond what is required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or any other applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.6 - Procedure. 
(a)  Pre-Application Consultation. 
(1)  Staff Review. Prior to filing a formal application for a PD, the developer shall request on forms available from the City's Community Preservation and Development Department (CP&D), a concept plan and technical review by the City's staff, including representatives from the Community Preservation and Development Department, the Fire Department, and the Public Works Department. Upon receipt of a complete application for such a review, the CP&D shall distribute copies of the application to appropriate staff and consultants, and schedule a meeting for the review. Unless agreed upon by the applicant, this meeting shall occur no later than 30 days after submission of a complete application. At a minimum, the application for concept plan and technical review shall include: 
a.  A map showing the proposed development site and surrounding land uses. 
b.  Concept site plan showing location of streets, existing and proposed buildings, landscaping and subdivision of land. 
c.  Information regarding site topography, drainage, intentions for storm water management, and existing utilities. 
d.  Building materials with proposed materials. 
(2)  Technical Review Staff Meeting. The advisory only. Nothing offered or said by the staff members shall be construed as approval of the project or approval of any particular element of the project. All advice and recommendations are subject to modification during later stages of the approval process. The purposes of the technical review staff meeting are to advise: 
a.  Whether the proposed planned development appears to be in general compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other regulations. 
b.  Whether the proposed planned development will be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, and the goals and policies of the City for development. 
(3)  Post-Meeting Report. Each member of the technical review staff will be given an opportunity to present recommendations on the concept plan, and the City shall provide a written report to the applicant containing a summary of the staff recommendations. 
(b)  Optional Concept Plan. 
(1)  Before submitting a formal application for a planned development, the applicant may present a concept plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The purpose of this submission is to obtain information and guidance prior to entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense. At minimum, such a concept presentation shall consist of the following: 
a.  A map or maps in general form containing the proposed land uses, the natural features of the development site, the character and approximate location of all roadways and access drives proposed within the planned development, the location of all adjacent public streets, thoroughfares and public utilities, and schematic drawings showing the size, character and location of buildings on the site. 
b.  A written statement containing a general explanation of the planned development, including a statement of the present ownership of all the land within the development and the expected schedule of construction. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the concept plan, and may provide such information and guidance as it deems appropriate. Any opinions or advice provided by the Commission shall in no way be binding with respect to any official action the Commission or City Council may take on the subsequent formal application. The review of the concept plan shall not be a public hearing, and any failure to observe formal procedures shall not affect the validity of any decision of the Commission or the City Council. 
(c)  Application for a Special Use for a Planned Development. (Including Review of the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat/Plat Procedure) Applications for planned developments shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements of Section 3.2 (Application) and shall contain a PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat. Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the application and PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(1)  Minimum Substantive Requirements. Every application for a planned development and review of the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat shall contain the following: 
a.  A plat of survey of the parcel or parcels of land comprising the zoning lot. The plat shall be drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of this zoning lot, including all parcels or lots within the zoning lot. The plat shall be drawn in accordance with the recorded plat of such land. 
b.  Proof of ownership. 
c.  A site location map drawn to an appropriate scale showing the streets and all property uses located within six hundred (600) feet in all directions of the development site. The map shall indicate the location, height and use of all existing buildings and structures on properties immediately adjacent to the development site. 
d.  A preliminary site plan drawn to an appropriate scale showing: 
i.  The location, ground area, height, bulk and approximate dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the planned development. 
ii.  The use or uses to be made of such existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
iii.  The dimensions of all perimeter setbacks and the distance between all buildings and structures. 
iv.  The location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways, driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the number of parking spaces serving each building or land use type and all parking related screening and landscaping. 
v.  The location, height, design and illumination characteristics of all external lighting fixtures within the development. 
vi.  The location and dimensions of any areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of worship, school sites, public buildings or for any other public or quasi-public use. 
e.  Typical building elevations and schematic design presentations indicating the general architectural character of all proposed buildings and structures. The drawings need not be the result of final architectural decisions and need not be in detail. 
f.  A traffic circulation plan indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the planned development and to and from adjacent streets. The plan shall address the impact of the proposed planned development upon existing traffic patterns. Such study shall also include an examination of the adequacy of on-site parking facilities, vehicular circulation patterns and pedestrian access and safety. 
g.  A drainage plan indicating the manner in which surface drainage will be controlled and managed. 
h.  A utilities study prepared by a qualified professional indicating the adequacy of the utility systems serving the proposed planned development, including water distribution lines, sanitary sewers and storm water drainage facilities. 
i.  A preliminary landscape plan prepared by a qualified professional indicating the general character of all proposed landscaping, screening and fencing, including all open space areas around buildings and structures. The landscape plan need not be the result of final architectural decisions and need not be in detail. 
j.  A separate schedule setting forth any proposed exceptions to any City regulations. The schedule shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the regulations governing use, density, area, bulk, off street parking and loading and signs as they apply to the zoning district or districts within which the planned development is to be located. This schedule shall cite by Section number each and every regulation from which an exception is sought. 
k.  Such other documentation as the Planning and Zoning Commission may, by general rule, require. 
(2)  Procedural Requirements. The procedure for approval of the Planned Development shall be: 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing for the approval of the special use for a planned development and for review of the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat, in accordance with Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) no more than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 3.3 (Public Notice). If, in the Planning and Zoning Commission's judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the Commission to properly discharge its responsibilities, or the Commission desires to review amendments to the submittals, the Commission may request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty-day (60) period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information. No planned development may be approved unless the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat is also approved. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth, in writing, the respects in which the planned development is or is not in the public interest including, but not limited to, findings of fact on the following: 
i.  Is the site or zoning lot upon which the planned development is to be located adaptable to the unified development proposed? 
ii.  Will the proposed planned development be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare of any portion of the community? 
iii.  Will the proposed planned development be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the vicinity for the purposes already permitted? 
iv.  Will the proposed planned development diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood? 
v.  Will the proposed planned development impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district? 
vi.  Is there provision for adequate utilities, drainage, off street parking and loading, pedestrian access and all other necessary facilities? 
vii.  Is there provision for adequate vehicular ingress and egress designed to minimize traffic congestion upon public streets? 
viii.  Are the location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and appurtenant facilities, compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and adjacent land uses? 
ix.  Is there suitable landscaping for the portions of the proposed planned development which are not to be used for structures, parking and loading areas or access ways? 
x.  Is the planned development, in the specific location proposed consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan? 
c.  Within forty-five (45) days of the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take one of the following actions: 
i.  Advise the applicant in writing of any recommended changes, additions or corrections to the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat. If such advice is given, the applicant may, within thirty (30) days, submit a revised PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat for Planning and Zoning Commission consideration at a new public hearing. The applicant may do so without paying an additional filing fee. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then recommend approval or denial of the Planned Development and submit its written recommendation to the City Council; or 
ii.  Recommend denial of the application for the planned development; or 
iii.  Recommend approval of the planned development (including the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat) and submit its written recommendation to the City Council. 
(3)  City Council Action. The City Council, after receipt of the recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall approve, modify or deny the Planned Development within thirty (30) days following the receipt of the written recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, the City Council may, by motion, extend the thirty-day (30) period. 
a.  If the planned development is denied, the City Council shall state in writing the reasons for the denial, and such writing shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and a copy shall be sent to the applicant. 
b.  If the planned development is approved, the applicant shall submit a PD Final Development Plan/ Plat for the planned development as set forth in (D) below. 
(4)  Limitations on Denials. If an application for a planned development has been denied, no application for substantially the same special use may be filed for a period of one (1) year from that date of denial. Whether the application is for "substantially the same" special use shall be within the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(5)  Effect of Approval. Once a PD Preliminary Plan is approved, applicants shall proceed to the final plan/plat stage of the development review and approval process. Approval of the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat shall not constitute approval of the final plan/ plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of the approval of the layout submitted on the PD Preliminary Plan/Plat. 
(d)  PD Final Development Plan/Plat. 
(1)  PD Final Development Plan/Plat Initiation. Within one (1) year following the approval of the planned development, the applicant shall file with the Director for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission a PD Final Development Plan/Plat. If the planned development is to be developed in phases, the applicant need only file a PD Final Development Plan/Plat for the first phase of development, as indicated in the development and construction schedule prescribed below. The PD Final Development Plan/Plat for the remaining phases shall be filed in accordance with the development and construction schedule. Every PD Final Development Plan/Plat shall contain the following information and documentation: 
a.  In final form, all of the information required for the PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat. 
b.  A final site plan drawn to an appropriate scale on Mylar or other material suitable for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. The final site plan shall include the following information: 
i.  Final designation of the location, ground area, height, bulk and exact dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the planned development. 
ii.  A detailed tabulation of each separate land use area, including land and building areas, and where applicable, the total number of residential dwelling units, the number of bedrooms in each unit, and the residential density. 
iii.  The use or uses to be made of existing and proposed buildings or structures. 
iv.  The dimensions of all perimeter setbacks and the distances between all buildings and structures. 
v.  The final location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways, driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the number of parking spaces serving each building or land use type and all parking related screening and landscaping. 
vi.  The exact location and dimensions of any areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of worship, school sites, public buildings or for any other public or quasi-public use. 
c.  An accurate legal description of the entire zoning lot upon which the planned development is to be located, and a legal description of each separate subdivided parcel, including any areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public or quasi-public uses. 
d.  All covenants, easements, agreements and other provisions required to govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned development, along with an agreement assuring that the applicant, any subsequent owner or, where applicable, a condominium or owners' association shall be responsible for snow plowing, refuse disposal, all street, utility and common area and open space maintenance within the development. 
e.  All plats, certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication or vacation of land and/or the recording of the final site plan. 
f.  If subdivision of the development site is included in the planned development, a plat of subdivision shall be prepared suitable for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. Such plat of subdivision shall be prepared in the same form and meet the same specifications required for any subdivision as prescribed in the City's Subdivision Regulations. In like manner, if a vacation or dedication of a public street or alley is included, a plat of vacation or dedication shall be prepared. 
g.  A detailed landscape plan based on final architectural decisions indicating the specific location and character of all landscaping, including the size and species of all trees, shrubs, hedges and other groundcover, the location, size and type of all screening and fencing and the location, height, design and illumination characteristics of all external lighting fixtures within the development. 
h.  A detailed final utilities and drainage plan based on final architectural and engineering decisions indicating the size and location of all water distribution lines, sanitary sewers and storm drainage facilities required to serve the planned development and the manner in which surface drainage will be controlled and managed. 
i.  Typical building elevations and schematic design presentations indicating the architectural character of all proposed buildings and structures based on final architectural decisions and prepared in detail. 
j.  Detailed drawings and design presentations of all signs to be erected within the planned development in accordance with the applicable regulations contained in this Ordinance. 
k.  A development and construction schedule indicating the following: 
i.  The date when construction of the planned development will begin or, if developed in phases, the date when construction of the initial phase will begin. 
ii.  If the planned development is to be developed in phases, a map indicating the phases in which the planned development will be built, the dates when the PD Final Development Plans/Plats for all but the initial phase will be filed, and the approximate dates when construction of each subsequent phase will begin. 
iii.  The date when construction of the planned development will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be established, or if developed in phases, the date when construction of each phase will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be established for each phase. 
(2)  Approval of PD Final Development Plan/Plat. The PD Final Development Plan/Plat shall be reviewed, and, if appropriate, approved as follows: 
a.  Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the PD Final Development Plan/Plat within thirty (30) days of certification by the Director that the application is complete. The review shall be for the purpose of determining whether the PD Final Development Plan/Plat is in conformity with this Section 5.6 and the approved planned development. Although comments may be taken from those in attendance, such review shall not be a public hearing. Standards for this review in determining conformity shall include, but may not be necessarily limited to: 
i.  The number of dwelling units has not been increased; and 
ii.  The heights of the buildings have not been increased; and 
iii.  The exterior building materials are the same or of equal quality, type and quantity; and 
iv.  The general quantities, quality, and type of landscaping have not been changed; and 
v.  Final engineering does not substantially alter the design characteristics of the Preliminary Plan/Plat. 
b.  Procedure after Review. 
i.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the PD Final Development Plan/Plat is substantially changed from the approved planned development, or is otherwise not in accordance with City regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall inform the applicant with regard to the specific areas found not to be in compliance. The applicant may then, within thirty (30) days of being so informed, resubmit the PD Final Development Plan/Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission with changes to those areas found not to be in compliance. If upon resubmission and reconsideration, or if no resubmission is made within thirty (30) days, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council that approval of the PD Final Development Plan/Plat be denied. 
ii.  If the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the PD Final Development Plan/Plat is in conformity with the approved special use for a planned development and all other City regulations; then the Commission shall so certify to the City Council. 
iii.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission's certification, the City Council shall review the PD Final Development Plan/Plat. The City Council may then accept the certification of the Planning and Zoning Commission or may conduct its own review of the PD Final Development Plan/Plat. If the PD Final Development Plan/Plat is found not to be in conformity with the approved planned development or other City regulations, the City Council shall inform the applicant with regard to specific areas found not to be in compliance. The applicant may resubmit the PD Final Development Plan/Plat to the City Council with changes to those areas found not to be in compliance. The applicant may also resubmit the plan as a PD Preliminary Development Plan/Plat in conformance with the procedures for approval of a PD Final Development Plan/Plat. 
c.  Approval. After the approval of the PD Final Development Plan/Plat, the use of the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned development will be governed by the approved PD Final Development Plan/Plat and all other City regulations. If there is a conflict between the PD Final Development Plan/Plat and other regulations, the PD Final Development Plan/Plat shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2010-07, 1-18-2010; Ord. No. 2011-61, 11-21-2011; Ord. No. 2016-49 , §§ 9, 10, 7-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017 ) 
5.7 - Changes to planned developments. 
    No changes may be made in the approved PD Final Development Plan/Plat, except upon application to the City, according to the following provisions. 
(a)  Prior to Commencement of Construction. No changes may be made prior to the commencement of construction, except that the City Council, by a 2/3 supermajority vote, may approve changes to the temporal schedule of the development. 
(b)  During Construction. During the construction of the planned development, the procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minor Changes. Minor changes, as required by engineering or other physical site circumstances not foreseen at that time that the PD Final Development Plan/Plat was approved, and verified by the City Engineer, may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any changes to the PD Final Development Plan/Plat must be recorded as amendments to the planned development ordinance. If changes are allowed in a final site plan, then a new site plan reflecting such changes must be filed with the City noting the date of the changes. 
(2)  Major Changes. Major changes are those changes that substantially affect the design, density or bulk of the development. All changes in land use, building height or density, or in the arrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts changes that substantially affect the basic design, density or bulk of the development shall be considered a major change, and must be approved by the City Council after a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and following the same procedures as required for the original planned development approval. 
(c)  After Construction. After the completion of construction of the planned development, the procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any minor extension, alteration or modification of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission. No such change may increase the cubic area of any single building or structure by more than ten percent (10%). 
(2)  If a building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed, it may be reconstructed in compliance with the PD Final Development Plan/Plat. If it is to be reconstructed in a manner not in compliance with the PD Final Development Plan/Plat, an amendment to the PD Final Development Plan/Plat, following the procedures for an amendment, shall be required. 
(3)  All other changes in the PD Final Development Plan/Plat must be reviewed and approved by the City Council, under the procedure authorized for an amendment. No changes may be made in the PD Final Development Plan/Plat unless required for the continued successful functioning of the planned development, or unless required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the PD Final Development Plan/Plat was approved or according to changes in the development policy of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 1-18-2010; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.8 - Revocations and extensions. 
    If construction work on the proposed planned development has not begun within eighteen (18) months from the date of the City Council's vote to approve the PD Final Development Plan/Plat, the approval of the special use for a planned development shall become null and void and all rights shall lapse. However, the applicant may request an extension, upon written application, filed prior to the expiration of the eighteen (18) month time limit. The City Council may authorize a single extension of not more than twelve (12) months without a public hearing. Any further extensions shall require a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 1-18-2010; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.9 - Conditions and guarantees. 
    Prior to granting any special uses, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the planned development as deemed necessary to guarantee performance of all conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.10 - Issuance of building permit. 
    Building permits may only be issued if the construction work in question is in conformity with the approved Plan PD Final Plan/Plat and with all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
5.11 - Enforcement of planned development. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall periodically review all permits issued for the planned development in conjunction with the construction that has taken place on the planned development site, and compare actual development with the approved development and construction schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, 1-18-2010; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 3, 4-5-2017) 
Section 6 - ZONING DISTRICTS 

6.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to outline the different zoning districts within this Zoning Ordinance and introduce the Official Zoning Map. 
6.2 - Districts. 
    In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, the City of Park Ridge shall be divided into the following zoning districts: 
(a)  Residential Districts 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
R-2 Single-Family Residential District 
R-3 Two-Family Residential District 
R-4 Multi-Family Residential District 
R-5 Multi-Family Residential District 
(b)  Commercial Districts 
O Office District 
B-1 Retail and Office District 
B-2 General Commercial District 
B-3 General Commercial, Wholesale and Service District 
B-4 Uptown Business District 
(c)  Special Purpose Districts 
OS Open Space Special Purpose District 
H Hospital Special Purpose District 
EB Educational Boarding Special Purpose District 
S Sexually-Oriented Business Special Purpose District 
P Parking Special Purpose District 
6.3 - Zoning map 
(a)  Location of Districts. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Ordinance are set forth in the Official Zoning Map, as periodically amended. The Official Zoning Map is incorporated into, and made an integral part of, this Ordinance. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that the entire area of the City, including all land and water areas, be included in the zoning districts established by this Ordinance. Any land lying within the City, but not shown on the Official Zoning Map as being included within a district, shall be classified as the R-2 Single-Family Residential District. 
(b)  Interpretation of Boundary Lines. 
(1)  Right-of-Way Lines. Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with streets, alleys, highways, easements, or right-of-way lines of railroads, toll roads or expressways, the boundary line shall be construed to be the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Property Lines. Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with a recorded property line, the property line shall be construed to be the boundary line of the district. 
(3)  Scaled Lines. Where the district boundary lines do not coincide with a right-of-way line or recorded property line, the district boundary shall be determined by measuring such boundary line(s) by using the map scale as provided on the Official Zoning Map. 
(4)  Clarification of Boundary Lines. The Zoning Administrator shall decide all interpretations of zoning district boundary lines, where the application of Paragraphs 1 through 3 above leaves doubt as to the boundary between two (2) zoning districts. 
6.4 - Annexed land. 
    Any territory annexed into the City shall automatically, upon annexation, be classified as R-2 Single-Family Residential District. That land shall be subject to the requirements of the R-2 Single-Family Residential District, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation agreement or until the territory is rezoned. 
6.5 - Publicly-owned facilities and essential utility equipment. 
(a)  Public buildings, structures and facilities owned and maintained by the City shall be permitted in any zoning district. Furthermore, essential privately-owned utility transmission equipment, such as electric transmission lines, natural gas lines, trunk sewer lines and similar structures, shall likewise be permitted subject to all applicable state statutes and City ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Privately-owned utility buildings and structures, indicated as a permitted or special use under the regulations of the applicable zoning district, shall not be permitted except in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(c)  Public buildings, structures and facilities, and essential privately-owned utility transmission equipment are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance. However, prior to the construction, relocation or enlargement of any public building, structure or facility, or any off-street parking facility by the City, plans shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for comment. Such structures shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also require additional landscaping and screening, including the fencing requirements of Section 11.4.E.4 (Fences for Public Utility and Public Recreational Uses). 
Section 7 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

7.1 - Residential districts purpose. 
(a)  Purpose of R-1 Single-Family Residential District. The R-1 Single-Family Residential District is intended to create a low density environment of single-family homes located upon larger sites than the typical single-family lot size for such housing within the community, where the maintenance of adequate open space is seen as essential to the preservation of the unique residential character. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted. 
(b)  Purpose of R-2 Single-Family Residential District. The R-2 Single-Family Residential District is intended to create a low density environment of single-family homes in areas clearly distinguishable as residential neighborhoods, located upon sites comparable in dimensions to the typical lot size for single-family housing within the community. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted. 
(c)  Purpose of R-3 Two-Family Residential District. The R-3 Two-Family Residential District is intended to create a moderate density environment of single-family homes and two-family dwellings located along major streets upon sites comparable in dimensions to the typical lot size for single-family housing within the community. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted. 
(d)  Purpose of R-4 Multi-Family Residential District. The R-4 Multi-Family Residential District is intended to create a moderate density environment of single-family homes, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings, including townhomes. This district may provide a transition zone between single-family neighborhoods and adjacent higher intensity land uses, and should have access to major streets or public transportation facilities. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted. 
(e)  Purpose of R-5 Multi-Family Residential District. The R 5 Multi-Family Residential District is intended to create a higher density environment of single-family homes, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings, including townhomes and apartments, located in the Central Business District, or for the R-5 District created on or before May 1, 2008, that is adjacent to the Central Business District. Areas within this district should be adjacent to major streets or convenient to public transportation facilities. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
7.2 - Permitted and special uses. 
    Table 2: Residential Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the residential districts. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use is considered a special use in that district and must obtain a special use permit as required in Section 4.6 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special UseUse 1 Residential Districts Specific Use Standards R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 RESIDENTIAL USESAssisted Living Facility P P See Section 10.3.A Community Residence, Large (More than 8 persons) P P See Section 10.3.B Community Residence, Small (8 or less persons) P P P P P See Section 10.3.B Dwelling, Multi-Family P P See Section 10.3.G Dwelling, Single-Family P P P P P Dwelling, Townhouse P P See Section 10.3.G Dwelling, Two-Family P P P Independent Living Facility P P See Section 10.3.A Nursing Home P P See Section 10.3.A Temporary overnight shelter 3 S S S S S See Section 10.3.R GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USESEducational Facility, College/University S S Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary (No Residential) S S S S S Government Facility and Offices S S Public Safety Facility S S S S S Public Works Facility and Utility S S S S S See Section 6.5 RELIGIOUS USESConvent/Rectory S S S S S Place of Worship S S S S S See Section 10.3.O CULTURAL, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USESCultural Facility S S S S S See Section 10.3.C Social Club or Lodge S S See Section 10.3.Q SERVICE AND OFFICE USESDay Care Center, Adult or Child S S S S P See Section 10.3.D Day Care Home, Adult or Child, Large (More than 8 persons) S S S S S See Section 10.3.E Day Care Home, Adult or Child, Small (8 or less persons) P P P P P See Section 10.3.E Utility, Private S See Section 10.3.S OTHERPlanned Development S S S See Section 5 Wireless Telecommunications Antenna S, P 2 S, P 2 S, P 2 S, P 2 S, P 2 See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Facility S S S S S See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Tower S S S S S See Section 10.3.R  
Table 2: Footnotes 
1 The terms in this column ("Use") are defined in Section 17 (Generic Use Definitions). 
2 Only wireless telecommunications antennas that comply with the stealth design standards of Section 10.3.R.10 shall be considered permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-83, 11-17-2008) 
7.3 - Yard and bulk regulations. 
Table 3: Residential Districts Yard and Bulk Regulations establishes yard and bulk regulations for the residential districts. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 3: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS DISTRICTS BULK
REGULATION R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 MINIMUM 
LOT AREA 1,2 10,000sf 
Special Uses 3 : 20,000sf 6,500sf 
Special Uses 3 : 20,000sf 6,500sf 
Special Uses 3 : 20,000sf SF & 2F: 6,500sf 
Townhouse: 3,000sf/unit 
MF: 1,800sf/unit 9 
Special Uses 3 : 20,000sf SF & 2F: 6,500sf 
Townhouse: 2,200sf/unit 
MF: 1,500sf/unit 9 
Special Uses 3 : 20,000sf MINIMUM 
LOT WIDTH 2 70 ft 
Special Uses 3 : 100 ft 50 ft 
Special Uses 3 : 100 ft 50 ft 
Special Uses 3 : 100 ft 50 ft 
Special Uses 3 : 100 ft 50 ft 
Special Uses 3 : 100 ft MAXIMUM 
PRINCIPAL 
BUILDING HEIGHT 4 35 ft or 21/2 stories, 
whichever is less 35 ft or 21/2 stories, 
whichever is less 35 ft or 21/2 stories, 
whichever is less SF, 2F & 
Townhouse:35 ft or 21/2 stories, 
whichever is less 
MF:40 ft SF, 2F & 
Townhouse:35 ft or 21/2 stories, 
whichever is less 
MF:45 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION 5 4 ft from grade 4 ft from grade 4 ft from grade 4 ft from grade 4 ft from grade MAXIMUM 
LOT COVERAGE 35% 35% 35% 50% 60% MINIMUM 
OPEN SPACE 45% of zoning lot 
50% of required front yard 40% of zoning lot 
50% of required front yard 30% of zoning lot 
50% of required front yard 30% of zoning lot; 9 30% of zoning lot; 9 MAXIMUM 
FLOOR AREA 
RATIO (FAR) 0.45 + 0.03 FAR Bonus, when applicable (See Section 7.5 below) 0.45 + 0.03 FAR Bonus, when applicable (See Section 7.5 below) SF: 0.45 
2F: 0.50 SF: 0.45 
2F: 0.50 SF: 0.45 
2F: 0.50 Front Yard 25% of lot depth or 35 ft, whichever is less 
Where 40% of lots on the block are improved, then use average of front yards of two neighboring lots on either side 7 20% of lot depth or 35 ft, whichever is less 
Where 40% of lots on the block are improved, then use average of front yards of two neighboring lots on either side 7 20% of lot depth or 30 ft, whichever is less 20% of lot depth or 25 ft, whichever is less 20% of lot width or 15 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 10 ft Interior Side Yard 10% of lot width or 10 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 7 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 10% of lot width or 8 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 5 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 10% of lot width or 8 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 5 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 10% of lot width or 8 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 5 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 10% of lot width or 8 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 5 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined Corner Side Yard 20% of lot width or 20 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 14 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 20% of lot width or 15 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 10 ft. 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 20% of lot width or 15 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 10 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 20% of lot width or 15 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 10 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined 20% of lot width or 15 ft, whichever is less; but a minimum of 10 ft 
Special Uses 3 : No less than 12 ft on either side and no less than 30 ft combined Reverse Corner Side Yard 
(See Section 7.6 below) First 20 ft, as measured from rear lot line, equals the front yard of the lot to the rear 
Remainder of the yard: 50% of the front yard depth or 20 ft, whichever is less, but a minimum of 14 ft First 20 ft, as measured from rear lot line, equals the front yard of the lot to the rear 
Remainder of the yard: 50% of the front yard depth or 17 ft, whichever is less, but a minimum of 10 ft First 20 ft, as measured from rear lot line, equals the front yard of the lot to the rear 
Remainder of the yard: 50% of the front yard depth or 15 ft, whichever is less, but a minimum of 10 ft First 20 ft, as measured from rear lot line, equals the front yard of the lot to the rear 
Remainder of the yard: 50% of the front yard depth or 15 ft, whichever is less, but a minimum of 10 ft First 20 ft, as measured from rear lot line, equals the front yard of the lot to the rear 
Remainder of the yard: 50% of the front yard depth or 15 ft, whichever is less, but a minimum of 10 ft Rear Yard: Corner Lot 8 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft 30% of lot depth or 30 ft, whichever is less 30% of lot depth or 30 ft, whichever is less Rear Yard: Interior Lot 8 30% of lot depth or 
40 ft, whichever is less 30% of lot depth or 30 ft, whichever is less, except for those lots which are 105 ft deep or less, in which case the minimum yard is 25 ft 30% of lot depth or 30 ft, whichever is less  
Table 3: Footnotes 
1 For a conversion chart that provides the approximate density for each residential district, as calculated from minimum lot area, see Appendix D. 
2 For nonconforming lots of record within the residential districts, see Section 15.5 (Nonconforming Lots of Record). 
3 Day care homes and day care centers are exempt from the special use bulk requirements. These uses shall be subject to those for single-family residential uses within the district. 
4 Appurtenances for single-family and two-family dwellings within the residential districts are limited to 5 feet in height and a maximum area of 3 feet by 3 feet. The maximum area of an appurtenance shall be determined by measuring the largest cross-section of the appurtenance. 
5 Maximum height of first floor elevation shall be measured from grade, as defined in this Ordinance, to the top of the finished first floor. 
6 In some cases between certain districts and/or uses, a transition yard may be required. Such transition yard may require additional landscaping and screening, as well as a larger yard dimension to accommodate these plantings. Such transition yards shall be as required by Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
7 In no case shall averaging be based on less than four neighboring lots. For example, in the case of a corner lot, four neighboring lots on the same block shall be used or, in the case of a lot adjacent to the corner lot, the corner lot and three neighboring lots on the same block shall be used. In the case of an addition to the front of a house, the front setback of the subject property shall be included (prior to the addition), along with the neighboring properties as noted above. 
8 In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the rear yard dimension is determined by lot type (corner lot versus interior lot). In the R-4 and R-5 Districts, the rear yard dimension is the same regardless of lot type. See Section 16 (Definitions) for description of lot types. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009) 
7.4 - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Temporary Uses . See Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses . See Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory buildings, structures and uses. Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.F.2 (Attached Garages). 
(c)  Permitted Encroachments . See Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(d)  Environmental Performance Standards. See Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing environmental performance standards. 
(e)  Off-Street Parking and Loading . See Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(f)  Landscaping and Screening . See Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(g)  Signs. See Section 14 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
7.5 - Floor area ratio measurement and bonus applicability. 
(a)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Calculation . Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings on a lot by the total lot area. 
(b)  Gross Floor Area Calculation . To determine the gross floor area for the purposes of the FAR calculation, as described in Paragraph A above, the gross floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of any building, as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. In addition, the following shall also be included in the gross floor area calculation: 
(1)  That part of the floor area where the height from floor to ceiling is in excess of twelve (12) feet shall be counted twice. 
(2)  The basement floor area when more than half of the basement height is above the established finished grade. 
(3)  Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor. 
(4)  Floor space used for mechanical equipment. This shall not include roof-top equipment. 
(5)  Penthouses. 
(6)  That floor area of attic space or the second story of a detached garage that has headroom of seven (7) feet or more. Only the floor area with a height of seven (7) feet or more shall be counted. 
(7)  Enclosed balconies and mezzanines. 
(8)  Enclosed porches. 
(9)  Accessory structures located on the lot, except for that floor area permitted to be excluded from the gross floor area calculation, as described in Paragraph C below. 
(c)  Exceptions to Gross Floor Area Calculation: 
(1)  Unenclosed Porches . Unenclosed front entry porches shall be eligible for a floor area exemption as described in this section. In order to qualify for this exemption, unenclosed porches shall be no more than one (1) story in height, shall not be enclosed or used for year-around living, shall not have a solid railing, and shall have a minimum depth of four (4) feet as measured from the edge of the porch to the front façade of the principal structure at the shallowest point of the porch, not including steps and stoops. 
Qualifying unenclosed porches shall be granted the following floor area exemptions: 
a.  Where a porch extends for a width of fifty percent (50%) or more of the front façade along the front yard, up to one-hundred (100) square feet shall be excluded from the total gross floor area. 
b.  Where a porch extends for a width of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the façade along the corner side yard, up to one-hundred (100) square feet shall be excluded from the total gross floor area. 
c.  For corner lots, with a qualifying porch along both the front yard and corner side yard façades, up to a total of two-hundred (200) square feet may be excluded from the total gross floor area. 
(2)  Accessory Structures . Certain accessory structures shall be eligible for a floor area exemption as described in this section. Certain accessory structures shall be granted the following exemptions: 
a.  Sheds of one-hundred twenty (120) square feet or less of total floor area not be included in the total gross floor area. 
b.  Detached garages of four-hundred (400) square feet or less of total floor area and located entirely within the rear thirty (30) feet of the lot shall not be included in the total gross floor area. If a detached garage located in the rear yard exceeds four-hundred (400) square feet in area, the first four-hundred (400) square feet shall be excluded from the total gross floor area, but the remainder of the garage's floor area shall be included in the calculation 1 . Regardless, that floor area of the second story of a detached garage that has headroom of seven (7) feet or more shall be counted in the total floor area. 
(d)  Floor Area Bonus for Certain Additions in R-1 and R-2 Districts . Additional floor area for proposed additions to existing single-family homes constructed before January 1, 1960 in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be permitted, subject to the rules and conditions of this section and any other provisions of this subsection. 
(1)  Purpose of Floor Area Bonus . The floor area bonus for existing single-family homes within the R-1 or R-2 Districts is intended to preserve the existing housing stock and maintain the established character of single-family neighborhoods. By preserving older homes, this may create additional affordable housing opportunities as well. 
(2)  Maximum Additional Floor Area . The maximum bonus FAR permitted for an existing single-family home in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be 0.03, not to exceed a total maximum FAR in these districts for single-family homes of 0.48. 
(3)  Rules and Conditions . The following rules and conditions shall be used to determine if the property is eligible for the additional floor area: 
a.  The proposed addition shall be attached to an existing building, for which a building permit was issued prior to January 1, 1960. 
b.  The original foundation of the structure at the time the original building permit was issued must be maintained. If the original foundation has been partially removed or destroyed since the original construction, such structure is not eligible for the FAR bonus. 
c.  Demolition. 
i.  No demolition activity to the structure located on or above the original foundation shall be permitted during the construction of the addition, except that necessary to construct the addition, such as the demolition of a wall for room expansion. 
ii.  Demolition of additions to the structure, whose foundations are expansions of the original foundation but not part of the original foundation, shall be permitted. 
iii.  Demolition of accessory structures, which are not part of the original building foundation, such as detached garages and porches, shall be permitted. 
d.  With the exception of FAR, the existing single-family homes and the proposed addition will be in compliance with all applicable bulk regulations. When the FAR is calculated after the construction of the proposed addition, the FAR shall not exceed that permitted by-right plus the bonus provision (0.48). 
e.  In the case of demolition of the entire structure, even if the original foundation is not removed, the new structure shall not be eligible for the FAR bonus. The FAR bonus applies only to structures constructed before January 1, 1960, and not to the zoning lot. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
7.6 - Measurement of reverse corner side yard. 
    To clarify the distinction between a corner lot and a reverse corner lot, and to clarify how to measure a reverse corner side yard, the following illustrations (Figures 1, 2 and 3) are provided: 
(a)  For reference, a typical corner lot is a lot situated at the junction of, and abutting, two (2) or more intersecting streets. See Figure 1: Corner Lot below. 
FIGURE 1: CORNER LOT

(b)  A reverse corner lot is a corner lot where the side lot line adjoining a street is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. See Figure 2: Reverse Corner Lot below. 

(c)  How to measure the reverse corner side yard of a reverse corner lot is illustrated in Figure 3: Measurement of Reverse Corner Side Yard below. The dimension of such yard is as required in Table 3: Residential Districts Yard and Bulk Regulations. 
FIGURE 3: MEASUREMENT OF REVERSE CORNER SIDE YARD 
FIGURE 3-STEP 1: On a reverse corner lot, the lot line used to determine the location of the front yard and to measure lot width shall be the shorter street frontage. 

FIGURE 3 - STEP 2: As measured from the rear lot line of the reverse corner lot, the first twenty (20) feet of the reverse corner side yard shall equal the front yard of the lot to the rear. The remainder of the reverse corner side yard shall be fifty percent (50%) of the front yard depth or a dimension established by district regulations. 

Section 8 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

8.1 - Commercial districts purpose. 
(a)  Purpose of O Office District. The O Office District is intended to create a commercial environment of a non-retail nature for the development of office structures and related uses, within a well landscaped setting. Areas within this district should have access to major streets or public transportation facilities. 
(b)  Purpose of B-1 Retail and Office District. The B-1 Retail and Office District is intended to provide an environment suitable for a variety of retail, service, office and mixed (residential above ground-floor commercial) uses. Additionally, this district is intended to accommodate uses that: provide for the needs of local residents; are oriented to pedestrian access; generate relatively minimal vehicular traffic; and have minimal off-street parking demands. Areas within the district should have access to major streets and/or public transportation and may be located adjacent to residential districts. 
(c)  Purpose of B-2 General Commercial District. The B-2 General Commercial District is intended to provide an environment suitable for a variety of retail, service and office uses that have higher traffic, illumination and other operational impacts on surrounding areas than those in the B-1 District. Additionally, this district is intended to accommodate uses that: serve both local and regional patrons; are oriented to the demands of heavy vehicular traffic, and provide for relatively high off-street parking demands. Ideally, areas within this district should be adjacent to major streets and should be either physically separated or adequately buffered from R-1 and R-2 residential areas. 
(d)  Purpose of B-3 General Commercial, Wholesale and Service District. The B-3 General Commercial, Wholesale and Service District is intended to provide appropriate locations for specialized general commercial uses, including wholesaling, equipment storage and a variety of business services, which are oriented toward supporting other retail goods and personal service establishments, and not necessarily focused upon the shopping public. Areas within this district should have direct access to major streets and be generally situated in locations removed or buffered from residential uses. 
(e)  Purpose of B-4 Uptown Business District. The B-4 Uptown Business District is intended to sustain the current commercial, pedestrian-oriented character and economic viability of the central business district. New development will be consistent with the Uptown's established scale, architecture and mix of uses. In order to refine the regulations for this district, a series of sub-districts with corresponding use and bulk regulations have been established, as described in Section 8.2 (B-4 District Sub-Districts) below. 
(Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 2, 4-5-2017) 
8.2 - B-4 uptown business district sub-districts. 
    Because various areas of Uptown have different mixes of uses, physical characteristics and functions, the City has identified four (4) sub-districts, each with its own set of allowable uses and bulk regulations. The sub-districts are identified on the Official Zoning Map. The general purpose and intent of each sub-district is described below. 
(a)  Purpose of the Uptown Core Sub-District. The Uptown Core Sub-District (U-Core) is the traditional center of the City's Central Business District. The U-Core Sub-District is intended to preserve buildings located within the Central Business District that are of architectural significance, and ensure the new development is compatible with and maintains the historical character of the core. The U-Core Sub-District is characterized by a mix of small retail and service uses within a mixed-use pedestrian-oriented environment. Retail, restaurant and entertainment uses shall be located along the ground floor, with personal service, office and residential above. 
(b)  Purpose of the Uptown Commercial Sub-District. The Uptown Commercial Sub-District (U-Comm) is intended to support the Uptown Core with a mixed-use environment. The mix of uses and the bulk regulations within this sub-district are structured to relate directly to the Uptown Core, but are distinct in that they allow service uses on the ground floor. This sub-district is also designed to be pedestrian-oriented. 
(c)  Purpose of the Transitional Commercial Sub-District. The Transitional Commercial Sub-District (U-TC) is intended as a transitional area, where low-intensity office buffer surrounding single-family neighborhoods from the U-Core Sub-District. The mix of uses includes primarily low intensity office and institutional uses, including on-site parking and open space. 
(d)  Purpose of the Public/Institutional Sub-District. The Public/Institutional Sub-District (U-P/I) is intended to accommodate existing public, open space and institutional uses, including government offices. These public and institutional uses offer important community services, and provide a focal point and civic character for Park Ridge and the Uptown Business District. 
8.3 - Permitted and special uses. 
Table 4: Commercial Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the commercial districts. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use is considered a special use in that district and must obtain special use approval as required in Section 4.6 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 4: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special UseUse 1 Commercial Districts Specific Use Standards O B-1 B-2 B-3 RESIDENTIAL USESAssisted Living Facility S S S S See Section 10.3.A Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor 9 S See Section 10.3.U Independent Living Facility S S S S See Section 10.3.A Nursing Home S S S S See Section 10.3.A Temporary overnight shelter 4 S S S S See Section 10.3.R GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USESEducational Facility, College/University P P Educational Facility, Vocational School P P P Government Facility and Offices P S S P Public Safety Facility S S S S Public Works Facility and Utility S S S S See Section 6.5 RELIGIOUS USESConvent/Rectory S S S S Place of Worship S S S S See Section 10.3.O CULTURAL, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USESArt Gallery P P P P Cultural Facility S S S See Section 10.3.C Health/Fitness Center S P P P Heritage Center 12 S See Section 10.3.C Indoor Entertainment Facility P P P See Section 10.3.H Indoor Recreation Facility P P P See Section 10.3.H Live Entertainment P P P Outdoor Entertainment Facility S P S See Section 10.3.H Outdoor Recreation Facility S P S See Section 10.3.H Social Club or Lodge S S S See Section 10.3.Q SERVICE AND OFFICE USESAnimal Hospital S P Banquet Hall P Car Wash S Day Care Center, Adult or Child P P P P See Section 10.3.D Drive-Through Facility P P See Section 10.3.F Financial Institution P P P P Funeral Home S P P Hotel/Motel S S S Kennel S See Section 10.3.I Medical/Dental Clinic 5,6 P P P P Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment S P See Section 10.2 Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major S P See Section 10.3.M Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor S P See Section 10.3.M Motor Vehicle Service Station S P See Section 10.3.J Office Park P Office, Professional P P P P Personal Services Establishment P P P Restaurant P P P Utility, Private S S S S See Section 10.3.S RETAIL USESMedical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 13 S Motor Vehicle Dealership S P See Section 10.3.K Retail Goods Establishment P P P PARKING USESParking Lot (Principal Use) P S S P See Section 10.3.N Parking Structure (Principal Use) P S S P See Section 10.3.N HEAVY RETAIL AND SERVICE, WHOLESALE AND DISTRIBUTION USESContractor Storage Yard S Heavy Retail, Rental and Service Establishment P Medical/Dental Laboratory 7 P Motor Vehicle Operations Facility S See Section 10.3.L Research and Development Facility P P Self-Service Storage Facility S Warehouse/Distribution S OTHERPlanned Development S S S S See Section 5 Wireless Telecommunications Antenna S,P 3 S,P 3 S,P 3 S,P 3 See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Facility S S S S See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Tower S S S S See Section 10.3.R  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 4: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special UseUse B-4 Uptown Business District Specific Use Standards U-Core U-Comm U-TS U-P/I RESIDENTIAL USESDwelling, Above Ground Floor 10 S S See Section 10.3.U GOVERNMENTAL AND EDUCATIONAL USESEducational Facility, Vocational School P P P Government Facility and Offices P Public Safety Facility S P Public Works Facility and Utility S P See Section 6.5 RELIGIOUS USESConvent/Rectory S S S S Place of Worship S S S S See Section 10.3.O CULTURAL, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USESArt Gallery P P Cultural Facility P P P See Section 10.3.C Health/Fitness Center 11 S P Indoor Entertainment Facility P P P See Section 10.3.H Indoor Recreation Facility P P P See Section 10.3.H Live Entertainment P P P SERVICE AND OFFICE USESDay Care Center, Adult or Child P P P See Section 10.3.D Financial Institution P P P Medical/Dental Clinic 8,9 S S Office, Professional (Above Ground Floor) P P P Office, Professional (Ground Floor) S S 2 , P P Personal Services Establishment (Above Ground Floor) P P P Personal Services Establishment (Ground Floor) S P P Restaurant P P RETAIL USESRetail Goods Establishment P P OTHERPlanned Development S S S S See Section 5 Wireless Telecommunications Antenna S,P 3 S,P 3 S,P 3 S,P 3 See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Facility S S S S See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Tower S S S S See Section 10.3.R  
TABLES 4 & 5: FOOTNOTES: 
1 The terms in this column ("Use") are defined in Section 17 (Generic Use Definitions). 
2 In the Uptown Commercial, professional office uses located on the ground floor along Northwest Highway shall be considered special uses. In all other areas of the Uptown Commercial, professional office uses located on the ground floor are considered permitted uses. 
3 Only wireless telecommunications antennas that comply with the stealth design standards of Section 10.3.R.10 shall be considered permitted uses. 
4 Ordinance 2008-83,11/17/2008 
5 Ordinance 2008-55, 8/18/2008 
6 Ordinance 2009-50, 7/6/2009 
7 Ordinance 2010-33, 4/5/2010 
8 Ordinance 2010-84, 12/6/2010 
9 Ordinance 2012-57, 12/3/2012 
10 Ordinance 2015-37, 6/1/2015 
11 Ordinance 2014-63, 11/17/2014 
12 Ordinance 2012-39, 8/20/2012 
13 A Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center is not permitted within the City due to the distance requirements contained in The Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2014-56, 10-20-2014) 
8.4 - Yard and bulk regulations. 
Table 5: Commercial Districts Yard and Bulk Regulations establishes yard and bulk regulations for the commercial districts. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 5: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONSBULK 
REGULATION 1 Districts O B-1 B-2 B-3 MINIMUM LOT AREA None Non-Residential: None 
MF: 2,000 sf/unit None None MINIMUM LOT WIDTH None None None None MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 1 40 ft 40 ft 40 ft 40 ft MINIMUM YARD S 2 Front Yard 20% of lot depth or 35 ft, whichever is less 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft 
Except along SW Busse Highway: 
-Where ROW is more than 80 ft: 7 ft 
-Where ROW is 66 ft or less: 17 ft 
-Where ROW is between 67 & 80 ft: 
10 ft Interior Side Yard 10% of lot width or 10 ft, whichever is less None None None Interior Side Yard: 
Non-Residential Use Abutting Residential Use or District 10% of lot width or 10 ft, whichever is less 5 ft 5 ft 10 ft Corner Side Yard 10% of lot width or 10 ft, whichever is less 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft Rear Yard 20 ft None None None Rear Yard: Non-Residential Use Abutting Residential Use or District 3 20 ft 15 ft 15 ft 20 ft  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 5: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONSBULK REGULATION 1 Districts U-Core U-Comm U-TS U-P/I MINIMUM LOT AREA Non-Residential: None 
MF: 1,500 sf/unit Non-Residential: None 
MF: 1,500 sf/unit None None MINIMUM LOT WIDTH None None None None BUILDING HEIGHT 1 Townhouses: 35 ft or 21/2 stories, whichever is less 
Other uses: 
Minimum: 2 stories or 30 ft, whichever is less 
Maximum: 3 stories or 40 ft, whichever is less Maximum: 3 stories or 40 ft, whichever is less Maximum: 3 stories or 40 ft, whichever is less Maximum: 3 stories or 40 ft, whichever is less DESIGN STANDARDS See Section 8.6 See Section 8.6 See Section 8.6 See Section 8.6 MINIMUM YARDS 2 Front Yard None; 
Except along Prospect Ave. and Main St.: 0 ft build-to line None required; 
Except along NW Hwy.: 0 ft build-to line 10 ft 15 ft Interior Side Yard None; 
Except along Prospect Ave. and Main St.: 0 ft build-to line None required; 
Except along NW Hwy.: 0 ft build-to line 10% of lot width; 10 ft minimum 10% of lot width; 10 ft minimum Corner Side Yard None; 
Except along Prospect Ave. and Main St.: 0 ft build-to line None; 
Except along NW Hwy.: 0 ft build-to line 10 ft 15 ft Rear Yard None required None required 20 ft 20 ft Rear Yard: Non-Residential Use Abutting Residential Use or District 10 ft 10 ft 20 ft 20 ft  
TABLE 5: FOOTNOTES 
1 All appurtenances must meet building height requirements. 
2 In some cases between certain districts and/or uses, a transition yard may be required. Such transition yard may require additional landscaping and screening, as well as a larger yard dimension to accommodate these plantings. Such transition yards shall be as required by Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
3 In the B-1, B-2 or B-3 Districts, a rear yard is not required where an alley or railroad tracks are located between the commercial use and a residential use or district. 
8.5 - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Temporary Uses. See Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses. See Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory buildings, structures and uses. Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.F.2 (Attached Garages). 
(c)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(d)  Environmental Performance Standards. See Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing environmental performance standards. 
(e)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(f)  Landscaping and Screening. See Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(g)  Signs. See Section 14 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
8.6 - B-4 Uptown Business District design standards. 
(a)  Architectural Styles. 
(1)  Conformance to established architecture is encouraged, but not required. However, the exterior design of buildings shall emphasize traditional architecture consistent with buildings in the Uptown Business District of architectural significance. 
(2)  Predominant façade colors shall be subtle, neutral or earth-tone colors, such as red, buff, cream and gray. Primary colors, high-intensity colors, metallic or fluorescent colors, and black are prohibited as predominant façade colors. Building trim and accent areas may be brighter and include primary colors. 
(3)  Ceramic tile, terra-cotta brick, stone and glass surfaces shall not be painted. 
(b)  Building Materials. 
(1)  Permitted Materials. The following materials are permitted for use on exterior elevations: 
a.  Clay brick 
b.  Natural or cast stone 
c.  Wood 
In order to adapt to changing technology, the development of new materials and so as not to limit the designer, additional materials other than those specified above may be permitted. The use of alternate materials shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, in the context of each individual project, by the Appearance Commission. 
(2)  Prohibited Materials. Any language to the contrary in (1) above notwithstanding, the following building materials shall be prohibited as the predominant surface finish material in the construction of new residential buildings and related accessory structures within the Uptown Business District. However, such materials may be used as part of decorative or detail elements, or as part of the exterior construction that is not used as a surface finish material. 
a.  Concrete masonry units (CMU); 
b.  Utility brick; 
c.  Aluminum, steel or other metal sidings; 
d.  Metal wall panels; 
e.  Exposed aggregate (rough finish) concrete wall panels; 
f.  Exterior insulating finish systems (EIFS) on the ground floor; 
g.  Rustic shingles and shakes; 
h.  Plastic 
(c)  Building Scale. 
(1)  The Pickwick Theater building shall be maintained as the visual focal point of the Uptown Business District. No new construction shall compete visually with the Pickwick Theater building. 
(2)  New construction shall be compatible with the traditional color and scale of the Uptown Business District and the sub-district in which the new construction is to take place. 
(3)  Facades of large buildings shall be visually broken into bays to avoid the appearance of large, blank walls. Visual breaks in the façade shall be accomplished by alterations in the plane of the façade, height of the façade, changes in materials, color, texture or pattern, and/or the addition of columns, pilasters and/or windows. Bays shall be twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet in width. 
(4)  Buildings shall be designed with a definable base, middle and top. Rooflines, cornice treatments, window design and parapets are encouraged to divide larger buildings. Arcades may be used provided that the upper levels of the building line up with the streetwall and the columns are aligned with the façade of the building. 
(d)  Door and Window Design. 
(1)  Punched openings in the wall plane shall be provided in which to set windows and doors. Flush-mounted windows and doors are prohibited. Fenestration should match the surrounding traditional character and design. Bay windows on upper stories are permitted provided they are in character with surrounding buildings. 
(2)  Each ground floor space with street frontage shall have its primary entrance on the public sidewalk. Additional entrances may be provided from a parking area or access corridor. Buildings that face more than one (1) street may have an angled front entry at the corner. 
(3)  All public entrances shall be articulated from the building mass. Examples of such articulation include: recessed entries, overhangs, arcades, raised corniced parapet walls over the door, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patio or seating areas, display windows, details such as tile work and moldings integrated into the building design, and integral planters or wing walls that include landscaping or seating. 
(4)  In order to recognize the pedestrian orientation of the Uptown Business District, windows shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Along the length of façade(s), if a building faces the public street and sidewalk and has a retail, personal service and/or office use located on the first floor, fifty percent (50%) of the first floor façade shall be display-type windows. A minimum eighteen (18) inch and maximum of thirty (30) inch high knee-wall shall be required beneath glazing so as to allow pedestrians to see into the windows. 
b.  First story glass shall be clear and non-tinted. Tinting of second and third story glass shall not vary by more than twenty percent (20%). Reflective glass is prohibited. 
(e)  Roof Design. 
(1)  Roof lines shall either be varied with a change in height or the incorporation of a major focal point feature, such as a dormer or projected wall feature. Parapet walls are encouraged and shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatments or other shadow-creating detail elements along their tops. 
(2)  Gable, sloped mansard, shake and shingle roof designs are prohibited. 
(3)  "Green roof" designs are encouraged. 
(f)  Historical Preservation. The following design guidelines apply to existing buildings with historical or architectural significance within the B-4 Uptown Business District. 
(1)  Existing buildings should be restored to their original condition. False fronts and incompatible façade treatments should be removed. 
(2)  Distinguishing features of existing buildings, such as cornices and façade detailing, should be retained, repaired and restored. Original building materials should be maintained and restored. 
(3)  Improvements and additions to existing buildings should reinforce and enhance the original character of the building. 
(4)  Existing windows should not be covered over or boarded up. New doors should match the original style and character of the façade. 
(5)  The original roofline and cornice treatment should be maintained and restored. 
Section 9 - SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS 

9.1 - Special purpose districts purpose. 
(a)  Purpose of OS Open Space Special Purpose District. The Open Space Special Purpose District (OS) is intended to provide and protect publicly and privately owned open space, natural areas, and passive and active recreation facilities that serve the City and surrounding region. 
(b)  Purpose of H Hospital Special Purpose District. The Hospital Special Purpose District (H) is intended to address the special needs and impacts of a large-scale, multi-functional hospital and medical campus. The Hospital District is divided into three sub-districts - Hospital Transition Zone 1, Hospital Transition Zone 2 and Hospital Core Zone. These sub-districts progressively increase in intensity of use and bulk. This progression is intended to mitigate the impacts of a hospital campus on adjacent residential uses. 
(1)  Hospital Core Zone. Hospital Core Zone (H-CZ) is intended to accommodate the main hospital structure and related uses. This sub-district is the most intense within the H District. 
(2)  Hospital Transition Zone 1. Hospital Transition Zone 1 (H-TZ-1) is intended to serve as the immediate transition between neighboring residential uses. It is primarily a landscaped transition yard, though surface parking lots may be allowed as a special use. No principal structures are permitted in this sub-district. 
(3)  Hospital Transition Zone 2. Hospital Transition Zone 2 (H-TZ-2) is intended to serve as a secondary buffer against neighboring residential uses. The H-TZ-2 Sub-District allows for some freestanding smaller-scale medical-related uses with individual yard requirements for each structure. 
(c)  Purpose of EB Educational Boarding Special Purpose District. The Educational Boarding Special Purpose District (EB) is intended to address the special needs and impacts of a large-scale, educational facility and campus that includes boarding facilities for students. The Educational Boarding District is divided into two sub-districts - EB Transition Zone and EB Core Zone. 
(1)  Educational Boarding Core Zone. Educational Boarding Core Zone (EB-CZ) is intended to accommodate a large-scale educational facility, including classrooms and dorms, and related uses such as parking and outdoor recreation. 
(2)  Educational Boarding Transition Zone. Educational Boarding Transition Zone (EB-TZ) is intended to serve as the buffer with respect to neighboring residential uses and provides a landscaped transition yard between the facility and the abutting residential uses. No principal structures are permitted in this sub-district. 
(d)  Purpose of S Sexually-Oriented Business Special Purpose District. The Sexually-Oriented Business Special Purpose District (S) is intended to provide a limited area in which to operate a sexually-oriented business. The S District is a floating zone, which will not be designated on the Zoning Map until an application is made and a recommendation is made by action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. An S District is the only zoning district in which a sexually-oriented business may be operated. 
(e)  Purpose of P Parking Special Purpose District. The Parking District (P) is intended to create an area adjacent to the existing B-1 District for off-street parking that must be designed to be compatible with adjacent residential areas. The parking areas are to be used solely for off-street parking lots by passenger vehicles incidental to a principal use. The district is intended to serve as parking for an adjacent use, or uses, which has previously been developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
9.2 - Permitted and special uses. 
Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists permitted and special uses for the special purpose districts. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted within that district. An "S" indicates that a use is considered a special use in that district and must obtain special use approval as required in Section 4.6 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that district. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 6: SPECIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special UseUse 1 Special Purpose Districts Specific Use
Standards OS H EB S 2 P H-CZ H-TZ-1 H-TZ-2 EB-CZ EB-TZ RESIDENTIAL USESAssisted Living Facility S S See Section 10.3.A Independent Living Facility S S See Section 10.3.A Nursing Home S S See Section 10.3.A Temporary overnight shelters 5 S S S S See Section 10.3.R GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USESEducational Facility, Primary/Secondary(With Residential) S Educational/Residential Boarding Campus S Educational/Residential Boarding Campus S 6 SERVICE AND OFFICE USESClassrooms with Laboratory Facilities (Medical-Related) P S Day Care Center, Adult or Child P S See Section 10.3.D Helistop S Health/Fitness Center P Hospital P Medical/Dental Clinic P P Medical Support Facilities P Office, Professional (Hospital-Related) P P Physical Therapy Office P P Rehabilitation Facility (Residential) S Research and Development Facility (Hospital-Related) P P Restaurant (includes hospital cafeteria) P P PARKING USESParking Lot (Principal Use) P S P P S P See Section 10.3.N Parking Structure (Principal Use) P P P S See Section 10.3.N RETAIL USESRetail Goods Establishment(Hospital-Related) 3 P P Sexually-Oriented Business S See Section 10.3.P OPEN SPACE USESCemetery P Country Club P Driving Range P Forest Preserve P Golf Course P Park (Principal Use), including Park District Recreational Buildings P OTHER Wireless Telecommunications Antenna S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 S,P 4 See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Facility S S S S S S S S See Section 10.3.R Wireless Telecommunications Tower S S S S S S S S See Section 10.3.R  
FOOTNOTES: TABLE 6 
1 The terms in this column ("Use") are defined in Section 17 (Generic Use Definitions). 
2 In addition to sexually-oriented businesses, all uses that are listed as permitted uses in the B-3 District are considered permitted uses in the S District. All uses considered special uses in the B-1 District are considered special uses in the S District. See Table 4: Commercial Districts Permitted and Special Uses for the commercial district uses. 
3 Hospital-related retail goods establishments include such uses as gift shops and medical supply sales establishments. 
4 Only wireless telecommunications antennas that comply with the stealth design standards of Section 10.3.R.10 shall be considered permitted uses. 
5 Ordinance 2008-83, 11/17/2008 
6 Ordinance 2011-88, 12/19/2011 
9.3 - Yard and bulk regulations. 
Table 7: Special Purpose Districts Yard and Bulk Regulations establishes yard and bulk regulations for the special purpose districts. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS BULK REGULATION OS 1 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 5 35 ft MINIMUM YARDS Front Yard 20 ft Interior Side Yard 10 ft Corner Side Yard 15 ft Rear Yard 25 ft  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS BULK REGULATION H 2 H-CZ H-TZ-1 3 H-TZ-2 1 MINIMUM DISTRICT SIZE 10 acres for entire H District MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 5 165 ft n/a 50 ft MINIMUM YARDS Front Yard None 20 ft (See Section 9.6) 10 ft Interior Side Yard None 20 ft 4 (See Section 9.6) 10 ft Corner Side Yard None 20 ft (See Section 9.6) 10 ft Rear Yard None 20 ft 4 (See Section 9.6) 10 ft  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS BULK REGULATION EB EB-CZ 1 EB-TZ 3 MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 5 45 ft n/a MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 30% n/a MINIMUM OPEN SPACE 40% n/a MINIMUM YARDS Front Yard 10 ft 35 ft (See Section 9.6) Interior Side Yard 10 ft 40 ft (See Section 9.6) Corner Side Yard 10 ft 35 ft (See Section 9.6) Rear Yard 10 ft 40 ft (See Section 9.6)  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS BULK REGULATION S MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 5 35 ft FLOATING ZONE MAPPING LOCATION May be designated only within existing B-3 District MINIMUM YARDS Front Yard 10 ft Interior Side Yard 10 ft Corner Side Yard 10 ft Rear Yard 20 ft  
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7: SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS BULK REGULATION P MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 5 No structures; parking lot at existing grade MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE 90% MINIMUM LOT AREA 6,500sf MINIMUM YARDS Front Yard 10 ft Interior Side Yard 4 ft Corner Side Yard 10 ft Rear Yard 4 ft  
FOOTNOTES: TABLE 7 
1 In the OS District and the H-TZ-2 and EB-CZ Sub-Districts, yard regulations only apply to structures. 
2 Modifications within the H District are subject to the provisions of Section 9.5 of this Section. 
3 Any surface parking lots located within the H-TZ-1 Sub-District must meet landscaping and screening requirements of Section 13.8 (Parking Lot Landscaping) and 13.9 (Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping). The H-TZ-1 and EB-TZ Sub-Districts shall provide screening as required by Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
4 Interior and rear yard requirements for the H-TZ-1 Sub-District are applicable only when the sub-district boundary is directly adjacent to a residential district. 
5 All appurtenances must meet building height requirements. 
9.4   General standards of applicability.
(a)  Temporary Uses. See Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses. See Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory buildings, structures and uses. Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.F.2 (Attached Garages). 
(c)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(d)  Environmental Performance Standards. See Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing environmental performance standards. 
(e)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(f)  Landscaping and Screening. See Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(g)  Signs. See Section 14 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
9.5   Modifications within hospital special purpose district.
    Any changes within any sub-district within the Hospital District shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Use Change. A use change within the Hospital District, whether a permitted or special use, which does not require any exterior changes, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  When a use change occurs within the Hospital District to a use designated as permitted within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, such use change shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). 
(2)  When a use change occurs within the Hospital District to a use designated as a special use within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, such use change shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6). 
(b)  Interior Building Modifications. Any interior remodeling, which does not affect any exterior portion of the structure or increase the bulk of the building or structure in any manner, shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. 
(c)  Additions and New Construction. 
(1)  All additions and new construction in any part of the Hospital District shall be subject to site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. This shall not include normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, which is subject to Paragraph D below. 
(2)  Any additions to a structure used for a special use, or for new construction of a special use, as designated within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6). 
(3)  If any addition or new construction meets certain bulk thresholds as described below, such additional or new construction shall be shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6), regardless of whether the use is considered permitted or special use as designated within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses. The thresholds are as follows: 
a.  Any addition that increases the bulk of an existing structure by ten percent (10%) or ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Any new construction of twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet or more. 
c.  Any new addition that increases building height, or any new construction, over fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is less. This is applicable regardless of the increase in bulk as described in Paragraphs a or b above. 
d.  Any reconfiguration of circulation with the Hospital Core Zone Sub-District, which affects drop-off and pick-up areas for both patients of the hospital and supplies, such as emergency room drop-off areas and loading docks, regardless of size. This shall not include temporary changes in the location of drop-off and pick-up areas due to on-site construction. Temporary changes in location shall not require a special use approval. 
As stated in Paragraph 1 above, additions and new construction that are below these thresholds shall be subject to site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. 
(d)  Maintenance and Repair of Structures. Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement on any building or structure within the Hospital District, including repair of surface parking lots, shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement shall not create an increase in the bulk of the building or structure in any manner. 
9.4 - General standards of applicability. 
(a)  Temporary Uses. See Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses) for standards governing temporary uses. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses. See Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory buildings, structures and uses. Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be subject to the requirements of Section 11.4.F.2 (Attached Garages). 
(c)  Permitted Encroachments. See Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments. 
(d)  Environmental Performance Standards. See Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing environmental performance standards. 
(e)  Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street parking and loading. 
(f)  Landscaping and Screening. See Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and screening. 
(g)  Signs. See Section 14 (Signs) for standards governing signs. 
9.5 - Modifications within hospital special purpose district. 
    Any changes within any sub-district within the Hospital District shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Use Change. A use change within the Hospital District, whether a permitted or special use, which does not require any exterior changes, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  When a use change occurs within the Hospital District to a use designated as permitted within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, such use change shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). 
(2)  When a use change occurs within the Hospital District to a use designated as a special use within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, such use change shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6). 
(b)  Interior Building Modifications. Any interior remodeling, which does not affect any exterior portion of the structure or increase the bulk of the building or structure in any manner, shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. 
(c)  Additions and New Construction. 
(1)  All additions and new construction in any part of the Hospital District shall be subject to site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. This shall not include normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, which is subject to Paragraph D below. 
(2)  Any additions to a structure used for a special use, or for new construction of a special use, as designated within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses, shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6). 
(3)  If any addition or new construction meets certain bulk thresholds as described below, such additional or new construction shall be shall be subject to the special use procedures of this Ordinance (Section 4.6), regardless of whether the use is considered permitted or special use as designated within Table 6: Special Purpose Districts Permitted and Special Uses. The thresholds are as follows: 
a.  Any addition that increases the bulk of an existing structure by ten percent (10%) or ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Any new construction of twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet or more. 
c.  Any new addition that increases building height, or any new construction, over fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is less. This is applicable regardless of the increase in bulk as described in Paragraphs a or b above. 
d.  Any reconfiguration of circulation with the Hospital Core Zone Sub-District, which affects drop-off and pick-up areas for both patients of the hospital and supplies, such as emergency room drop-off areas and loading docks, regardless of size. This shall not include temporary changes in the location of drop-off and pick-up areas due to on-site construction. Temporary changes in location shall not require a special use approval. 
As stated in Paragraph 1 above, additions and new construction that are below these thresholds shall be subject to site plan review (Section 4.5) prior to approval of a building permit. 
(d)  Maintenance and Repair of Structures. Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement on any building or structure within the Hospital District, including repair of surface parking lots, shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement shall not create an increase in the bulk of the building or structure in any manner. 
Section 10 - USE STANDARDS 

10.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to set forth additional requirements for specified uses of land. These standards are intended to ensure that the use is compatible with the surrounding area. 
10.2 - Use of land and buildings. 
    No building, structure, or premises shall be used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
10.3 - Generic use standards. 
    In addition to the use standards below, all uses are required to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, Section 11 (Site Development Standards), Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading), Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening), and Section 14 (Signs), and all other City regulations. 
(a)  Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility and Nursing Home. Assisted living facilities, independent living facilities and nursing homes shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required: 
(1)  The location, design and operation of the facility shall be compatible with, and shall not adversely affect, adjacent properties and the surrounding area. 
(2)  The facility shall be harmonious with surrounding buildings, in respect to scale, architectural design and building placement. If located within a residential district, the facility shall not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The surrounding street network shall be capable of accommodating the traffic generated by the facility. 
(b)  Community Residence. Community residences shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required. 
(1)  The location, design and operation of the facility will not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  The facility shall retain a residential character, which shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  The operation of the facility shall not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
(4)  No community residence shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of another community residence, unless the City criteria or specific finding that the cumulative effect of such location would not violate the provisions of Paragraphs 1 through 2 above. 
(c)  Cultural Facilities and Heritage Centers. Cultural facilities and heritage centers shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(d)  Day Care Center, Adult and Day Care Center, Child. 
(1)  Day care centers shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required: 
a.  Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting shall be provided. 
b.  The amount of traffic or noise to be generated shall not be excessive. 
c.  Adequate open space and recreational areas shall be provided. 
(2)  In residential districts, day care centers shall be subject to single-family residential use bulk requirements of the district in which they are located (i.e., not the special use bulk requirements). 
(e)  Day Care Home, Adult and Day Care Home, Child. 
(1)  Day care homes shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required: 
a.  Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting shall be provided. 
b.  The amount of traffic or noise to be generated shall not be excessive. 
c.  Adequate open space and recreational areas shall be provided. 
d.  The day care home shall retain a residential character and the affect of the day care home shall not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
e.  The operation of the day care home shall not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
(2)  In residential districts, day care homes shall be subject to single-family residential use bulk requirements of the district in which they are located (i.e., not the special use bulk requirements). 
(3)  Services are provided in a protective setting for more than three (3), up to a maximum of twelve (12), children or adults for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(4)  Child day care home does not include facilities which receive only children from a single household. 
(f)  Drive-Through Facility. A drive-through facility is considered a separate use, rather than accessory to the principal use, and shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  All drive-through facilities shall provide adequate stacking spaces, in accordance with Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
(2)  All drive-through lanes must be located and designed to ensure that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. 
(3)  No exterior lighting shall produce a glare into, or upon, the surrounding area or any residential premises. All drive-through facilities shall be properly screened, in accordance with Section 13.13.D (Drive-Through Facilities), to prevent glare from vehicles passing through service lanes. 
(4)  Drive aisles shall be separated from landscaped areas by a six (6) inch curb. 
(5)  The volume on all intercom menu displays shall be maintained at a level so as not to be audible in adjoining residential districts. The volume on all intercom menu displays shall comply with all local noise regulations. 
(6)  The operator of the drive-through facility shall provide adequate on-site outdoor waste receptacles and shall provide daily litter clean-up of the facility and along the rights-of-way abutting the property. 
(g)  Dwelling, Multi-Family and Dwelling, Townhouse. 
(1)  All townhouse developments and multi-family dwellings shall be designed with the front facade facing the street. When the side walls of a townhouse or multi-family dwelling face a street, these sidewall facades shall be designed with elements of a front façade, including doors and/or windows, to avoid blank walls along a street. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum separation of ten (10) feet between sidewalls among rows of townhouse developments and multi-family dwellings. (See Figure 4: Sidewall Separation) Where the front or rear wall of a row of townhouse or multi-family dwellings faces the front or rear wall of another row of townhouse or multi-family dwellings, the minimum required separation between such buildings shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. (See Figure 5: Upper-Wall Separation) Driveways and parking areas may be located within this minimum separation area. The minimum separation at the ground-floor may be reduced to twenty-four (24) feet for interior drives with garage doors facing garage doors, provided that the upper-story living spaces comply with the thirty (30) foot separation requirements. 
(3)  Townhouses should be designed with either detached garages located in the rear yard, or attached garages oriented to the rear or side of the units. 
(4)  Each townhouse unit shall have a private yard that is a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet in area and a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. The yard is not required to be fenced or otherwise demarcated. This yard may be located adjacent to a front, rear or side wall, provided that it is immediately adjacent to the townhouse it serves and directly accessible from the corresponding townhouse by way of a door or stair. Private yards must be at-grade or, if located on a terrace or patio, within four (4) feet of grade. All private yards must be landscaped with turf, groundcover, shrubs, trees or other landscape improvements, which can include hardscapes, such as patios. 

(h)  Entertainment and Recreation Facilities, Indoor or Outdoor. Entertainment and recreation facilities shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(i)  Kennel. 
(1)  Exterior enclosures and runs shall provide protection against weather extremes. Floors of runs shall be made of impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. 
(2)  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Fencing surrounding exercise areas and/or runs shall be of a sufficient height to prevent escape and shall be buried as part of installation to prevent escape by digging beneath the fence posts. 
(4)  Kennel noise shall be mitigated so as not to create a public nuisance for adjoining properties. This shall exclude noise from exercise or training while outdoors during the daytime. Kennels shall comply with all local noise regulations. 
(j)  Motor Vehicle Service Station. 
(1)  Motor vehicle service station canopies shall be designed with luminaires recessed under the canopy to minimize light pollution. Light intensity directly under the canopy shall not exceed ten (10) footcandles at any location. All lighting mounted under the canopy, including auxiliary lighting within signage and panels over the pumps, shall be included in the ten (10) footcandle limit. 
(2)  All motor vehicle service station driveways must be located and designed to ensure that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. 
(3)  Motor vehicle service stations may offer convenience items for sale as a secondary activity. 
(4)  Motor vehicle service stations may also include an automatic car wash with one (1) bay. Stacking spaces shall be in accordance with Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
(5)  In addition, motor vehicle service stations may be included as part of a "Minor Motor Vehicle Repair and Service Shop." However, they shall be subject to the provisions of this Section and the standards of Paragraph M (Motor Vehicle Repair and Service, Minor) below. 
(k)  Motor Vehicle Dealership. Newly established motor vehicle dealerships shall have a minimum lot size of twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. Any service and repair facilities, which are open to the public and included as part of the dealership must also comply with the standards of Paragraph M (Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major or Minor) below. 
(l)  Motor Vehicle Operations Facility. All repair operations and service bays shall be fully enclosed. 
(m)  Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major or Minor. 
(1)  Minor motor vehicle service and repair shops may not store the same vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than ten (10) days. Major motor vehicle service and repair shops may not store the same vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than ninety (90) days. 
(2)  All driveways must be located and designed to ensure that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on adjoining streets. 
(3)  All repair operations shall be fully enclosed. Wrecked or junked vehicles shall not be stored for longer time periods than those specified above and shall be screened from the public right-of-way and any adjacent residential districts. 
(4)  Minor motor vehicle service and repair shops may also include gas stations as a secondary use. All gas stations which are part of such an establishment must comply with the regulations of Paragraph J (Motor Vehicle Service Station) above. 
(n)  Off-Street Parking, Structure or Lot (Principal Use). The provisions of these paragraphs apply where an off-street parking structure or lot is the principal use of the zoning lot. 
(1)  Off-Street Parking Structure: 
a.  Parking structures located in the B-1 or B-2 Districts or the U-Core Sub-District of the B-4 District shall include commercial uses along at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of a façade adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
b.  Where no storefronts are required as per Paragraph (a) above, a landscaped yard a minimum of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Off-Street Parking Lot: 
a.  In the P District, the off-street parking lot shall be solely for the parking of passenger vehicles and must adjoin and abut an existing B-1 District. 
b.  In other non-residential districts where parking is allowed as a principal use the off-street parking lot shall be for the parking of passenger and commercial vehicles for periods of less than one (1) day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
c.  No sale display repair or service of any kind shall be conducted in any off-street parking lot. 
d.  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on any off-street parking lot. 
e.  No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon any street parking lots. The allowable shelters shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in area. 
(o)  Place of Worship. Places of worship shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(p)  Sexually-Oriented Business. Sexually-oriented business shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  No sexually-oriented business shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other sexually-oriented business or any residential district, school or place of worship. 
(2)  The sexually-oriented business shall be so designed, located and operated so that the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare will be protected. 
(3)  The sexually-oriented business shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(4)  The sexually-oriented business shall not unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets and highways in the area in which it is located. 
(5)  The sexually-oriented business shall not cause additional public expense for fire or police protection. 
(6)  No sexually-oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas" from any public way or from any adjacent property. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(q)  Social Club or Lodge. 
(1)  Social clubs or lodges shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. 
(2)  No more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area may be used as office space for the social club or lodge. 
(3)  Social clubs and lodges are permitted to serve food and meals on the premises. There shall be no sleeping facilities. 
(r)  Temporary Overnight Shelter. Temporary overnight shelters shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Each temporary overnight shelter shall be used in a manner that minimizes its impact on the neighborhood in which it is located. To that end, the entrances, exits, exterior lighting and parking facilities shall be planned so that, to the extent practical, traffic congestion and pedestrian hazards will not be increased. The amount of noise to be generated shall not interfere with the quiet use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) temporary overnight shelter may be located in any single ward of the City and no temporary overnight shelter shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other temporary overnight shelter unless the City makes a specific finding that the cumulative effect of such location would not violate paragraph 1 above. 
(3)  The maximum number of occupants, including staff, permitted to remain on each floor of a temporary overnight shelter shall be computed by dividing the square footage of each sleeping area by 80; resulting fractions shall be disregarded. 
(4)  There shall be compliance with all federal, state and local requirements, including but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements and all applicable sections of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
(5)  Application for a special use shall be made by both the owner of the premises and any other entity providing significant programming support (defined as program operating procedures related in any way to security, healthcare screening and background verifications) for the temporary overnight shelter. 
(6)  The owner of the premises and any entity providing significant programming support for a temporary overnight shelter shall first be required to obtain a license for the operation of a temporary overnight shelter from the City. This license must, at all times, be maintained in full force and effect. If at any time the licenses lapses, the special use shall terminate. 
(7)  No temporary overnight shelter shall operate for more than twelve (12) hours per twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(8)  No temporary overnight shelter shall operate more than one night per week or between May 1 and September 30. 
(9)  A temporary overnight shelter shall not be located in any hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, community residence, rooming house, assisted living facility, independent living facility, single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or townhouse. 
(10)  A temporary overnight shelter shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of a child daycare, nursery school or grammar school within sixty (60) minutes of operation of such child daycare, nursery school or grammar school when children are present, except for children utilizing the shelter's services. 
(11)  The City shall issue a maximum of two (2) licenses for temporary overnight shelters. 
Items 1 through 11 above shall not apply to use of a premises for: (a) an emergency, such as a natural or other disaster affecting significant portions of the Park Ridge community; or (b) occasional overnight events sponsored by the organization that owns the premises. 
(s)  Wireless Telecommunications Antenna, Facility and Tower. 
(1)  Purpose. The following standards for wireless telecommunications antennas, facilities and towers are intended to: 
a.  Ensure public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. 
b.  Ensure access to reliable wireless telecommunications services throughout the City. 
c.  Encourage the use of existing towers and other structures for the colocation of wireless telecommunications antenna. 
d.  Encourage the location of towers, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the City will be minimal and preferably in non-residential, as opposed to residential, districts. 
e.  Minimize the potential adverse effects associated with the construction of wireless telecommunications towers through the implementation of reasonable design, landscaping and construction practices. 
(2)  Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements for a special use, all applications to erect, construct or modify any part of a wireless telecommunications antenna, facility or tower shall include the following items, unless waived by the City: 
a.  A site plan showing: 
i.  The location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences. 
ii.  The location and size of all outdoor equipment. 
iii.  A landscaping plan showing all screening. 
iv.  If the site plan is for a new wireless telecommunications tower, indication of the fall zone (shaded circle). 
b.  A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, designed to ensure long-term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard, including maintenance of landscaping, keeping the area free from debris and litter, and immediate removal of any graffiti. 
c.  A disclosure of what is proposed, demonstrating the need for the wireless telecommunications antenna, facility or tower to be located where proposed. 
d.  The reason or purpose for the placement, construction or modification, with specific reference to the provider's coverage, capacity, and/or quality needs, goals and objectives. 
e.  The service area of the proposed wireless telecommunications antenna, facility or tower. 
f.  An EME/RF Study which documents both the individual carrier's contribution of radiofrequencies (RF) to the environment, and the cumulative effects of all RF sources at the site. The Study must document where the "maximum permissible exposure" (MPE) is exceeded. 
g.  The nature and extent of the provider/applicant's ownership, easement or lease interest in the property, building or structure upon which the antenna, facility or tower is proposed for placement, construction or modification. 
h.  The identity and address of all owners and other persons with a real property recorded interests in the property, building, or structure upon which the antenna, facility or tower is proposed for placement, construction or modification. 
i.  If the proposal is for a new telecommunications tower, then a map showing colocation opportunities within the City and within areas surrounding the borders of the City shall be provided and justification for why collocation is not feasible in order to demonstrate the need for a new tower. 
j.  Certification by a State of Illinois licensed and registered professional engineer regarding the manner in which the proposed structure will fail. The certification may be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining if additional setback should be required for the structure and other facilities. 
k.  A visual simulation or rendering of the proposed support structure that illustrates the relationship between the height and the visual appearance of the structure. The City may require the visual simulation shall be provided from two (2) different perspectives and accurately depict the scale of the proposed structure in the context of the surrounding area. 
(3)  Fall Zone Setback. 
a.  A fall zone shall be constructed around any wireless telecommunications tower equal to one-hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the height of the tower. The fall zone shall not include public right-of-way, and must be located on property either owned or leased by the applicant, or for which the applicant has obtained an easement, and may not contain any structure other than an associated wireless telecommunications facility. In all cases, the wireless telecommunications tower must at least meet the underlying setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
b.  The City may reduce the required fall zone as part of the special use approval, but the City must find that the tower is less visible as a result and that safety is not compromised. Such reduction in the fall zone setback shall require submission of a written instrument signed by all adjoining property owners, and duly notarized, agreeing to such modification. In all cases, the wireless telecommunications tower must at least meet the underlying setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
c.  Any associated wireless telecommunications facilities shall be set back from all property lines in accordance with the minimum setback requirements in the zoning district. 
(4)  Height. The maximum height of a wireless telecommunications tower shall be one-hundred (100) feet as measured from grade as defined in this Ordinance, including all attachments (antennas, lightening rods, arrays, etc.). A special use application for approval of a wireless telecommunications tower shall demonstrate that the tower does not exceed the minimum height requirement necessary to function satisfactorily, which may be less than the one-hundred (100) foot maximum permitted here. As part of the special use approval, a tower may exceed the maximum height if the City finds that the exception is necessary for co-location purposes. In any case, the tower shall not exceed the height necessary to function satisfactorily. 
(5)  Lighting and Marking. Wireless telecommunications antennas, towers and facilities shall not be lit or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(6)  Landscaping. Landscaping is required to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. A fence six (6) feet in height must be erected around the wireless telecommunications tower and/or facility. Landscaping shall be installed outside the fencing in accordance with the following: 
a.  One (1) shade tree shall be provided for every twenty-five (25) feet of fence length, not including gates or other fence openings. 
b.  One (1) shrub for every five (5) feet of fence length, not including gates or other fence openings. 
c.  The landscaping may be flexible in its arrangement (but not quantity) by appropriately aggregating the required plant materials and maintaining open areas around gates or other fence openings. 
(7)  Additional Standards for Wireless Telecommunications Antennas. 
a.  Wireless telecommunications antennas shall be a special use in all districts, except where they are considered a permitted use subject to administrative site plan review in accordance with Paragraph 10 (Stealth Design for Wireless Telecommunications Antennas) below. 
b.  Wireless telecommunications antennas do not include satellite dishes, as regulated in Section 11.4.N (Satellite Dish Antennas) of this Ordinance. 
c.  Antennas shall be of a color that is identical or similar to the color of the supporting structure to make the antenna visually unobtrusive. 
d.  No antenna shall increase the overall height of any building or structure on which it is mounted by more than ten percent (10%), or ten (10) feet, whichever is less. However, antennas attached to existing communication towers shall not increase the height of tower above the maximum allowed. 
e.  The City may require, at its discretion, additional EME/RF Studies once antennas have been mounted and are in use in order to verify that the MPE has not been exceeded. 
(8)  Additional Standards for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
a.  Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be a special use in all districts. 
b.  Any buildings, cabinets or shelters may house only equipment and supplies for operation of the wireless telecommunication tower. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on the site. The facility shall be un-staffed and does not include telecom hotels. 
c.  Signs for the wireless telecommunications facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required), and any other information required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited. 
(9)  Additional Standards for Wireless Telecommunications Towers. 
a.  Wireless telecommunications towers shall be a special use in all districts. 
b.  Wireless telecommunications towers shall be designed to accommodate at least three (3) telecommunications providers. 
c.  The area surrounding a tower must be of a sufficient size to accommodate accompanying wireless telecommunications facilities for at least three (3) telecommunications providers. 
d.  Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration or the City, towers shall have a galvanized silver or gray finish. 
(10)  Stealth Design for Wireless Telecommunications Antennas. Stealth design for wireless antennas is encouraged and shall be considered a permitted use in all districts, subject to administrative site plan review. All applications for administrative site plan review shall include the information required by this section. In addition to the standards of this section for wireless telecommunications antennas, stealth design shall comply with the following regulations: 
a.  To qualify as a stealth design, wireless telecommunications antennas must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or otherwise not readily apparent to a causal observer. 
b.  Antennas must be located on or in structures already permitted within zoning districts, such as bell towers, clock towers, crosses, streetlights, monuments, penthouses, parapet walls and steeples, and shall be designed to blend in to the structure. Antennas that co-locate on existing wireless telecommunications towers shall also be considered stealth design. However, antennas attached to existing communication towers shall not increase the height of tower above the maximum allowed. 
c.  No antenna shall increase the overall height of any building or structure on which it is mounted. If an antenna exceeds the overall height of any building or structure, it shall be considered a special use. 
d.  In the B-4 District, any antennas located on or near the Pickwick Theater building must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or otherwise not readily apparent to a causal observer and may not detract from the visual prominence of the Pickwick Theater, nor may any antenna mounted on the Pickwick Theater building be higher than the building, in order to qualify as stealth design. 
(11)  Abandonment. Any wireless telecommunications tower or facility that is not operated for a period of one-hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall be considered abandoned. The owner shall remove the tower or facility within one-hundred eighty (180) days of its abandonment. The City shall ensure and enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority. 
(12)  Nonconformities. 
a.  Nonconforming Wireless Telecommunications Antenna or Facilities. Ordinary maintenance may be performed on nonconforming antenna or facilities. However, if the proposed alteration would intensify a nonconforming characteristic of the antenna or facility, a special use permit is required. 
b.  Nonconforming Telecommunications Towers: 
i.  Ordinary maintenance may be performed on nonconforming towers. 
ii.  Colocation of an antenna on an existing nonconforming tower is permitted upon approval of the Zoning Administrator, provided that the addition of the antenna and any additional wireless telecommunications facilities do not intensify the nonconformity. 
(t)  Utility, Private. Private utilities shall be designed so that the location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties. Additional landscaping and screening may be required. Any aboveground private utility structures, such as pedestals for cable wire access or other access points for underground infrastructure (communications wiring, fiber optic, etc.) may not encroach into the required front yard and shall be screened from view of any public right-of-way. 
(u)  Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor. For dwellings above the ground floor, the following criteria must apply: 
(1)  Seventy-five percent (75%) of ground floor coverage must be occupied by a permitted or approved special use. Twenty-five percent (25%) of ground floor coverage may be occupied by accessory uses, such as parking or ancillary residential uses, such as a lobby or mechanical equipment storage. The square footage of each floor above the ground floor may not exceed the square footage of the ground floor. 
(2)  One-hundred percent (100%) of any street-facing façade must be occupied by permitted or approved special uses and may not include any accessory uses, including parking. 
(3)  Two stories of residential above the ground floor shall be the maximum permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-83, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 2012-39, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 2015-37, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2019-09 , § 3, 2-4-2019) 
10.4 - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Temporary Use and Structure Permit Application. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a temporary use and structure permit, as required by this Ordinance, shall file a written application with the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by the City, together with an application fee as required by Appendix C (Fee Schedule). 
(2)  The Zoning Administrator shall grant temporary use and structure permits for those uses and structures listed below so long as he/she determines that the proposed use or structure, complies with the requirements of this section and this Ordinance. Unless expressly provided in this section, every temporary use or structure shall comply with the bulk requirements applicable in the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Temporary uses or structures not specifically listed here shall require the specific approval of the City Council. Uses or structures may be allowed in any zoning district, provided that it is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  Every temporary use or structure shall comply with this Ordinance and all local regulations. The Zoning Administrator or City Council may impose other conditions, as part of the temporary use and structure permit approval, as necessary to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance, and to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. No temporary use or structure shall be permitted in any district if it would have a significant negative impact on any adjacent property or on the area as a whole. 
(b)  General Provisions. Every temporary use or structure shall comply with all the requirements listed below. 
(1)  No temporary use or structure shall be permitted that causes, or threatens to cause, an on-site or off-site threat to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(2)  Every temporary use or structure shall be operated in accordance with such restrictions and conditions as the Fire Department may require. If required by the City, the operator of the temporary use shall employ appropriate security personnel. 
(3)  No temporary use or structure shall be permitted if the additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such use would have undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses. No temporary use shall block handicapped or fire lanes. 
(4)  No temporary use or structure shall be authorized that would unreasonably reduce the amount of parking spaces available for use in connection with permanent uses located on the lot in question. The Zoning Administrator may make an assessment of the total number of parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with a proposed temporary use or structure, on the basis of the particular use or structure, its intensity and the availability of other parking facilities in the area. The Zoning Administrator shall approve temporary use or structure only if such parking spaces are provided. 
(5)  No temporary use or structure shall be permitted if it conflicts with another previously authorized temporary use or structure. 
(6)  Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the Section 14 (Signs). 
(c)  Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Carnivals/Circuses. Carnivals/circuses are allowed in any zoning district. These uses shall be evaluated on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue adverse impact, including noise, on other properties. These uses need not comply with the yard requirements and the maximum height requirements of this Ordinance. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such use shall: 
a.  Submit, in advance of the event, a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles with no dead-end aisles. 
b.  Comply with all local regulations. 
c.  Provide refuse containers in the number and locations required by the City. All containers shall be properly serviced. 
d.  Provide for thorough clean-up of the site at the completion of the event. 
e.  Provide proof that all amusement devices have been State inspected. 
f.  Upon written notice from the City, immediately stop the use of any amusement device or structure found by the City to pose a threat to the public safety. 
(2)  Christmas Tree Sales Lot and Pumpkin Sales Patch. Christmas tree sales and pumpkin sales patches are allowed in any zoning district. These uses shall be evaluated based on the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. These uses shall be limited to a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
(3)  Farmers Markets. Farmers markets shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 7 of Article 12 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
(4)  House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales. House, apartment, garage and yard sales shall comply with all local regulations. They are allowed in any district, but only when limited to personal possessions of, or arts and crafts made by, the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit where the sale is being conducted. These uses shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days and no more than three (3) sales shall be conducted from the same residence in any twelve (12) month period. 
(5)  Arts and Crafts Shows, and Plant Shows (Indoor or Outdoor). Arts and crafts shows, and plant shows are allowed in any zoning district. These uses shall be evaluated based on the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and adverse impact on other properties. In residential districts, these uses shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) days and no more than two (2) sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period. 
(6)  Sidewalk Sales. Sidewalk sales shall comply with all local regulations. They shall be in conjunction with, and clearly incidental to, an existing permanent on-site use. Sidewalk sales are allowed in any non-residential district, and are permitted to display and sell only merchandise that is found in stores participating in the sidewalk sale. No sidewalk sale shall be permitted for a period of more than five (5) successive days and no more than two (2) sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period. 
(7)  Temporary Classroom Trailers. Temporary classroom trailers are permitted in the Hospital Core Zone and Hospital Transition Zone 2 only. Temporary classroom trailers shall be permitted for a period of six (6) months with one (1) possible extension not to exceed six (6) months as approved by City staff. These trailers shall not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations. No trailer shall be used as an office. 
(8)  Temporary Contractor Trailers and Real Estate Model Units. Contractor trailers and real estate model units, including temporary real estate offices accessory to a new development, are allowed in any zoning district when accessory to a construction project or a new development. Contractor trailers shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project. Real estate model units, including temporary real estate offices, shall be limited to the active selling and leasing of space in such development or six (6) months after issuance of the final occupancy permit, whichever is less. These structures shall not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations, except those located in a model unit used for demonstration purposes only. No trailer, unit or office shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm. 
(9)  Tents. 
a.  Commercial Districts. Tents within commercial districts shall be permitted for no longer than fourteen (14) days and must be in conjunction with a special event of a use located on the same lot. Tents must be removed within two (2) days of the end of the event for which it was erected, but in no case may a tent be in place for longer than fourteen (14) days. Unless waived in writing by the Zoning Administrator, every tent shall comply with the bulk requirements applicable to accessory structures. Additionally, the size and location of tents may be restricted where it is determined that it creates parking and/or access problems on the site. 
b.  Residential Districts. Tents within residential districts shall be limited to no more than five (5) days and must be located within the rear yard. These structures shall include tents used for entertainment or assembly purposes that are not intended for living purposes, such as camping and sleeping. 
(10)  Temporary Storage Trailers and Temporary Storage Containers. 
a.  Temporary storage trailers and containers are permitted in any zoning district when accessory to a construction or remodeling project. Trailers and containers are permitted on site for a period not to exceed the duration of the construction or remodeling project, and must be removed within one (1) month of receiving approval of final inspections or issuance of an occupancy permit, whichever occurs first. 
b.  Temporary storage trailers and containers are permitted in any zoning district when used for loading or unloading. Trailers and containers are permitted on site for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
c.  Temporary storage trailers and containers shall not be used for permanent storage. They shall not serve as a substitute for permanent storage needs on the site on which they are located. Trailers and containers shall not be permanently attached to the ground, serviced with permanent utilities or stacked on the site. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
Section 11 - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

11.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to address the regulation of those other site improvements on a lot other than the regulations for the principal building. This includes site design standards, accessory buildings, structures and uses, and permitted encroachments. 
11.2 - Use of land and buildings. 
(a)  Number of Buildings on a Lot. In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts there shall be no more than one (1) principal building per lot. In all other districts, more than one (1) building may be erected on a single lot, provided that each building shall comply with all yard and bulk requirements of a district as though it were a principal building on an individual lot. 
(b)  All Activities within an Enclosed Building. Within all districts, all activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, with the exception of the following activities and uses: 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with Section 12 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). 
(2)  Outdoor businesses, and those businesses with a required outdoor component, including, but not limited to, outdoor entertainment, outdoor recreation, restaurants, car washes, kennels and similar businesses. These businesses may be limited, or outdoor components prohibited, as a condition of a special use. 
(3)  Outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas, in accordance with Section 11.4.K (Outdoor Storage, and Outdoor Sales and Display) below. 
(4)  Temporary uses, in accordance with Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses). 
(c)  Frontage on a Public or Private Street. All lots shall front on a public or private street. 
(d)  Required Yards. No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards are less than required by this Ordinance. The yards of a building or structure shall not be considered yard space for any other building or structure. All yards allocated to a building or structure shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or structure. 
(e)  Applicability of Bulk Requirements. All buildings and structures erected after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet the requirements for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. No existing building shall be enlarged, altered, reconstructed or relocated in such a manner that conflicts with the requirements of the zoning district in which the building or structure shall be located. 
(f)  Applicability of Use Restrictions. No building, structure or land shall be used for any use other than one allowed as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which such building, structure or land is located. Buildings, structures or land may also be used for a temporary use or accessory use, in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.4 (Temporary Uses) and Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses). 
(g)  View Obstruction in Residential Districts. The site clearance area at the intersection of two (2) streets within the residential districts shall be defined as a triangular area of a corner lot measured fifteen (15) feet in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts and ten (10) feet in the R-5 District from the point of intersection of the property lines of the lot along a street; and shall not be obstructed by any sign, wall, fence, hedge, shrub or other object which exceeds twenty-four (24) inches in height. Trees may be maintained within this area as long as there is no foliage within thirty-six (36) inches as measured from the ground to the lowest foliage. In the event that the grade of a lot is higher than the street grade, the height of the wall, fence, hedge, or shrub shall be reduced so that the site clearance is not obstructed twenty-four (24) inches over the grade of the street. See Figure 6: View Obstruction. 
FIGURE 6: VIEW OBSTRUCTION 

(Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009) 
11.3 - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Light Trespass and Distraction. No exterior lighting shall produce glare into, or upon, the surrounding area or any residential premises. In addition, no exterior lighting may be used in any manner that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. Specifically, the following types of light trespass are prohibited: 
(1)  Any light not designed for roadway illumination that produces direct or reflected glare that could disturb the operator of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Any light that may be confused with, or construed as, a traffic control device, except as authorized by state, federal or local government. 
(3)  In addition, motor vehicle service station lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 10.3.J and drive-through facilities shall comply with Section 10.3.F. 
(b)  Levels of Light Trespass. The following levels of light trespass shall be permitted: 
(1)  No lighting source shall cause more than one-tenth (0.1) footcandle of illumination to cross the property line of an adjoining R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoned property. 
(2)  No lighting source shall cause more than two-tenths (0.2) footcandle of illumination to cross the property line of an adjoining R-4, R-5 or O zoned property. 
(3)  No lighting source shall cause more than two (2.0) footcandles of illumination to cross the property line of an adjoining commercially zoned property. 
(4)  No lighting source shall cause more than five (5.0) footcandles of illumination to cross any public way in commercial areas. 
(c)  Unshielded Lighting. The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs hung or strung on poles, wires, or any other type of support, are prohibited, except on a temporary basis in areas where approved carnivals, fairs or other similar activities are held and only when such activities are taking place. 
(d)  Light Pole and Building-Mounted Lighting Heights. The maximum height of light poles on private property, as measured from grade at the base to the bottom of the luminaire, shall be as specified below. These standards do not apply to public right-of-way lighting. Permitted light pole heights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Non-Residential Districts. Lights poles and building-mounted fixtures shall be designed with fully shielded luminaires. Such poles or mounts shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, in appropriate circumstances as part of site plan review, a pole or mount of up to twenty-four (24) feet. 
(2)  Residential Districts. Light poles for single- and two-family dwellings shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Light poles for non-residential, multi-family and townhouse uses shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. Lighting, including under-soffit lighting mounted upon a single-family, two-family or townhouse residential dwelling shall not be mounted higher than ten (10) feet above grade as defined in this Ordinance. Light poles on school sites or that light public outdoor recreational facilities shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height. 
(e)  Automatic Teller Machines. All exterior lighting for automatic teller machines (ATMs) shall comply with the Automated Teller Machine Security Act (205 ILCS 695/1 et seq). All exterior lighting for ATMs in drive-through facilities shall be designed with luminairs recessed under the canopy to minimize light pollution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009) 
11.4 - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
    All accessory buildings, structures and uses, as defined as in Section 16 (Definitions), shall be subject to the requirements of this Section and the requirements of Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below. Additional accessory structures not regulated in this section may be regulated in Section 11.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below. 
(a)  Accessory Buildings and Structures - General Regulations. All accessory buildings and structures shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to any other regulations within this section and Ordinance. 
(1)  No accessory building or structure shall be constructed prior to construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(2)  Accessory buildings or structures are prohibited within the required front, corner side, reverse corner side or interior side yard of any lot, unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. 
(3)  The maximum height of any detached accessory building or structure shall be measured from the floor of the structure to the peak of the roof, unless otherwise required by this Ordinance. (See Figure 7: Accessory Building Height) 
(4)  All detached accessory buildings or structures must be located a minimum of three (3) feet from any rear lot line and side lot line, unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. Where an alley has been vacated, permitted accessory buildings and structures may be located five (5) feet from the centerline of the alley, provided proof of ownership is established, a disclaimer by the City of any utility easement is obtained, and a written disclaimer by all utility companies is obtained waiving use of the portion of alley to be improved by a building or structure. (See Figure 8: Accessory Building Setback) 
(5)  In residential districts, all detached accessory buildings or structures shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the principal building on a lot. The distance shall be measured from the wall or foundation of the detached accessory building or structure to the wall or foundation of the principal building or the furthermost point of an accessory structure attached to the principal building, such as a porch. (See Figure 8) 
(6)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings shall be permitted on a zoning lot. This shall include a detached garage. One (1) gazebo shall be permitted on a zoning lot in addition to the maximum of two (2) accessory buildings. 
FIGURE 7: ACCESSORY BUILDING HEIGHT 

FIGURE 8: ACCESSORY BUILDING SETBACK* 

* However, where there is an accessory building with doors that open onto an alley, such accessory building shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear lot line. 
(b)  Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment 
(1)  Towers that solely support amateur (HAM) radio equipment and conform to all applicable performance criteria as set forth in Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards) shall be permitted only in the rear yard. Towers shall not exceed the maximum building height of the applicable district by more than ten (10) feet, unless a taller tower is technically necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio communications. Such taller height may only be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Paragraph 3 below. 
(2)  Antenna may be ground-, building- or roof-mounted, provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than ten (10) feet unless a taller antenna is technically necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio communications. Such taller height may only be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Paragraph 3 below. Every effort shall be made to install radio antennae in locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or from the public right-of-way 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a taller antenna or tower provided the operator provides evidence that a taller tower and/or antenna is necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio communications. In addition, the applicant must provide evidence that the tower and/or antenna shall not prove a hazard to birds (i.e., minimal chance of bird strikes). Such tower and/or antenna must conform to all applicable performance criteria as set forth in Section 11.6 (Environmental Performance Standards). As part of the application, the applicant must submit a site plan showing the proposed location of the tower and/or antenna, as well as its relation to the principal building and any additional accessory structures. 
(4)  Antennae and/or towers owned and operated by the City are exempt from these requirements. 
(c)  Arbors and Trellises, Detached. Detached arbors and trellises may encroach into required rear, front and corner side yards by three (3) feet, provided they comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each surface of the arbor or trellis shall be at least fifty percent (50%) open. 
(2)  The maximum height shall be eight (8) feet, the maximum length six (6) feet and the maximum depth three (3) feet. 
(3)  Arbors and trellises are permitted in interior side yards. 
(d)  Electrical Generators. Emergency electrical generators may only be installed as follows: 
(1)  An emergency electrical generator may be located in the corner side yard, reverse corner side yard or rear yard, except as set forth elsewhere in this section. 
(2)  An emergency electrical generator may not be located within the required yard setback, except for the rear yard where it is required to be a minimum of five (5) feet from any point along any lot line. 
(3)  Access and working space around the emergency electrical generator must be provided as defined in the version of the National Electric Code adopted by the City. 
(4)  All approved ground-based emergency electrical generators shall be screened. Screening materials may be masonry, wood, landscaped hedges or other opaque material, and shall screen the generators so no portion is visible from a street, sidewalk or the ground level of an adjoining lot. Color and texture of a masonry screen wall shall be compatible with the color and texture of the principal building on the site. 
(5)  Testing of emergency electrical generators may only be done between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; and Saturday, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(e)  Fences. 
(1)  General Requirements: 
a.  No fence shall be erected or replaced within the City without first obtaining a building permit. 
b.  All fences shall be measured from existing grade, unless otherwise specified. 
c.  Fences for public utility and public recreational uses in any district shall be subject to the regulations of Paragraph 4 below. 
(2)  Fences in Residential Districts 
a.  Fences are prohibited in the front yard. 
b.  Fences in residential districts may be erected to a height of five feet, two inches (5'-2") in any interior side, rear or corner side yard of an interior or corner lot, except for the following: 
i.  In the case of a reverse corner lot, open fences may be erected to a height of four (4) feet along any corner side yard. 
ii.  Where a residential lot backs up to a major thoroughfare, a fence may be erected to a height of six (6) feet along the rear lot line. 
iii.  Where a property abuts a railroad right-of-way, a fence may be erected to a height of seven (7) feet. However, where the right-of-way is below grade level, the maximum height of the fence shall not exceed the difference between seven (7) feet and the depth of the depression below grade, or five (5) feet, whichever is more. 
iv.  Where a property abuts an alley, a fence may be erected to a height of five and one-half (51/2) feet. 
v.  Where a property abuts any property zoned and used for a commercial use or a parking lot, a fence may be erected to a height of six (6) feet in the rear, interior side or corner side yards. 
vi.  Where a fence is constructed to screen a patio that does not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length, that fence may be erected to a height of six (6) feet but must be located within three (3) feet from the patio being screened. In addition, only one (1) patio per lot may be screened with a six (6) foot fence. 
vii.  Where a fence is constructed on a deck, that fence may be erected to a height of five (5) feet. 
(3)  Fences in Non-Residential Districts: 
a.  Fences are prohibited in the front or corner side yard. 
b.  Open fences only may be installed in any interior side or rear yard to a height not to exceed six (6) feet. 
c.  When a non-residential use abuts a residential district, a solid six (6) foot high fence shall be required to be erected along any lot line that abuts a residential district, except along the front lot line and corner side lot line. 
(4)  Fences for Public Utility and Public Recreational Uses: 
a.  Whenever the lot line of a public utility or public recreational use abuts a residential district, or whenever a public utility use fronts on a public right-of-way, the use shall be screened by a fence. In addition to the fencing, shrubs a minimum of five (5) feet in height shall be planted along the fence. 
b.  Public utility uses shall be fenced. Barbed wire, razor wire or fences of similar material shall be permitted only on a lot used for a public utility facility. All barbed wire, razor wire or similar material shall be placed no less than seven (7) feet above finished grade and shall extend inward toward the interior of the lot. Such fences shall be a maximum height of eight (8) feet. Such fences may be located in any yard. 
c.  Public recreation areas may be enclosed along their boundaries (i.e., all yards) with an open type fence to a height not to exceed eight (8) feet. Tennis courts and other similar uses may be fenced in accordance with national standards for such uses. 
(5)  Fences for Screening. Fences shall be required for screening in accordance with Section 13.13 (Screening Requirements). 
(6)  Fence Construction and Design Requirements: 
a.  The finished side of all fences shall face away from the lot on which it located. Both sides of all fences shall be similar in design, construction and appearance. 
b.  All fence posts shall be placed on the inside of the fence and the post height may extend a maximum of four inches, including the post cap, above the fence. 
c.  A fence or wall, including all posts, bases, and other structural parts shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located. 
d.  Fences shall only be constructed of the following materials: 
i.  Treated wood, cedar or redwood 
ii.  Simulated wood 
iii.  Decorative brick or stone 
iv.  Wrought-iron or aluminum designed to simulate wrought-iron 
v.  Coated chain link, brown, black or green in color 
(7)  Nonconforming Fences. Existing fences located within the front yard, which are an existing legal nonconforming structure, may be repaired or reconstructed. However, any change to fence style or material, height or length shall not be permitted without a variance. 
(f)  Garages, Attached and Detached. The following design standards apply to all residential garages. Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be subject to the regulations of this section for attached garages. 
(1)  General Garage Design Standards: 
a.  On lots without alley access, utilization of a side-loaded or rear-loaded garage is encouraged to minimize the impact of the garage doors on the streetscape. 
b.  Garage size should be sensitive to the size of garages on the same block in terms of overall size and percentage of facade. 
(2)  Attached Garages: 
a.  Garage doors shall be limited to eighteen (18) feet in width, with the exception that garage doors that face the street on an attached garage shall not exceed nine (9) feet in width. 
b.  Front-loaded attached garages shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the width of the front façade of the house, as measured along any building line that faces the street, but in no case shall there be more than two (2) automobile bays. 
c.  Attached front-loaded and side-loaded garages shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet behind the main front façade of the house. This measurement will be taken from the part of the front façade that is immediately adjacent to the garage, except that the measurement may be taken from the part of the house closest to the street if all of the following conditions are met (See Figure 9: Attached Garage Design): 
i.  The front façade of the house is irregular, i.e., the front foundation is not a straight line. 
ii.  The portion closest to the street is actual living space. 
iii.  That space forms the dominant visual mass, as determined by length, width, height and surface treatment. 
iv.  Existing front loaded, one-car attached garages, which do not currently meet the five (5) foot behind the main front façade requirement, may be extended towards the side yard, maintaining the current attached garage setback distance, but not extending it, in order to create a two-car garage. All required yard setbacks and other bulk requirements for the zoning district shall still apply. 
d.  Windows, doors and roof treatments of that part of the garage facing the street shall incorporate architectural detail expressive of a residence. 
e.  Upper level dormers and pitched roof elements shall be used to de-emphasize the garage. Garage openings, windows, columns, trims, decorative paneling and color shall de-emphasize the visual impact of the garage in relation to the building as a whole. 

(3)  Detached Garages. 
a.  A detached garage shall not exceed a maximum of eighteen (18) feet in height as measured from the garage floor to the peak of a pitched roof, but the maximum height of the sidewall shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. (See Figure 10: Detached Garage Height) However, any garage over fifteen (15) feet in height shall require review by and approval of the Appearance Commission, and all plans for such garage must be drawn by a licensed architect and show evidence of structural integrity. 
b.  The area above the vehicle parking spaces in a detached garage may be utilized for storage, but not living space and may not contain a kitchen, bathroom or sleeping area. The floor area of the second story of a detached garage having head room of seven feet (7') or more shall be counted in the total maximum FAR. 
c.  Garage doors shall be limited to eighteen (18) feet in width. (See Figure 10) 
FIGURE 10: DETACHED GARAGE HEIGHT 

d.  Detached garages shall not exceed seven hundred twenty (720) square feet. 
e.  Detached garages located within the rear thirty (30) feet of a lot, shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet from any lot line. However, where there is a detached garage with doors that open onto an alley, such garage shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear lot line. The distance shall be measured from the walls of the garage. In no case shall a detached garage encroach into the corner side yard. 
f.  If a lot abuts a public alley, a detached garage shall be constructed so that access is from the public alley. 
g.  New detached garages over fifteen (15) feet in height shall be consistent with the architecture and design of the principal building. Consistency of design shall include use of the same palette of materials as the principal building, roofing, roof pitch, trim and colors. 
(g)  Gazebos and Pergolas, Detached. Detached gazebos and pergolas are permitted in the rear yard, provided they comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each surface of the gazebo or pergola shall be at least twenty-five percent (25%) open. 
(2)  Gazebos or pergolas shall be limited to twelve (12) feet in height as measured from grade to the peak of the roof. The gazebo platform shall be no higher than four (4) feet above grade. Gazebos shall be limited to one-hundred twenty (120) square feet in area. Pergolas shall be limited to lot coverage requirements, but in no case shall they exceed four hundred (400) square feet. 
(3)  The gazebo or pergola shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any lot line. 
(h)  Home Occupations. The following standards are intended to ensure that home occupations, conducted in a dwelling, are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located and do not interfere with the rights of the surrounding property owners to enjoy the established character of the neighborhood. 
(1)  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling and shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
(2)  The home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the principal building. 
(3)  A home occupation shall not be established prior to the member(s) of the family conducting the home occupation taking possession of, and residing in, the dwelling. 
(4)  No person other than a family member residing on the premises shall be employed as part of a home occupation. 
(5)  Vehicular traffic and parking shall not be increased by more than one (1) additional vehicle at a time 
(6)  The home occupation shall not change the fire rating of the structure. 
(7)  The receipt, sale or shipment of deliveries shall not be permitted on or from the premises, with the exception of regular U.S. Mail and/or an express shipping service that is characteristic of service to residential neighborhoods. 
(8)  A home occupation shall not generate noise, solid waste, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in a residential use. The home occupation shall not cause an increase in the use of utilities. 
(9)  No outside storage or display of materials, merchandise, inventory or heavy equipment shall be permitted. 
(10)  Use of an attached or detached accessory building for home occupation purposes is prohibited. 
(11)  No exterior alteration that changes the residential character of the principal building shall be permitted. No exterior building signs shall be permitted unless authorized by Section 14 (Signs). 
(12)  Any type of motor vehicle service and repair is a prohibited home occupation. Day care homes are not considered a home occupation. 
(i)  Mechanical Equipment. 
(1)  In all districts, all ground-based mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) units, may be located in the front, corner side or rear yard. This equipment shall not be located in the minimum interior side yard, except for HVAC units, which may be replaced in the same existing nonconforming location, as long as the units do not increase the extent or degree of nonconformity, with respect to the side yard setback. 
(2)  All approved ground-based mechanical, including, but not limited to, HVAC units, shall be completely screened from public view. Screening materials may be masonry, wood, landscaped hedges or other opaque material, and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment so no portion is visible from a street or adjoining lot. Color and texture of a masonry screen wall shall be compatible with the color and texture of the principal building on the site. 
(3)  Any HVAC units located on the roof of any structure in any zoning district shall be screened either by an architectural element of the roof and at least six (6) feet from any supporting wall of the building to permit safe access to the roof. 
(j)  Outdoor Cafes. Outdoor cafes are considered an accessory use to a restaurant. 
(1)  Outdoor cafes of twenty (20) or more seats shall be subject to administrative site plan review. 
(2)  Outdoor cafes shall not interfere with the use of parking spaces and aisles. 
(3)  Outdoor cafes shall not be located in any required yard that abuts a residential use or district, unless an alley is located between the use and a residential use or district. 
(k)  Outdoor Storage, and Outdoor Sales and Display. 
(1)  Retail goods establishments are permitted outdoor sales and display of merchandise, by either a storeowner or occupant, outside the store and within the same lot. Any lawfully existing retail goods establishment shall be permitted to display and sell its merchandise outdoors under the following conditions: 
a.  No sales and display area shall be permitted in any public right-of-way or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No sales and display area is permitted in any required yard. 
b.  Outdoor storage is prohibited for retail goods establishments. 
c.  A portion of the parking area may be used for outdoor sales and display on a temporary basis only, in terms of both display structure and goods displayed or sold (no permanent display structures permitted in parking areas). No more than ten percent (10%) of the required parking area for the existing commercial use may be used for the temporary outdoor sales and display, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The following uses are permitted outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas: greenhouse/nursery, including the growing of plants in the open; heavy retail, rental and service; motor vehicle dealership; motor vehicle operations facility; motor vehicle rental; and motor vehicle service and repair, major and minor. Additional outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. These uses are permitted outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  All manufacturing, assembly, repair or work activity shall take place inside an enclosed building. No work shall take place outdoors. 
b.  No required parking area shall be used as an outdoor storage, or outdoor sales and display area. 
c.  No materials stored or displayed outdoors shall be of a greater height than that of the required screening. 
d.  All outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas must comply with the screening requirements of Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(l)  Porches. 
(1)  Unenclosed porches may encroach five (5) feet into any front, corner side or rear yard. 
(2)  Enclosed porches must meet all setback requirements. 
(3)  Steps and stoops are not considered porches. Existing stoops, as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, located in the interior side yard, shall be considered conforming uses and may be repaired or replaced. 
(m)  Retaining Walls. 
(1)  If the face of a building is within fifteen (15) feet of a retaining wall, the height of the retaining wall shall be included in the building height calculation. The combination of the retaining wall height and the remainder of the building height above the wall shall not exceed the maximum building height limitation. 
(2)  Retaining walls must be located at least five (5) feet from any property line and shall not encroach into the required front yard or any public right-of way. 
(3)  Retaining walls, including the terracing of retaining walls for landscaping effect, shall be limited to two (2) feet in height. Retaining walls over two (2) feet in height shall be permitted only if approved by the City Engineer. 
(n)  Satellite Dish Antennas. 
(1)  General Requirements: 
a.  Satellite dish antennas shall be permanently installed on a building, in the ground or on a foundation, and shall not be mounted on a portable or movable structure. 
b.  Subject to operational requirements, the dish color shall be of a neutral color, such as white or grey, and shall blend with the surroundings as best as possible. No additional signs or advertising shall be permitted on satellite dish itself, aside from the logos of the satellite dish service provider or dish manufacturer. 
c.  Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall be located underground. 
d.  Compliance with all federal, state and local regulations shall be required in the construction, installation and operation of satellite dish antennas. 
e.  All exposed surfaces of the antenna shall be kept clean and all supports shall be painted to maintain a well-kept appearance. Antennas no longer in use must be removed. 
(2)  Small Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or Less in Diameter). Small satellite dish antennas, which are one (1) meter or less in diameter, shall be subject to the general requirements of Paragraph 1 above. Every effort shall be made to install small satellite dish antennas in locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or from the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Large Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or More in Diameter): 
a.  Administrative Site Plan Review Required. Large satellite dish antennas, which are over one (1) meter in diameter, shall be subject to an administrative site plan review (Section 4.5). Such site plan review application requires the following: 
i.  Proof of ownership. 
ii.  Plat of survey. 
iii.  Site plan showing location of antenna. 
iv.  Elevation drawings of the property with antenna installed. 
v.  Line of sight drawings demonstrating how the antenna would be screened, as required by this section. 
vi.  Statement by a registered professional structural engineer regarding safety of the installation and, if applicable, the building supporting the installation. 
b.  Residential Districts. 
i.  Large satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be setback a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
ii.  The overall height of a large satellite dish antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
iii.  A large satellite dish antenna shall be located and screened so that it cannot be readily seen from public streets or adjacent properties. Screening shall include fences, plant materials and/or earth berms located to conceal the sides and rear of the antenna and its support structure. Plants shall be, at minimum, five (5) feet tall at the time of installation. 
c.  Commercial Districts. 
i.  A large satellite dish antenna shall be located in the rear or side yard, and shall be setback a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
ii.  Roof-mounting shall be permitted only if the satellite dish antenna is in scale with the overall building mass and location, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be screened by an architectural feature. The visible portion of the dish should not comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the corresponding height or width of the screen. 
iii.  Ground-mounted satellite dish antenna shall provide screening, which includes fencing, berming or landscaping to accomplish the following: 
(a)  All ground-mounted accessory equipment and the lower part of the support structure shall be completely screened. 
(b)  Where feasible, trees shall be installed to the side and rear of the antenna and at a height/elevation equal to the tallest portion of the dish 
(o)  Sheds and Private Greenhouses. All sheds and private greenhouses shall be subject to all detached accessory buildings and structure regulations in Paragraph A above, in addition to the following: 
(1)  Sheds and private greenhouses are prohibited within the required front, corner side, reverse corner side or interior side yard of any lot. Sheds and private greenhouses must be located three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line. 
(2)  The maximum height of any shed or private greenhouse shall be twelve (12) feet. 
(3)  No shed or private greenhouse shall exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(p)  Solar Collectors. All solar collectors shall comply with the requirements of Article 15 of Chapter 16 of the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
(q)  Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs. 
(1)  Location: 
a.  Swimming pools and any related equipment are permitted only in the rear yard and must be located no less than eight (8) feet from any lot line, except when located within a shed provided the shed meets the setback requirements of Paragraph A above. 
b.  Hot tubs are permitted only in the rear yard and must be located no less than eight (8) feet from any lot line. A hot tub may be located on a deck, as defined by this Ordinance. If a hot tub is located on a deck, such deck must comply with all requirements of this Ordinance, including the maximum ten (10) foot rear yard encroachment. In no case, shall the hot tub be located in a side yard. 
(2)  Walkways: 
a.  A grade-level walkway or deck surrounding a pool must be located no less than five (5) feet from any lot line in the rear yard. An elevated walkway or deck surrounding a pool must be located no less than twelve (12) feet from any lot line in the rear yard. Pool decks are not subject to the ten (10) foot rear yard encroachment applicable to other decks. 
b.  A walkway surrounding a hot tub and constructed at grade level must be located no less than five (5) feet from any lot line. An elevated walkway or deck surrounding a hot tub may not encroach into the required side yard. Hot tubs located on decks, as defined by this Ordinance, are subject to the ten (10) foot rear yard encroachment applicable to decks. 
c.  An elevated walkway or deck surrounding a pool shall comprise no more than sixty percent (60%) of the total pool area. This restriction shall not apply to hot tubs located on decks or decks attached to the principal structure. 
d.  An elevated walkway or deck surrounding a pool or hot tub shall be no higher than six (6) inches above the rim of the pool or hot tub. 
(3)  Fencing: 
a.  All pools shall be enclosed by a five (5) foot fence, which shall enclose the entire yard, or the pool or the pool and deck area. All fence openings shall have a five (5) foot gate at the opening, with self-closing/self-latching device located at the top of the gate. Where the pool is surrounded by an elevated deck of more than three (3) feet, but less than four and one-half (41/2) feet in height, such fence shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height. 
b.  All hot tubs shall be enclosed by a five (5) foot fence, which shall enclose the entire yard, or the hot tub or the hot tub and deck area. All fence openings shall have a five (5) foot gate at the opening, with self-closing/self-latching device located at the top of the gate. Where the pool is surrounded by an elevated deck of more than three (3) feet, but less than four and one-half (41/2) feet in height, such fence shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height. 
(4)  Swimming Pool Depth: No aboveground pool shall exceed a depth of five (5) feet as measured from the top rim of the pool to the pool floor. An aboveground pool may be no more than one (1) foot below grade. No pool shall exceed four (4) feet as measured from the top rim of the pool to grade. 
(r)  Water Features and Man-Made Ponds. 
(1)  Water features and man-made ponds shall not be design for nor shall any owner allow any swimming, wading or recreational use. 
(2)  The maximum depth of the water feature or pond shall be limited to three and one-half (31/2) feet. 
(3)  The maximum size of a single container feature shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet. The maximum size of a multiple container feature shall be limited to two hundred and fifty (250) square feet total. 
(4)  No water feature or pond shall be located within the front, corner side or interior side yard. No water feature or pond shall be located in front of the front building line. 
(s)  Window/Light Wells. 
(1)  General Provisions: 
a.  The maximum amount of all window/light and escape window wells that encroach into a required yard along any wall may not exceed forty percent (40%) of the length of that wall. 
b.  Encroachment and length of window/light wells shall be determined by interior measurements. 
(2)  Window/Light Wells. The following shall apply only to window/light wells that encroach into a required yard: 
a.  Window/light wells may encroach up to three (3) feet into the required front and rear yards and may encroach up to a maximum of two (2) feet into a required side yard. 
b.  An encroaching window/light well may not have a length, the distance measured parallel to the foundation wall, of more than six (6) feet. 
c.  When more than one (1) encroaching window/light well is installed along a wall, each shall be separated by a space of at least three (3) feet from the other. 
(3)  Escape Window Wells. The following shall apply only to escape window wells that encroach into a required yard: 
a.  Escape window wells may encroach up to a maximum of three (3) feet into a required yard. 
b.  Not more than two (2) escape window wells shall be permitted to encroach into each of the rear and front yards, and not more than one (1) escape window well shall be permitted to encroach into a required side yard. 
c.  An escape window shall comply with the provisions of all building codes for an emergency escape window. 
d.  If a window well has a maximum horizontal area of more than nine (9) square feet, it shall be deemed to be a window/light well irrespective of its primary purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2010-26, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 2010-27, 3-15-2010; Ord. No. 2015-11, 2-16-2015; Ord. No. 2015-50, 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 2011-17, 3-7-2011) 
11.5 - Permitted encroachments. 
    An encroachment is the extension or placement of any structure or building, or component of such, into a required yard. Additional restrictions on permitted encroachments, including additional setback requirements and bulk regulations, can be found in Section 11.4 (Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses) above and are referenced within the following table. Permitted encroachments are found in Table 8: Permitted Encroachments. 

CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS 
TABLE 8: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS 
Y= Permitted // N= Not Permitted Type of Encroachment Yards Where Permitted Front Yard, 
Corner Side Yard Interior Side Yard Rear Yard Accessibility Ramp Y Y Y Air Conditioner Window Unit 
- No more than 18" into any required yard Y Y Y Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment 
- Subject to Section 11.4.B N N Y Arbor or Trellis 
- Subject to Section 11.4.C Y Y Y Awning & Canopy (Residential Use) 2 
- Only the street address number and street name are permitted Y, but no more than 4' into required yard Y, but no more than 2' into required yard Y, but no more than 4' into required yard Awning & Canopy Sign 2 
- Minimum clearance of 8' 
- Subject to Section 14 (Signs) Y, but no closer than 4' to the curb line Y, but no more than 4' into required yard Y, but no more than 4' into required yard Balcony 1 
- Must be located at least 2 feet above ground, and does not rest on the building foundation or on the ground Y, but no more than 4' into a required yard N Y, but no more than 4' into a required yard Bay Window Y, but no more than 3' into required yard N Y, but no more than 4' into required yard Chimney 
- No more than 18" into a required yard Y Y Y Compost Pile N N Y Deck 
- Does not include decks constructed around and part of swimming pools, 
- No higher than the first floor of a structure 
- If fenced, see fence requirements N N Interior Lots - Y, but no more than 10' into required yard 
Corner Lots - N Dog House & Dog Run N N Y, but 5' from any lot line Driveway Y Y Y Eaves (Principal Building) Y, no more than 2' into a required yard Y, no more than 18" into a required yard Y, no more than 2' into a required yard Eaves (Accessory Building or Structure) N Y, no more than 12" into a required yard Y, no more than 12" into a required yard Emergency Electrical Generator 2 
- Subject to Section 11.4.D 
- Must be a minimum of 5' from any lot line N N Y Exterior Stairwells 
- No more than 4' into a required yard N N Y Fall-Out Shelter (Underground) 
- Must be fully screened & landscaped N N Y Fence (Residential District) 
- Subject to Section 11.4.E N - Front Yard; 
Y- Corner Side Yard Y Y Fence (Commercial District) 
- Subject to Section 11.4.E N Y Y Fire Escape Y Y Y Firewood Storage & Trash Receptacles 
- Does not include trash receptacles temporarily placed on the lot for trash collection N Y, if screened from street Y Flagpole 
- No more than 4 per zoning lot 
- Not to exceed 40' in height Y Y Y Garage, Detached 
- Subject to Section 11.4.F N Y, if located within rear 30' of the lot Y Gazebo 
- Subject to Section 11.4.G N N Y Laundry Drying Equipment (Clotheslines & Poles) N N Y Mechanical Equipment, Ground-Mounted 
(Central air conditioning, heating, ventilating, compressors, etc.) 1,3,4 
- Subject to Section 11.4.I Y N, but may be repaired or replaced subject to Section 11.4 Y Ornamental Lighting, Lamp Posts, & Permanently Anchored Lawn Furniture & Decorations 
(Benches, statues, birdbaths, sculptures, etc.) 
- Subject to view obstruction and exterior lighting regulations Y Y Y Outdoor Fireplaces N N Y Parking Pad 1 Y Y Y Patio 1 
- No more than 5' into any required yard 
- If fenced, see fence requirements Y Y Y Pergola 1 
- Subject to Section 11.4.G N N Y Planter Box, Building-Mounted or Freestanding 
- No more than 1' into any required yard Y Y Y Playground & Recreational Equipment 
- Does not include equipment located on park/playground, school or day care center site 
- Basketball standards & backboards shall be permitted in all yards 
- Located 3' from any lot line N Y Y Porch, Unenclosed - Subject to Section 11.4.L Y, provided they extend no more than 5' into the required yard N Y, provided they extend no more than 5' into the required yard Porch, Enclosed N N N Retaining Wall 
- Subject to Section 11.4.M N Y Y Satellite Dish Antenna (1 meter or less in diameter) 
- Subject to Section 11.4.N Y Y Y Satellite Dish Antenna (More than 1 meter in diameter) 
- Subject to Section 11.4.N N N - Residential Districts; 
Y - Commercial Districts Y Sidewalk & Private Walkway Y Y Y Signs Y, subject to Section 14 (Signs) Y, subject to Section 14 (Signs) Y, subject to Section 14 (Signs) Sills, belt course, cornices & ornamental features of the principal building 
- No more than 12" into a required yard Y Y Y Sheds & Private Greenhouses 
- Subject to Section 11.4.O N N Y Steps & Stoops, Open Y, provided they extend no more than 10' into the required yard Y, provided they extend no more than 3' into the required yard and no more than 2' in height Y Swimming Pool and Hot Tub 
- Subject to Section 11.4.Q N N Y Tennis Court N N Y Terrace 1 
- No more than 5 ' into any required yard 
- Located no more than 3' above grade Y N Y Water Feature & Man-Made Pond 
- Subject to Section 11.4.R N N Y Window/Light Well 
- Subject to Section 11.4.S Y Y Y  
TABLE 8: FOOTNOTES 
1 Ordinance 2008-65, 9-2-2008 
2 Ordinance 2015-50, 8-3-2015 
3 Ordinance 2010-26, 3-15-2010 
4 Ordinance 2011-01, 1-17-2011 
11.6 - Environmental performance standards. 
    All uses shall comply with the performance standards established in this section unless any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation establishes a more restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(a)  Noise. No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that generates a level of sound as measured on another property greater than that allowed by federal, state and local regulations, as amended from time to time. These limits shall not apply to construction noises, noises emanating from safety signals or warning devices, noises not directly under the control of the owner or occupant of the property, and transient noises from moving sources, such as motor vehicles, railroads and aircraft. 
(b)  Glare and Heat. Any activity or the operation of any use that produces glare or heat shall be conducted so that no glare or heat from the activity or operation shall be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located. Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. 
(c)  Vibration. No earthborne vibration from the operation of any use shall be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located. 
(d)  Dust and Air Pollution. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from sources, such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment and the like, within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable means. 
(e)  Discharge and Disposal of Radioactive and Hazardous Waste. The discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive and hazardous waste materials shall comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations governing such materials or waste. No operation that produces radioactive or hazardous waste material shall commence without prior notice to the City. Notice shall be given at least three (3) weeks before the operation is commenced. Radioactive and hazardous material waste shall be transported, stored, and used in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(f)  Electromagnetic Interference. Electromagnetic interference from any operation of any use in any district shall not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off the lot on which such interference originates. 
(g)  Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public, or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public, shall be removed, stopped or modified so as to remove the odor. 
(h)  Toxic Substances. The storage, handling, or transport of toxic substances shall comply with federal, state and local regulations. 
(i)  Water Pollution. All uses shall comply with federal, state and local regulations. 
(j)  Fire and Explosion Hazards. Materials that present potential fire and explosion hazards shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
Section 12 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

12.1 - Purpose. 
    The off-street parking and loading regulations of this Section are intended to provide accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-street parking and loading areas with the appropriate number of spaces in proportion to the needs of the proposed use, increase public safety by reducing congestion of public streets, and encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation where appropriate. 
12.2 - General provisions. 
    The provisions of this Section shall apply as follows: 
(a)  Existing Facilities. 
(1)  The existing number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be reduced below the requirements of this Section. If the number of such existing spaces is already less than the requirements of this Section, it shall not be further reduced. 
(2)  Existing off-street parking and loading areas which do not conform to the requirements of this Section, but were in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance at the time the parking or loading facilities were established, are permitted to continue as a legal nonconforming structure. 
(3)  If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction has begun within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of a permit, the number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the amount required for the issuance of said building permit, regardless of what may be required by this Section. 
(b)  Damage or Destruction. When a building is reconstructed or repaired after being damaged or destroyed, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be restored or maintained in an amount equivalent to that at the time of such damage or destruction. However, it shall not be necessary to restore or maintain parking and loading facilities in excess of the applicable requirements of this Section. 
(c)  Change in Land Use. When the existing use of a building, structure or parcel of land is changed to a new use, parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required for the new use. Additional parking or loading spaces shall be required in the amount by which the requirements for the new use exceed the requirements for the existing use. 
(d)  Change in Intensity of Use. 
(1)  When the intensity of use of any building, structure or parcel of land is increased, additional parking and loading spaces shall be provided. The number of additional parking and loading spaces shall be based on the increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of measurement used to calculate the number of required number of parking or loading spaces. 
(2)  When the intensity of use of any building, structure or parcel of land is decreased, the number of parking and loading spaces may be reduced so long as the parking requirements of this Section are met for the entire building, structure or parcel of land as modified. 
(e)  Provision of Additional Spaces. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading facilities, provided that all regulations governing the location, design and control of such facilities shall be in accordance with this Section. 
(f)  Limitations on Use. No motor vehicle repair or cleaning of any kind shall be permitted in any parking space, parking lot or loading berth. No gasoline, motor oil or any other accessory or similar product shall be sold or dispensed in such areas. 
12.3 - Computation. 
    The total number of required parking and loading spaces shall be based upon the requirements for the principal use of the lot. However, when more than one (1) use occupies the same lot, the number of required spaces shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use. All off-street parking facilities shall be completed before occupancy of the building or structure served. In computing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces required by this Section, the following standards for computation shall apply: 
(a)  Space allocated to any off-street loading space shall not be used to satisfy the requirement for any off-street parking space or access aisle, or portion thereof. Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street parking space shall not be used to satisfy the replacement for any off-street loading space or portion thereof. 
(b)  A fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, and a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted as one (1) parking or loading space. 
(c)  In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or similar seating facilities, each eighteen (18) inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking facilities. 
(d)  Except as otherwise specified, parking or loading spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees normally present on the premises at any one time. When the determination of the number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees, the owner and/or manager shall be counted as an employee(s). 
12.4 - Construction of parking and loading facilities. 
(a)  Site plan review required. Site plan review, in accordance with Section 4.5 (Site Plan Review), is required prior to any construction, alteration or addition of any parking facility providing ten (10) or more parking spaces, and for any loading facility. For purposes of this section, construction, alteration or addition shall include all paving of previously unpaved surfaces, replacement of pavement with new binder and surface courses, construction of curbing, installation of new parking lot landscaping, and similar activities. Construction, alteration or addition shall not include maintenance activities such as replacement of existing landscaping, repair of existing curbing, repairs, sealing, re-striping, or placement of surface course pavement over previously paved areas. No permit shall be required for maintenance activities. 
(b)  Time of completion. Off-street parking and loading facilities required by this Section shall be completed prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit for the use they serve. If weather conditions do not permit such completion, the Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary occupancy certificate. 
12.5 - Collective provisions. 
(a)  Off-street parking spaces for individual uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces provided is equal to or greater than the sum of the spaces required for each individual use. No parking space, or portion of a space, shall serve as the required space for more than one similar use, but can be shared among two or more individual uses under the following shared parking arrangements described in Paragraph B below. 
(b)  The use of a particular parking facility shall not occur by each use at the same time. The use with the highest demand must provide all required spaces. No shared use of parking spaces shall be permitted unless: 
(1)  The users of the shared parking facility shall sign an agreement, approved by the City Attorney, expressing the intent to share parking facilities. This agreement shall be filed with the City and recorded with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. 
(2)  Approval is obtained from the Zoning Administrator that confirms that the use of such facility by each user does not take place at the same hours during the same days of the week. 
(3)  The location and design requirements of this Section are met. 
(4)  Any subsequent change in ownership or use shall require proof that the minimum parking requirements, per this Section, have been met for each use. The owner of a building or use shall have one-hundred eighty (180) days within which to accommodate all required off-street parking or to apply for a variance. If the owner is unable to accommodate the parking or fails to apply for a variance, then the occupancy certificate shall be revoked with respect to the building or use for which the separate parking was required. The occupancy certificate shall be reinstated when all applicable provisions of this Section are complied with. As an alternative to a variance, a new shared parking agreement may be arranged in accordance with this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
12.6 - Land banked future parking. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit land banking of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the required parking spaces through the site plan review process. 
(a)  Sufficient evidence shall be provided by the applicant that supports the reduced parking needs. 
(b)  The area proposed for land banking of parking spaces shall be an area suitable for parking at a future time. 
(c)  Landscaping of the land banked area shall be in full compliance of the zoning regulations and at a minimum landscaped with turf. As a result of the site plan review process, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require additional landscaping of the land-banked area. 
(d)  The land banking area cannot be used for any other use without amendment of the site plan. 
(e)  As part of the site plan review process, the applicant shall show the area to be banked on the site plan and marked as "land banked future parking." 
(f)  The Zoning Administrator, on the basis of increased parking demand for the use, shall require the conversion of all or part of the land-banked area to off-street parking spaces. 
12.7 - Location of off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  Residential Uses. 
(1)  All required parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served. 
(2)  For single- and two-family dwellings, parking shall be permitted in private driveways, but no such parking may encroach onto the public right-of-way. However, such driveway parking shall not be considered as satisfying the off street parking requirements for such single- and two-family dwellings as set forth in this Section, except for existing structures within the R-3 District where parking shall be permitted in private driveways and may count toward the required number of off-street parking spaces, but no such parking may encroach onto the public right-of-way. 
(3)  No less than fifty percent (50%) of all required parking in a residential district shall be provided in a completely enclosed building. However, parking located beneath a structure that is no less than four (4) feet below grade, as defined by this Ordinance, may be unenclosed, but must be screened from the public right-of-way by landscaping. 
(4)  Tandem parking is permitted for townhouse or multi-family dwellings but both spaces must be allotted to the same dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the dwelling. 
(b)  Non-residential uses. 
(1)  All required off-street parking areas for non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot as, or within three-hundred (300) feet of, the building or use served. However, off-street parking accessory to a non-residential use shall not be located in any R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 District. 
(2)  When required off-street parking spaces are provided at an off-site parking area, such off-site parking areas shall be, and remain in, the same possession and ownership as the zoning lot occupied by said building or use. No such off-site parking areas shall be authorized and no occupancy certificate shall be issued, unless the Zoning Administrator has reviewed the plans and has made findings that common ownership or possession does and will continue to exist with respect to the zoning lot and the land containing the off-site parking areas, and that the off-site parking area will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use or building. A covenant to this effect shall be recorded with the Cook County Recorder and Registrar of Titles. 
(3)  Off-street parking spaces are permitted within any rear or interior side yard. However, where a yard abuts a residential district, no off-street parking spaces shall be permitted within five (5) feet of the lot line abutting the residential district. 
(4)  No required off-street parking spaces are permitted within a required front or corner side yard. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
12.8 - Design standards. 
    All off-street parking facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Dimensions. 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces shall be shall be designed in accordance with Figure 11: Off-Street Parking Dimensions (Standard). 
(2)  All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7' 6"). 
(3)  Compact size parking spaces may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as part of site plan review, in parking lots or structures containing more than fifty (50) spaces. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the stalls over and above the first fifty (50) spaces may be compact parking stalls. Compact off-street parking spaces shall be shall be designed in accordance with Figure 12: Off-Street Parking Dimensions (Compact). 
FIGURE 11: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS (STANDARD) 

Parking Angle Stall Width (W) Stall Length (L) Aisle Width (A) Single Loaded Module 2 Width (SL) Double Loaded Module 2 Width (DL) 0° 8.5' 21' 12'/24' 1 20.5'/32.5' 1 29'/41' 1 45° 8.5' 18' 13' 32' 51' 60° 8.5' 18' 18' 38' 58' 75° 8.5' 19' 20' 40.8' 61.6' 90° 8.5' 18' 24' 1 42' 1 60' 1  
1 Two-way traffic permitted 
2 A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on each side of the drive aisle. 
FIGURE 12: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS (COMPACT) 

Parking Angle Stall Width (W) Stall Length (L) Aisle Width (A) Single Loaded Module 2 Width (SL) Double Loaded Module 2 Width (DL) 0° 8.' 19' 12'/24' 1 20'/32' 1 28'/40' 1 45° 8' 16' 13' 30' 8" 49' 4" 60° 8' 16' 18' 36' 8" 55' 4" 75° 8' 17' 20' 38' 9" 57' 7" 90° 8' 16' 24' 1 40' 1 56' 1  
1 Two-way traffic permitted 
2 A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on each side of the drive aisle. 
(b)  Access. 
(1)  Each off-street space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width as will provide adequate means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access in a manner that least interferes with traffic movement and allows the driver of the vehicle to proceed forward into traffic rather than back out. 
(2)  All required off-street parking facilities shall have vehicular access from a street, alley, driveway or cross-access connection. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission must review and approve any multi-family residential off-street parking area that is accessed from an alley. 
(3)  Within off-street parking facilities one-way traffic aisles shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and two-way traffic aisles shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width. Furthermore, all aisles shall be designed in accordance with Figure 11: Off-Street Parking Dimensions (Standard). However, during the site plan review process, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a reduction in the minimum width of a drive aisle for a private multi-family residential off-street parking area. 
(4)  Driveways 
a.  Residential Driveways, Excluding Multi-Family and Townhouse Dwellings 
i.  A residential driveway that provides access to a detached garage shall be no more than twelve (12) feet in width. A driveway apron, the width of the garage as measured from the garage walls, is permitted to extend for a distance (depth) of twenty (20) feet from the garage doors before tapering back to the required driveway width to allow access to the additional spaces (See Figure 13: Residential Driveway Width). Exceptions are allowed for sidewalks and parking pads to be attached to a driveway at the garage door opening. 
ii.  A residential driveway that provides access to an attached garage shall be no wider than the width of the garage (See Figure 13), except to allow for sidewalks or parking pads. 
iii.  Single-family and two-family dwellings are permitted an additional paved parking pad. Any driveways leading to such parking pads must comply with the requirements of Paragraphs i and ii above. 
b.  Multi-Family and Townhouse Dwellings, and Non-Residential Driveways 
i.  Except for access to loading berths, no driveway shall have a width exceeding twenty four (24) feet. 
ii.  Driveways of townhouse developments shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet for one-way drives, and a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet for two-way drives. 
iii.  Driveways, off-street parking areas and access aisles for multi-family residential and non-residential parking lots shall be designed in accordance with Figure 11: Off-Street Parking Dimensions (Standard). However, during the site plan review process, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a reduction in the minimum width of a drive aisle for a private multi-family residential off-street parking area. 
c.  Single-Family and Two-Family Dwelling Units Driveway Curb Cuts. One (1) driveway curb cut shall be permitted on a zoning lot for a new single family (detached) or two-family dwelling unit. More than one (1) curb cut must be approved by the Public Works Department consistent with established standards. Existing lots with more than one (1) curb cut and/or a circular driveway or straight driveway that exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, may be replaced and repaired, provided that the driveway is not enlarged and that the minimum open space requirement for the lot is not exceeded at the time of replacement or repair. 
FIGURE 13: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY WIDTH 
DETACHED GARAGE DRIVEWAY WIDTH ATTACHED GARAGE DRIVEWAY WIDTH  

(c)  Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with a hard surfaced, all-weather dustless material as approved by the City Engineer. Semi-pervious materials such as grass-crete and brick pavers may also be used, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
(d)  Striping. Off-street parking areas of four (4) or more spaces shall delineate parking spaces with paint or other permanent materials, which shall be maintained in clearly visible condition. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be identified with the appropriate sign and shall be visible at all times of the year, regardless of snow cover, plant growth or similar conditions. 
(e)  Curbing and Bumper Stops. Bumper stops, wheel stops, or curbing shall be provided to prevent vehicles from damaging or encroaching upon any adjacent parking or loading space, sidewalk, landscaped area or parking lot island, fence, wall or building. Curbing shall be at least six (6) inches in height. The length of the parking stall shall be as indicated in Figure 11: Off-Street Parking Dimensions (Standard), however a eighteen (18) inch overhang is permitted. 
(f)  Drainage and Grading. Except for parking spaces accessory to a single-family detached dwelling, no area of any parking facility shall have a slope of more than five percent (5%). No access ramp shall have a slope of more than twelve percent (12%). Finished grade and drainage shall be designed by an Illinois Registered Engineer and approved by the City Engineer. 
(g)  Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be in accordance with Section 11.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be arranged so as to deflect the direct rays of light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(h)  Landscaping and Screening. All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
12.9 - Accessible parking. 
(a)  Required Spaces. With the exception of single- (detached and attached) and two-family dwellings, in all off-street parking facilities where parking is provided for employees, visitors, or both, parking spaces for disabled persons shall be provided. The number of accessible parking spaces shall be included in the total number of required parking spaces and shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Illinois Accessibility Code, as amended from time to time, and all additional governing codes and applicable laws. 
(b)  Dimensions and Design. Such spaces shall comply with the design standards presented in the State of Illinois Accessibility Code, provided that in no instance shall the width of any one (1) space be less than sixteen (16) feet. Such spaces shall be identified by a sign and pavement markings indicating parking for the disabled only. Such spaces shall be the spaces closest to the entrance of the building or structure, and shall be connected by a paved surface designed to provide safe and easy access. 
12.10 - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Design. Stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses shall be: 
(1)  A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, as measured from the outermost point of any service window to the edge of the driveway, and eighteen (18) feet in length. (See Figure 14: Measurement of Drive-Through and Figure 15: Stacking Spaces) 
FIGURE 14: MEASUREMENT OF DRIVE-THROUGH 

FIGURE 15: STACKING SPACES 

(2)  Placed in a single line behind the drive-through facility. 
(3)  Located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces. 
(4)  Stacking spaces shall begin behind the vehicle parked at a last point of service, such as a window or car wash bay. 
(b)  Required Spaces. Every drive-through facility shall provide a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces per facility, unless otherwise required by Table 9: Required Off-Street Parking or this Ordinance. 
(c)  Reduction of Required Spaces. The number of required stacking spaces may be reduced by the Planning and Zoning Commission during the site plan review process if the petitioner presents a study done by a traffic engineer with quantifiable evidence (e.g., comparable information) which demonstrates that a different requirement should be imposed. The approval of a reduced number of stacking spaces shall apply only to the specific business for which the study was conducted. 
12.11 - Commercial vehicles. 
    The provisions of these paragraphs apply where off-street parking is accessory to the principal use of the zoning lot. 
(a)  Residential Districts. Off-street parking facilities serving residential uses in any residential district shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. One (1) truck of eight thousand (8,000) pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) or less (i.e., Class B license) shall be permitted to park in the interior side or rear yard, except as provided below. 
(1)  No truck of eight thousand (8,000) pounds GVW or less (i.e., Class B license) shall be permitted to park in the front or corner side yard of any residential lot, if the truck: 
a.  Has any tools, equipment, material, machines, debris or any other matter in the open bed. 
b.  Has attached any snowplow, towing winch, or rack or mounting for construction tools or materials. 
c.  Exceeds twenty (20) feet in length, eight (8) feet in height or seven (7) feet in width, or has more than four (4) wheels. 
(2)  A permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing one (1) truck of not more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds GVW or less (i.e., Class B license), except for those trucks described in Paragraph (a) above, to be parked in the front or corner side yard of any residential lot, where physical access to an interior side yard or rear yard is unavailable due to one (1) or more of the following factors, to be determined by administrative site plan review: 
a.  There is no rear or side yard access to a public or private alley. 
b.  An existing garage on the premises cannot physically accommodate the truck in question. 
c.  Front, side or rear yards are inadequate due to the placement or configuration of the dwelling on the lot. 
d.  There is no accessible interior side or rear yard of sufficient size and area to accommodate the truck in question. 
In issuing a permit, the Zoning Administrator may attach reasonable conditions, in view of the particular circumstances, and in keeping with the intent of this Section. It remains the intent of this Paragraph to prohibit all truck parking within the front or corner side yard of a residential dwelling except where it is a physical impossibility, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or financial hardship. 
(3)  No stored or parked commercial vehicle shall be occupied or used for human habitation. 
(4)  All other commercial vehicles including, but not limited to, tractors, with or without attached trailers, commercial trailers, buses, limousines, tow trucks, construction vehicles or other large commercial or livery vehicles are not permitted to be stored or parked outside overnight on residentially zoned property. 
(b)  Non-Residential Districts. 
(1)  The following vehicles may be stored for no more than four consecutive hours, unless allowed by Subparagraphs (2) or (3): 
a.  Tractors. 
b.  Trailers (vehicle). 
c.  Commercial buses. 
d.  Construction equipment. 
e.  Trucks with "C" through "Z" license plates, or the equivalent thereof issued by any jurisdiction. 
f.  Any class of commercial motor vehicle where, in order to be lawfully operated, the operator must possess a valid commercial driver's license. 
(2)  Vehicles listed in Subparagraph (1) may be parked or stored for more than four (4) consecutive hours when located in a garage or other fully enclosed structure that substantially conceals them from view. If the vehicles are not within a fully enclosed structure, they may also be permitted when set back a minimum twenty percent (20%) of the lot depth from any lot line that fronts a public street. At lot lines that do not front a public street and where the zoning lot abuts residentially zoned property, the vehicles may be set back a minimum ten percent (10%) of the lot width. In addition, at least one (1) of the following conditions must be met: 
a.  The vehicles are integral to an active principal use on the property and are parked in areas clearly designated and marked for large vehicle parking; or 
b.  The vehicles are engaged in work related to an active building construction or site development project occurring on the zoning lot. 
(3)  Zoning lots with authorized principal uses to sell, rent, or repair vehicles listed in Subparagraph (1) are exempt from the regulations of Subparagraphs (1) and (2). However, these zoning lots are not exempt from the landscaping and screening requirements of Section 13, and conditions may be added as part of a special use permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09 , § 4, 2-4-2019) 
12.12 - Recreational vehicles. 
    For the purposes of this Section, recreational vehicles shall include all trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, pop-up campers, and trailers that transport snowmobiles, wave-runners, ATVs, etc. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles exceeding thirty-two (32) feet in length or eight (8) feet in width may not be stored in any residential district. 
(b)  No recreational vehicle licensed to transport recreational vehicles or equipment shall be parked in the public right-of-way or within the front or corner side yard. However, such recreational vehicle may be temporarily parked in such yards for a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours for trip preparation and unloading purposes. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles may be stored within an interior side or rear yard, but must be located at least three (3) feet from any side lot line, provided that adequate screening at least five (5) feet in height is installed and properly maintained. 
(d)  No more than one (1) recreational vehicle may be stored in the open on a zoning lot, except that one (1) boat stored on top of a camper trailer, pick-up coach or motorized home, shall be permitted in addition to the recreational vehicle on which it is stored. 
(e)  No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes in any zoning district. 
(f)  This section does not apply to recreational vehicles offered for-sale in an approved outdoor sales and display area of a motor vehicle dealership. 
12.13 - Required off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for the designated uses shall be as follows in Table 9: Off-Street Parking Requirements. Table 9 lists parking requirements for the generic uses listed within the districts. In some cases, uses which are considered part of a generic use category are listed with specified parking requirements. These specific uses are listed only for the purposes of this Section and do not indicate whether such uses are permitted or special uses within any district. Certain generic uses listed within the districts do not have parking requirements. These types of uses are not listed within Table 9. 
(b)  Commercial land uses in any commercial zoning district that are one thousand (1,000) square feet or less in gross floor area are exempt from the parking standards of Table 9 of this Section. For commercial land uses in any commercial district that are over one thousand (1,000) square feet in gross floor area, the first one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be exempt from the parking standards of Table 9 of this Section. 
(c)  Commercial permitted and special land uses in the B-4 District shall be exempt from the parking standards of Table 9 of this Section. The City may impose parking requirements as a condition of special use approval. 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS USE PARKING REQUIREMENT RESIDENTIAL USES Assisted Living Facility .2 per bed + 1 per 2 employees Community Residence .25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor 5 Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit: 1.5 per dwelling unit 
2-bedroom or more unit: 2 per dwelling unit 
In the B-4 District:
Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit: 1 per dwelling unit 
2-bedroom or more unit: 1.5 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Multi-Family Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit: 1.5 per dwelling unit 
2-bedroom or more unit: 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Single-Family 2 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Townhouse 2 per dwelling unit 
In the B-4 District:
Efficiency or 1-bedroom unit: 1 per dwelling unit 
2-bedroom or more unit: 1.5 per dwelling unit Dwelling, Two-Family 2 per dwelling unit Independent Living Facility 1 per dwelling unit + 1 per 2 employees Nursing Home .25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees Temporary Overnight Shelters 1 .25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees or volunteers GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USES Educational Facility, College/University 1 per 2 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary (No residential facilities) Primary: 2 per classroom 
Secondary: 1 per 8 students (based on maximum enrollment) + 2 per classroom Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary (With residential facilities) 1 per employee + 1 per classroom Educational Facility, Vocational School 1 per 2 students (based on (based on maximum enrollment) + 1 per classroom Educational/Residential Boarding Campus 4 2 per dwelling unit + 1 per classroom + 1 per employee Government Facility and Offices 3 per 1,000 sf GFA Public Safety Facility 1 per 600 sf GFA Public Works Facility 1 per 2 employees RELIGIOUS USES Convent, Rectory 1 per 1,000 sf of residential living area Place of Worship 1 per 4 seats CULTURAL, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USES Art Gallery 1 per 800 sf GFA Cultural Facility 2 per 1,000 sf GFA   Community Center 3 per 1,000sf Heritage Center 6 2 per 1,0000 sf GFA Indoor Entertainment 4 per 1,000 sf of public use area   Movie Theater 1 per 4 seats for first 400 seats + 1 per 6 additional seats after first 400 Indoor Recreation 4 per 1,000 sf of public use area   Bowling Alley 2 per lane Live Entertainment 4 per 1,000 sf of public use area Outdoor Entertainment 2 per 1,000 sf of public use area Outdoor Recreation 2 per 1,000 sf of public use area Social Club or Lodge 2 per 1,000 sf GFA SERVICE AND OFFICE USES Animal Hospital 1 per full-time employee + 1 per 30 sf of waiting room area Banquet Hall 1 per 4 seats (based on maximum capacity) + 1 per 2 employees (based on largest shift) Car Wash 1 per 2 employees + 2 stacking spaces per bay Currency Exchange 4 per 1,000 sf GFA Day Care Center, Adult or Child 1 per 2 employees + 2 passenger loading spaces Funeral Home 12 spaces per chapel + 1 per business vehicle Financial Institution 3 per 1,000 sf GFA + 2 stacking spaces per lane Health/Fitness Center 4 per 1,000 sf of public use area Hospital 1 per 2 beds + 2 per 3 employees (based on largest shift) Hotel/Motel 1.25 per room Kennel 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA + 1 per 4 pet owners if animal training classes are taught on-site (based on maximum class size) Medical/Dental Clinic 1.5 per exam room Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment 1 per 1,000 sf of display area (indoor + outdoor area) Motor Vehicle Service Station 2 per 1,000 sf GFA of any accessory convenience retail and/or food service + 2 stacking spaces per bay for any accessory automatic car wash Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major or Minor 2 per service bay + 1 per 500 sf of office & waiting area Office Park 5 per 1,000 sf GFA Office, Professional 4 per 1,000 sf GFA Personal Services Establishment 2 per 1,000 sf GFA Physical Therapy Office 2 1.5 per exam room + 1 per 150 sf group space used for rehabilitation exercise purposes Restaurant 2 1 per 60 sf of public seating area (exclude any outdoor dining area)   Restaurant, Carry-Out 3 per 1,000 sf GFA   Bakery 3 per 1,000 sf GFA RETAIL USES Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization 7 3 per 1,000 square feet of GFA Motor Vehicle Dealership 1 per 1,000 sf of sales & display area (indoor + outdoor) Retail Goods Establishment 3 per 1,000 sf GFA HEAVY RETAIL AND SERVICE, WHOLESALE AND DISTRIBUTION USES Contractor Storage Yard 1 per 300 sf of office area + 1 per 5,000 sf of storage yard (indoor + outdoor) Heavy Retail and Rental 4 per 1,000 sf GFA, including outdoor sales & display area Heavy Service and Repair 2 per 1,000 sf GFA Medical/Dental Laboratory 3 3 per 1,000 sf GFA Motor Vehicle Operations Facility 1 per 1,000 sf GFA Research and Development Facility, Laboratory 4 per 1,000 sf GFA Self-Service Storage Facility 1 per 100 storage units Warehouse/Distribution 1 per 1,000 sf GFA OPEN SPACE USES Cemetery 1 per 250 sf of office and/or chapel space Country Club See applicable uses (golf course, driving range, restaurant, etc.) Driving Range (Principle Use) 1 per tee Golf Course 4 per hole OTHER Storage Space Accessory to a Principal Use - Service, Office or Retail Use 1 per 1,000 sf GFA (storage space only)  
Note: The line entitled Payday or Title Loan Agency was deleted per Ordinance 2009-50, 7/6/2009. 
TABLE 9: FOOTNOTES 
1 Ordinance 2008-83, 11-17-2008 
2 Ordinance 2009-50, 7-6-2009 
3 Ordinance 2010-33, 4-5-2010 
4 Ordinance 2011-88, 12-19-2011 
5 Ordinance 2015-37, 6-1-2015 
6 Ordinance 2012-39, 8-20-2012 
7 Ordinance 2014-56, 10-20-2014 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2018-25 , § 3, 8-6-2018) 
12.14 - Required off-street loading spaces. 
    Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for a building, structure or use which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or other vehicles in accordance with Table 10: Off-Street Loading Requirements: 
CITY OF PARK RIDGE, ILLINOIS
TABLE 10: OFF-STREET LOADING REQURIEMENTS Use Type Number of Spaces Required Non-Residential Use (excluding uses below) 10,000-100,000 sf of gross floor area 1 loading space Each additional 100,000 sf of gross floor area 1 loading space Heavy Retail and Service, Wholesale and Distribution, and Office Park Uses 5,000-10,000 sf of gross floor area 1 loading space 10,001-40,000 sf of gross floor area 2 loading spaces 40,001-100,000 sf of gross floor area 3 loading spaces For each additional 100,000 sf of gross floor area over 100,001 sf of gross floor area 1 loading space  
12.15 - Design of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  All off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served. No off-street loading spaces shall project into a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Off-street loading spaces shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 
(3)  No off-street loading space shall be located in a front or corner side yard. 
(4)  All off-street loading spaces shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the lot line of any lot in a residential district, unless completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(b)  Dimensions. All required off-street loading spaces shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width and at least thirty (30) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. During site plan review, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require a loading space in excess of thirty (30) feet in length based upon the proposed use and anticipated shipping/delivery methods. In no case, shall the Planning and Zoning Commission require a length in excess of sixty (60) feet. 
(c)  Surfacing. All off-street loading spaces shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer 
(d)  Access Control and Signage. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with adequate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will minimize interference with traffic movement. 
(e)  Lighting. Loading facility lighting shall be in accordance with Section 11.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street loading facility shall be arranged so as to deflect the direct rays of light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(f)  Landscaping and Screening. All loading facilities shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with Section 13 (Landscaping and Screening). 
Section 13 - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

13.1 - Purpose. 
    The landscaping and screening requirements established by this Section are intended to preserve and enhance the appearance, public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare of the City by fostering an aesthetically pleasing development. Proper landscaping contributes to the City in many ways: enhancing its character and scenic beauty, providing clean air, reducing noise, preventing erosion of topsoil, reducing the rate of stormwater runoff, providing nesting areas for birds and habitat for other wildlife, conserving energy, and providing shade and windbreaks. These regulations are also intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses, and minimize the adverse impact of noise, dust, motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted on, or created by, adjoining or neighboring uses. 
13.2 - Enforcement of landscape provisions. 
    No building permit or occupancy certificate shall be issued for any lot or use subject to the requirements of this Section unless all the requirements of this Section have been fulfilled. Failure to implement the landscape plan, or to maintain the lot or use in substantial conformance with the landscape plan, shall be cause for revocation of the occupancy certificate and/or the application of fines and penalties, as established in this Ordinance. In addition, all landscaping is subject to periodic inspection by the Zoning Administrator. 
13.3 - Landscape plan. 
(a)  Landscape Plan Required. A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted to the City as part of any new development, and/or special use, planned development or site plan review application, and must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Content of Landscape Plan. 
(1)  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, ground signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas, sidewalks, bicycle paths and parking facilities, fences, electrical equipment, recreational facilities, drainage facilities, and other freestanding structures, as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  The location, quantity, size, name and condition, both botanical and common, of all existing plant materials, including trees and other material in the right-of-way, and indicating plant material to be retained and removed. 
(3)  The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade and evergreen trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals/perennials and turf. 
(4)  The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at one (1) foot intervals. Proposed berming shall be indicated using one (1) foot contour intervals. 
(5)  Elevations of all proposed fences, steps, stairs, retaining walls both fixed (cast concrete, unitized walls) and any natural rock outcroppings on the site. 
(6)  Elevations, cross-sections, and other details as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Minor Changes to Approved Landscape Plans. Minor changes to the landscape plan that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material as specified on the approved landscape plan shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. Changes to the size and species of plant materials of an approved landscape plan shall not be considered a minor change. Major changes shall be approved by the body granting approval of the landscape plan initially. 
13.4 - Selection, installation and maintenance of plant materials. 
(a)  Selection. All planting materials used shall be of good quality and meet American Association of Nurserymen (ANNS) standards for minimum acceptable form, quality and size for species selected, and capable to withstand the seasonal temperature variations of northeastern Illinois, as well as the individual site microclimates. The use of species native to northeastern Illinois shall be encouraged. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting and at maturity, are additional criteria that shall be considered when selecting plant material. Where appropriate, the use of drought and salt tolerant plant material is preferred. 
(b)  Installation. All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the AANS. All plant materials shall be free of disease and shall be installed so that soil of sufficient volume, composition and nutrient balance are available to sustain healthy growth. 
(c)  Required Element. Landscape materials depicted on landscape plans approved by the City shall be considered to be required site plan elements in the same manner as buildings, parking and other improvements. As such, the owner of record, or in some instances the homeowner's association, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials, and fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping elements over the entire life of the development. 
(d)  Maintenance. All landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition, shall present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants shall be replaced within six (6) months of notification by the City or the next reasonable available growing/planting season. Fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping elements shall be maintained in good repair. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscape materials, fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping elements, and refuse disposal areas. Irrigation systems, when provided, shall be maintained in good operating condition to promote the health of the plant material and the conservation of water. 
13.5 - Landscape design standards. 
    Landscape plans, as described above, shall be prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect, registered in the State of Illinois, and evaluated and approved based on the following design criteria. 
(a)  Scale and Nature of Landscape Material. The scale and nature of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the size of the site and related structures. 
(b)  Selection of Plant Material. Recommended plant materials are listed in the approved plant materials list included in Appendix E (Recommended Plant Materials List). Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth and suitability to local conditions. 
(c)  Shade Trees. All deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of three (3) inches in caliper (dbh) as measured at breast height at time of planting, unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  Evergreen Trees. Evergreens trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting and shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly in those areas where year-round screening and buffering is required. 
(e)  Ornamental Trees. Single stem ornamental trees shall have a minimum trunk size of three (3) inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified. Multiple stem ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet at planting, unless otherwise specified. 
(f)  Shrubs. Unless otherwise specified, all large deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall have minimum height of three (3) feet at installation, and all small deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches at installation. 
Large shrubs shall be considered to be those shrubs that reach five (5) or more feet in height at maturity. Small shrubs shall be considered to be those shrubs that can grow up to five (5) feet in height if left unmaintained, but are generally kept at heights of eighteen (18) to thirty (30) inches. 
(g)  Softening of Walls and Fences. Plant material shall be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences and other barriers to create a softening effect and to help break up long expanses of blank walls with little architectural detail. 
(h)  Planting Beds. Planting beds shall be mulched with shredded hardwood, mushroom compost or decomposed rock chips less than one-quarter (1/4) inch in diameter, feather rocks or similar materials. Lava rock, large river rock or colored stones are not acceptable. 
(i)  Irrigation. Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this Section shall recognize the need for irrigation and water conservation. Sprinkler irrigation systems may be required for certain landscaped areas, as determined by a landscape architect. The need for sprinkler irrigation systems shall be determined by the type of plant material and the condition/growing medium that they are installed in. For instance, whether there is a permanent means available to water plant material, such as hose bibs, shall be a consideration. All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of water. 
(j)  Energy Conservation. Plant material placement should be designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development. In addition, landscaping designs shall take into account and make an effort to implement LEED policy and design standards, where appropriate. 
(1)  Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun. 
(2)  Evergreens and other plant materials should be concentrated on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds. 
(k)  Preservation of Existing Trees. The preservation and protection of existing trees shall be as required in Article 15, Chapter 18 of the City's Municipal Code. 
(l)  Berming.Earthen berms and existing topographic features shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site where there is sufficient space and, in particular, when berms and existing topographic features can be combined with plant material to facilitate effective screening. Minimum unretained berm side slopes shall be maintained at no less than a 4:1 slope ratio to prevent erosion and be properly and safely maintained. Retained slopes may be implemented with the appropriate terracing necessary to reduce the need for safety railing. 
13.6 - On-lot landscaping. 
(a)  Turf Required. All yards within the City shall be landscaped primarily with seed or sod. 
(b)  Required Trees. Shade trees shall be provided on all zoning lots at a minimum of: 
(1)  Two (2) shade trees per townhouse or multi-family residential lot. 
(2)  Four (4) shade trees per non-residential lot. 
Existing trees shall be counted toward this required minimum number. 
13.7 - Building foundation landscaping. 
(a)  Building foundation landscaping is required in all districts for all new construction and additions to buildings that are visible from a street, including all front and corner side yards. 
(b)  A multi-family residential or non-residential development within the commercial or special purpose districts that has a front and/or corner side yard may request relief during the site plan review process before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may decide that such landscaping is not appropriate for the development and may waive this requirement. 
(c)  Foundation plantings shall work in concert with transition yard plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long expanses of walls, particularly those that lack windows and/or other architectural details. Foundation plantings shall be compatible with the materials and the form of a building. The body granting approval of the landscape plan shall determine compliance with this intent as part of the review. 
(d)  The minimum width of the area provided to accommodate foundation plantings is as follows: 
(1)  Five (5) feet of planting area width adjacent to building walls having an eave height of up to twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Ten (10) feet of planting area width adjacent to building walls having an eave height of twenty (20) feet or more. 
(e)  Foundation plantings shall be planted in accordance with the requirements below: 
Foundation plantings shall be installed across the entire length of street facing facades, except where walkways and driveways are located. (See Figure 16: Foundation Planting) 
FIGURE 16: FOUNDATION PLANTING

13.8 - Parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Parking Lot Landscaping Design Guidelines. All parking lots of ten (10) or more spaces are subject to site plan review and a landscape plan as a condition of obtaining a building permit. Perimeter landscaping is required for all parking lots and shall be established along the edge of the parking lot. Interior parking lot landscaping is required for those lots of ten (10) or more spaces. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the applicant's voluntary installation of additional interior parking lot landscaping, so long as parking space requirements and parking lot design requirements are complied with. 
(b)  Existing Parking Lots. For existing parking lots that currently do not comply with the required parking lot landscaping, such landscaping shall be provided when: 
(1)  A new principal building or building addition is constructed, or exterior remodeling of the principal building occurs. 
(2)  Over fifty percent (50%) of the total area of an existing parking lot is reconstructed. 
(3)  When an existing parking lot under ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area is expanded by fifty percent (50%) or more in total surface area. 
(4)  When an existing parking lot over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area is expanded by twenty-five percent (25%) or more in total surface area. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify the amount of landscaping required by this Section or exempt existing parking lots from providing landscaping if such landscaping would reduce the amount of parking spaces and create a nonconformity. 
13.9 - Parking lot perimeter landscape yard. 
    Perimeter parking lot landscaping provides for the enhancement and screening of parking lots by requiring a scheme of pedestrian walls and/or landscaping along public streets. Perimeter landscaping shall be required for all parking lots and shall be established along the edge of the parking lot. See Section 13.14 (Illustration of Landscaping and Screening Requirements) for a graphic illustration of such landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. The landscape treatment shall run the full length of the parking lot and shall be located between the property line and the edge of the parking lot. All perimeter parking lot screening areas shall be protected with raised concrete curbs. 
(b)  Width of Perimeter Landscape Yard. A perimeter landscape yard shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and shall require six (6) inch curbing. This shall exclude any bumper overhang. 
(c)  Required Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be provided within the perimeter landscape yard. 
(1)  Amount of Landscaping. A landscape treatment shall run the full length of the perimeter landscape yard. 
(2)  Trees. One (1) tree shall be planted every forty (40) linear feet of yard length. As part of the landscape plan approval, trees may be clustered based on specific site requirements or design scheme but the total number of trees planted shall be no less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced forty (40) feet apart. 
(3)  Shrubs. For every three (3) feet of perimeter yard length, one (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of two (2) feet at planting and reaching a minimum of three (3) feet in height at maturity. As part of the landscape plan approval, shrubs may be spaced at various intervals based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of shrubs planted shall be no less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced three (3) feet apart. 
(4)  Fences and Walls. 
a.  In addition to the landscaping requirements, a fence or wall of no less than four (4) feet, nor more than five (5) feet, in height shall be provided along the perimeter landscape yard. Said fence shall be located: 
i.  Between the planting strip and the front and corner side lot line. 
ii.  Outside the planting strip, but inside the property line along the interior side and rear lot lines. 
b.  Fences or walls may be constructed with the following materials, and shall receive the same architectural treatment on both sides: 
i.  Fences: 
(a)  Treated wood, cedar or redwood 
(b)  Simulated wood 
(c)  Wrought-iron or aluminum designed to simulate wrought-iron 
ii.  Walls 
(a)  Textured, panelized or patterned concrete 
(b)  Brick 
(c)  Tile 
(d)  Architectural block or stone 
Materials other than those listed below shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
c.  Where feasible, plant materials shall be installed between the sidewalk and the fence or wall to provide a softening effect on the fence or wall. 
d.  As an alternative to Paragraphs a through c above, shrubs may be combined with a berm accentuated with additional landscape plantings and turf, instead of a low wall or fence, so long as effective screening is provided to a height of four (4) feet. 
(5)  Groundcover. Landscaped areas outside of shrub and tree masses shall be planted in turf or other live groundcover, perennial or ornamental grass plantings. 
13.10 - Interior parking lot landscaping. 
    For parking lots consisting of ten (10) or more spaces, interior parking lot landscaping shall be required. Ten percent (10%) of the total parking lot area shall be landscaped with parking lot islands and landscaped areas. (See Figure 17: Interior Parking Lot Landscaping) Parking lot perimeter landscape yards shall not be included toward satisfying this requirement. See Section 13.14 (Illustration of Landscaping and Screening Requirements) for a graphic illustration of such landscaping. 
(a)  Amount. Parking lot islands and landscaped areas shall be provided in the following amount: 
(1)  One (1) parking lot island shall be provided between every ten (10) to fifteen (15) contiguous parking spaces. As part of the landscape plan approval, parking lot island locations may be varied based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of islands shall be no less than the amount required one (1) island for every ten (10) spaces. However, all rows of parking spaces shall be terminated by a parking lot island. 
FIGURE 17: INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING 

(2)  At least one (1) shade tree shall be provided for every one-thousand five-hundred (1,500) square feet of off street parking lot area, up to six-thousand (6,000) square feet, and at least one (1) tree shall be provided for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of pavement area above six-thousand (6,000) square feet. Such trees shall be planted within parking lot islands and landscaped areas. 
(3)  No off street parking facility of greater than ten thousand (10,000) contiguous square feet of pavement area shall be permitted. Off street parking facilities larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall be appropriately broken by linear planting strips or variable shaped islands in the interior of the parking facility. Such planting strips or islands shall be satisfactorily landscaped with trees and suitable groundcover, and shall constitute no less than five (5%) percent of the total area of the off street parking facility excluding the perimeter landscape yard. 
(b)  Size of Parking Lot Islands. Where parking lot islands are required, they shall be the same dimension as the parking stall. Double rows of parking shall provide parking lot islands that are the same dimension as the double row. 
(c)  Design of Planting Areas. Parking lot islands and landscaped areas shall be at least six (6) inches above the surface of the parking lot and protected with concrete curbing, except where designed specifically for the absorption of stormwater. Such islands and landscaped areas shall be properly drained and irrigated as appropriate to the site conditions to ensure survivability. 
(d)  Type of Landscape Material. Shade trees shall be the primary plant materials used in parking lot islands and landscaped areas. Ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges and other plant materials may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings but shall not create visibility concerns for automobiles and pedestrians. 
(e)  Quantity of Landscape Material Within Parking Lot Islands and Landscaped Areas. A minimum of one (1) shade tree shall be provided for every parking lot island. If the island extends the width of a double row, then two (2) shade trees shall be provided. Landscaped areas within the parking lot shall provide a minimum of one (1) shade tree for every three hundred (300) square feet of landscaped area. 
(f)  Groundcover. A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of every parking lot island or landscaped area shall be planted in turf or other live groundcover, perennials or ornamental grasses. Where extreme conditions exist that will not make this feasible or practical, the body approving the landscape plan may permit decomposed (rotten) granite groundcover so long as it is properly graded, will not erode due to slope conditions and is properly maintained. 
13.11 - Sign landscaping. 
    Ground signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign in accordance with Section 14.5.D (Landscape Requirements). 
13.12 - Transition yards. 
(a)  This section establishes standards for the dimensions and improvement requirements of transition yards between land uses and/or zoning districts within the rear or interior side yard. (See Figure 18: Transition Yard Locations) Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the applicant's voluntary installation of transition yards to these design specifications. See Section 13.14 (Illustration of Landscaping and Screening Requirements) for a graphic illustration of such landscaping. 
FIGURE 18: TRANSITION YARD LOCATIONS 

(b)  In some instances, a transition yard may not be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. These include, but are not limited to, instances where the rear wall of a commercial building is located on the rear property line or where an alley is located between a commercial property that abuts a residential property. Where it proves difficult to meet the transition yard requirements of this Ordinance, which may include other situations than those listed here, the body approving the landscape plan may approve alternative approaches or waive requirements. 
(c)  Transition yards are required in the following situations: 
(1)  Where an R-4 or R-5 District abuts an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District. 
(2)  Where a commercial district abuts a residential district. 
(3)  Where a non-residential use is located within a residential district. 
(d)  Transition yards shall be provided in interior side yards and rear yards. Transition yards may be located within required yards, and shall be reserved for the planting of material and installation of screening as required by this section. No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory buildings or other impervious surfaces shall be permitted within the transition yard area, unless otherwise specified by this Ordinance. 
(e)  All plantings in the transition yard shall be in accordance with the design standards of this Section. The minimum size and improvement of transition yards shall be as follows: 
(1)  Interior Side Yard Transition Yards. When required, the transition yard within the interior side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. Within this required transition yard, the following improvements shall be provided: 
a.  Shade trees shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of yard length. The trees may be grouped or staggered to maximize their effect, subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b.  An opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick) or solid wood decorative fence, with the finished side of the fence facing the adjacent residential property, or dense evergreen hedge, six (6) feet in height shall be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length. 
c.  Shrubs shall be planted on an average of one (1) shrub for every three (3) feet of yard length. 
d.  Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or other groundcover. 
(2)  Rear Yard Transition Yard. When required, the transition yard within the rear yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. Within this required transition yard, the following improvements shall be provided: 
a.  A mix of shade trees and evergreen trees planted on an average of one (1) tree for every twenty (20) linear feet of the yard length. The trees may be grouped or staggered to maximize their effect, subject to approval of the landscape plan. 
b.  Shrubs shall be planted on an average of one (1) shrub for every three (3) feet of yard length. 
c.  A masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick) or solid wood decorative fence, with the finished side of the fence facing the adjacent residential property, or dense evergreen hedge, six (6) feet in height shall be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length. 
d.  Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or other groundcover. 
(Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009) 
13.13 - Screening requirements. 
(a)  Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Refuse Storage Areas. Refuse disposal containers, recycling containers, and refuse and recycling storage areas shall be screened on three (3) sides by a solid wood fence or masonry screen wall to a height of no less than six (6) feet but no more than eight (8) feet. Where required, the dumpster enclosure shall be gated, and situated on a concrete apron that extends a minimum of six (6) feet beyond the opening of the enclosure, so as to support the weight of the waste disposal vehicle during unloading. All refuse shall be stored within the covered refuse disposal containers. In residential districts, this provision shall not apply where refuse is collected by the City from containers less than one-hundred (100) gallons in size at the street, curb or alley. 
(b)  Loading Berths. Where feasible, loading berths in all zoning districts shall be located and oriented so as not be visible from the street and adjacent properties, while still allowing access to the use it is serving. In addition, loading berths in all zoning districts shall be screened as much as possible, unless such screening is determined unnecessary by the body approving the landscape plan. Such screening shall consist of a solid wood or simulated wood fence or masonry screen wall to a height of no less than six (6) feet. A dense evergreen hedge may be substituted for a fence or wall, subject to approval of the landscape plan. 
(c)  Outdoor Storage and Display Areas. 
(1)  Outdoor Storage Areas. All outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened by a solid wood or simulated wood fence or masonry screen wall to a height of no less than six (6) feet but no more than eight (8) feet. Where feasible, plant materials shall be installed along the fence or wall located along the public right-of-way to provide a softening effect. No materials stored outdoors shall be of a greater height than that of the required fence or wall. 
(2)  Outdoor Display Areas 
a.  When the rear or interior side yard of an outdoor display area abuts a residential district, or the rear yard is separated from a residential district by an alley,the outdoor display area shall be effectively screened from view by a solid wood fence, masonry screen wall, or dense hedge at least six (6) feet in height. Chain-link fencing is prohibited. 
b.  All outdoor display areas shall be designed with a landscaped yard along the public right-of-way, excluding alleys, a minimum of five (5) feet in width and planted with shade or evergreen trees at a rate of one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) feet, and supplemented with shrubs and perennials to enhance the view from the public right-of-way. These screening requirements are not intended to prohibit openings reasonably necessary for access drives and walkways. 
c.  Motor vehicle dealerships or rental establishments with outdoor sales and display lots shall be designed with permanent screening along the right-of-way meeting the requirements of Paragraph b above, but such plantings may be clustered. However, the screening may consist of small shrubs and/or a low pedestrian wall, rather than shade or evergreen trees, to optimize the view of motor vehicles for sale. 
d.  Growing areas for nursery stock located in the front or corner side yard shall be considered to meet screening requirements. 
(d)  Drive-Through Facility. Drive aisles of drive-through facilities shall be effectively screened from view along the public right-of-way and at the edges of sites adjacent to residential properties in order to minimize the impact of exterior site lighting, headlight glare and any menu intercom displays. Such screening shall be approved during the site plan review process and shall consist of a solid wood or simulated wood fence, masonry screen wall, or dense evergreen hedge at least six (6) feet in height. Chain-link fencing is prohibited. Plant materials shall be installed along the fence or wall to provide a softening effect. 
13.14 - Illustration of landscaping and screening requirements. 
    Figure 19: Landscaping and Screening Requirements provides a sample illustration of the landscaping and screening requirements of this Section of the Ordinance. 

Section 14 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History- Ord. No. 2014-09, 2-17-2014. 

14.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to establish comprehensive system of sign controls governing the display, design, construction, installation and maintenance of signs that will: 
A.  Balance the interest of business owners in conveying their messages, and the interest of the public in being protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs. 
B.  Protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. 
C.  Reduce traffic hazards. 
D.  Enhance the attractiveness of the City. 
E.  Protect property values. 
F.  Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs containing noncommercial messages. 
14.2 - Sign permits. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Section 14, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or structurally alter any sign or other advertising structure on any property, public or private, without first obtaining a sign permit from the City. No sign is exempt from permit requirements unless so specified in this Section 14 and then only to the extent that such sign complies with the stated limitations. If it is of a type that is set forth as exempt, but nonetheless violates the limitations in any manner, it shall be deemed an illegal and prohibited sign. The Zoning Administrator may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this Section 14 or other City regulation or a misrepresentation on the sign permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
14.3 - Permit application. 
    Application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the Community Preservation & Development Department and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
B.  Two (2) prints or ink drawings of the sign and the supporting structure indicating: 
1.  Size. 
2.  Location on building (if applicable). 
3.  Location on zoning lot indicating the sign's relationship to buildings, structure and property lines. 
4.  Specifications listing materials, colors, illumination, dimensions and structural design showing method of attachment to the building or anchorage in the ground. 
C.  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, when required by the Zoning Administrator, showing the sign is designed for a dead load and wind pressure in the amount required in the municipal code. 
D.  Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting sign. 
E.  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which the sign is to be attached or on which it is to be erected. 
F.  All illuminated signs shall require an electrical permit, subject to Article 15 and Article 20 of the Municipal Code. 
G.  Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require for full compliance with this and all other regulations of the City. 
14.4 - Sign maintenance. 
A.  All temporary and permanent signs, and the premises surrounding such signs, shall be maintained in a clean, rust and corrosion free and sanitary condition. The premises shall be free and clear of all noxious substances, rubbish and weeds. All ground signs shall be landscaped as required in subsection 14.9.C. Such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition. 
B.  If any temporary or permanent sign has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section 14, the Zoning Administrator shall give written notice of such violation to the permittee and in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator; any other person set forth in subsection 14.19. If the offending sign or structure is not removed or altered so as to comply with the applicable standards, within twenty (20) days after such notice, it may be removed by order of the City Manager at the expense of the same persons set forth in subsection 14.19. The City Manager may cause any sign that is an immediate peril to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
14.5 - Issuance of permit. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall, examine or cause to be examined all plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect a sign to assure compliance with all applicable regulations. If the work authorized has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
14.6 - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs are allowed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection 14.6, except that where other regulations are applicable the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
A.  Temporary Signs Exempt from Sign Permit Requirements. Subject to compliance with all City regulations, the following types of temporary signs are exempt from sign permit requirements: 
1.  Construction and Home Improvement Services Signs. 
a.  On-site construction signs identifying the architect, engineer, developer and/or contractor for that site. Such a sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height. Such a sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be removed no later than seven (7) days after application for a certificate of occupancy or completion of the project, whichever occurs first. Construction signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per street frontage, except in the case of single-family and two-family dwelling construction, where construction signs shall be limited to one (1) sign. 
b.  Home improvement services signs, such as landscaping and house painting services. Only one (1) such sign not to exceed four (4) square feet is allowed. The sign may contain only the name, address, a phone number and e-mail address of the company providing the service. A temporary home improvement services signs may only be displayed for the duration of the project or 30 days, whichever is less. 
2.  Directional Signs for Public Events. Temporary directional signs six (6) square feet or less, for a real estate open house or an event held in a governmental building, park or educational institution. Such a sign may be posted no earlier than forty-eight (48) hours prior to, and shall be removed no later than twenty-four (24) hours after, the conclusion of the event to which the sign relates. 
3.  Displays or Decorations for Holidays and Special Occasions. Displays of a primarily decorative nature with a non-commercial message, and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday. 
4.  "For Sale" and "For Rent" Signs. 
a.  "For Sale" and "For Rent" Property Signs. "For Sale" and "For Rent" signs that do not exceed six (6) square feet in area for all residential and special purpose districts or sixteen (16) square feet for commercial districts. These signs shall only advertise the sale, rental, lease or management of the premises upon the said signs are located. A ground-mounted sign may be no more than six (6) feet in height. Such a sign shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the completion of the sale or lease. "For Sale" and "For Rent" signs shall be restricted to one (1) sign for interior lots and two (2) signs for corner lots. 
b.  "For Sale" Vehicle Signs. "For Sale" Vehicle Signs subject to the following: 
i.  A vehicle "For Sale" sign must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the vehicle's sale. 
ii.  A vehicle that displays a "For Sale" or similar sign may be parked only as follows: 
i.  in a lot where the sale of new or used vehicles is permitted by this Zoning Ordinance; or 
ii.  an individual privately selling a vehicle may park a vehicle with a "For Sale" sign for display at that individual's home, including in the driveway. 
iii.  A vehicle may not be parked in the public right-of-way for purposes of displaying it for sale. 
5.  Garage or Yard Sale Signs. Temporary residential garage or yard sale signs. There may be no more than two (2) such signs per sale. Such a sign may not exceed four (4) square feet. One (1) sign shall be permitted per lot frontage on the premises of the sale and another on other property with the permission of that property owner or tenant. Such signs shall be removed immediately when the garage or yard sale is over. 
6.  Not-For-Profit Special Event Signs. Not-for-profit special event signs. Such signs may: (a) not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area; (b) be erected not more than fifteen (15) days in advance of the event; (c) shall be removed within five (5) days of the conclusion of the event; and (d) only be used in conjunction with special events conducted by charitable or not-for-profit organizations, philanthropic campaigns or house of worship activities. Such a sign may be a banner sign. 
7.  Political Signs or Non-Commercial Messages. Political signs subject to the following: 
a.  The sign may be no more than six (6) square feet in area on each side. Not more than twenty (20) square feet total area of political or non-commercial signs shall be allowed on any zoning lot. 
b.  Such a sign may not be posted on any public property except as set forth in subparagraph (c). A sign may be posted on private property only with the permission of the property owner. 
c.  On any day of a federal, state or local election, as called by the Clerk of Cook County, election signs may be placed in the City parkway starting at 4:00 a.m. on the day of the election. Such a sign may not be placed within 100 feet of the door of the polling place. The City Manager may remove any sign that he or she believes constitutes a hazard to the public. Such signs must be removed within twenty-four hours of the close of the polls. For purposes of this subparagraph (c), "day of the election" shall not include early voting days. 
8.  Window Signs (Temporary). Temporary signs affixed to the inside of a window advertising temporary commercial goods or services sold on the premises. The total of all temporary window signs may occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the window's area. No such temporary window sign shall be in place longer than thirty (30) days. 
9.  Certain A-Frame Signs. A-frame signs, also known as "sandwich boards," used to advertise a business, its products or its services may be displayed by a retail establishment in a commercial district between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Use of A-frame signs may be further restricted by the City based on weather conditions. Only one such sign, not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet (12 feet per side) shall be permitted for each establishment. The sign may not be placed on a roadway. It must be placed in such a manner as to not obstruct pedestrian traffic and may only be placed along the actual frontage of the establishment. The sign may be placed on public property if a Certificate of Insurance, in an amount determined by the City, is provided to the City prior to displaying the sign. 
10.  Window Displays. Window displays for the purpose of showing merchandise, community related and not-for-profit items in a window of a vacant business in a commercial district are exempt from subsection 14.13.H (Off-Premise Signs) but shall meet the other requirements of the code and the requirements below. 
a.  Window displays shall only be allowed for businesses with a Park Ridge business license, community organizations and not-for-profits for the purpose of promoting merchandise or community events. 
b.  Only one sign is allowed per window. 
c.  The name, emblem or other such element that is specific to the company creating the display may not exceed 1.3 (one and three tenths) square feet. The remainder of the area shall highlight merchandise or events. 
d.  The display shall be immediately removed should the building space with the window become occupied. 
e.  Displays shall be maintained and kept current. 
f.  No such display shall be permitted without the written consent and assumption of responsibility of the building's legal or beneficial owner. 
11.  Patio Umbrella Signs. Patio umbrella signage is permitted for a licensed outdoor cafe to advertise its business, products, or services. Up to three square feet of total signage may be displayed on each umbrella. 
B.  Temporary Signs That May Or May Not Require A Sign Permit. Temporary signs that may or may not require a permit, based on specific criteria, are set forth in this section. These temporary signs must comply with the requirements of this Section 14 and the following specific limitations: 
1.  Banners and Pennants - Exempt from Permit. Banners for charitable or not-for-profit organizations, philanthropic campaigns, or house of worship activities located within the City are permitted in any district. Such banners are exempt from the lot size limitations of paragraph 14.6.B.2.a below, but must comply with the requirements of paragraphs b, c, d, e, f, g, h and i of paragraph 14.6.B.2. below. 
2.  Banners or Pennants - Permit Required. 
a.  Banners or pennants are only permitted within commercial districts on lots of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet or more. 
b.  Each twenty-five (25) foot length of multiple pennants connected in series shall count as one sign. 
c.  No Vertical signage may exceed seven (7) feet in height. 
d.  No single banner may exceed twelve (12) square feet of surface area. 
e.  There may be no more than 4 banners per property. 
f.  Banners are prohibited within the vision triangle. 
g.  All banners must be five feet from the property line and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
h.  Banners and pennants must remain in good condition during the display period. Throughout the display period, corrective action must be taken immediately should there be any problems with the appearance, condition or maintenance of any banner or pennant and support hardware. If the banner is torn in any manner, it shall be deemed to be in violation of this subparagraph h. 
i.  Banners may not be displayed for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days twice a calendar year and not more than thirty (30) days in a calendar year. 
j.  There shall be no cost for a temporary banner or pennant permit. 
3.  Other Attention-Getting Devices - Permit Required 
a.  Any attention-getting device that is not a pennant or banner shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in a commercial district, and sixteen (16) square feet in a residential district. 
b.  Other advertising devices may be constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, or other similar light materials, intended to be of temporary construction as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Temporary Signs Requiring Sign Permit. Temporary signs not specifically exempted in Paragraphs A or Paragraph B above require a sign permit. In addition, such non-exempt temporary signs must comply with the requirements of this Section 14 and the following specific limitations: 
1.  Time Limit. Such signs may not be in place for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year. 
2.  Amount. There may be only one (1) sign on each street frontage per lot. 
3.  Messaging. Advertising, non-commercial and political messages are allowed. However, any advertising contained on such a sign may pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. 
4.  Location and Height 
a.  No such sign shall extend into the public right-of-way. 
b.  Signs attached to a building shall not extend above the building height or, if attached to a permanent sign, shall not extend above the height of the permanent sign. 
(Ord. No. 2015-69, 12-7-2015) 
14.7 - Sign placement. 
A.  Signs on Public Property . No sign shall be placed or erected on any public property, except as follows: 
1.  Those placed by federal, state and/or local governments. 
2.  Those whose placement has been authorized by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this Section 14. 
3.  Political signs on public property are addressed in Section 14.6.A.7. Any sign placed on public property without authorization may be removed by the City without notice. 
B.  Signs on Private Property. No sign shall be placed on any private property without prior consent of the property owner. 
C.  View Obstruction. All signs shall comply with the view obstruction provisions of Section 11.2.G (View Obstruction) of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
14.8 - Sign dimension computations. 
    The following principles shall control the computation of sign dimensions. 
A.  Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face shall be computed by use of the smallest square, circle, rectangle or triangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background or the display, or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. Not included in the computation of the sign area is any supporting framework or bracing, unless such framework or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign. The determination of the Zoning Administrator with respect to computation of sign area shall be final. See illustrations in Appendix G (Sign Illustrations). 
B.  Computation of Area of Multiple-Faced Signs. 
1.  Except as stated in (2) below, the sign area for a sign with more than one (1) face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign visible faces. 
2.  When two (2) identical sign faces are (a) placed back to back in parallel so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time; and (b) are part of the same sign structure; and (c) are no more than twenty-four (24) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one (1) of the faces. 
C.  Measurement of Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured from grade, as defined in this Zoning Ordinance, at the sign base to the highest point of the sign or its supporting structure. 
14.9 - General design standards for permanent signs. 
A.  Construction and Design Standards. Each sign constructed, erected, modified or altered shall comply with the provisions of this Section 14 and the structural requirements of the Municipal Code. 
B  Illumination. 
1.  All sign illumination shall be designed, located, shielded and directed so as to minimize glare or direct light upon adjacent roadways and surrounding properties and prevent distraction of operators of vehicles or pedestrians. 
2.  Goose-neck reflectors and lights are allowed on ground signs and wall signs. However, the reflectors shall concentrate the illumination upon the actual sign message so as to minimize glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
3.  The terms, provisions, regulations, restrictions and penalties of Article 14 Chapter 11 entitled "Regulation of Lighting" of the Municipal Code of the City shall be applicable to all signs in existence and hereafter erected within the City. 
C.  Landscape Requirements. Ground signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign in accordance with the following: 
1.  The landscaping shall extend a minimum of one (1) foot from the sign base on all sides. 
2.  Monument signs shall be landscaped with small shrubs a minimum of two (2) feet in height at planting. (See Figure 20: Ground Sign Landscaping) The remainder of the landscaped area shall be planted with perennials, turf or other live groundcover. If the monument sign is designed with a decorative base, the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive landscaping requirements. 
3.  Pole signs shall be landscaped with shrubs, which are a minimum of four (4) feet tall at planting. (See Figure 20) The remainder of the landscaped area shall be planted with perennials, turf or other groundcover. 
FIGURE 20: GROUND SIGN LANDSCAPING 

D.  Glass. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be wired glass or safety glass. 
E.  Lettering. All letters, figures, characters or representations maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign whether in regular, in cut-out or irregular form, shall be safely and securely built into or attached to the sign structure. 
F.  Limitation on Items of Information. 
1.  So as not to create traffic hazards for passing motorists and to minimize the cluttered appearance of signs, the number of items of information on any single sign face shall be limited to no more than three (3). Items of information may include: the name of the business, type of use, product or service (if not part of the business name), street address, phone number, website address, business logo, business slogan and other business information. 
2.  Ground signs for developments with multiple tenants that are used to provide the names of tenants within the development shall be allowed, in addition to the address of the development, one (1) item of information per tenant within the development. 
3.  For a proposed commercial development or redevelopment with multiple tenants, where more than one (1) wall, awning or canopy sign is proposed, a master sign plan is required in accordance with subsection 14.14 (Master Sign Plan Required). 
G.  Data to be Posted. Every sign shall display in a conspicuous place, in letters not less than one (1) inch in height, the date of installation, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in or on such sign. Such information shall not count toward the limitation on the items of information described in Paragraph F above. 
14.10 - Permanent signs. 
    The construction, erection, installation, modification or alteration of all signs shall comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the requirements of the Municipal Code. Figures 32 A-C: Permanent Sign Regulations for Business Districts, found at the end of this Section, illustrate the general permanent sign regulations for each of the four business districts. Section 14.15 "Sign Standards for Special Purpose Districts" contains provisions for the Special Purpose Districts. 
A.  Awnings. Awnings that are an architectural feature of a structure and are not used for identifying the premises or the goods and/or services sold are not considered a sign. Awnings and canopies used as signs are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  No portion of an awning sign shall be less than eight (8) feet above the level of the public sidewalk or thoroughfare over which it is erected. (See Figure 21: Awnings) 
2.  No awning sign shall be permitted to extend beyond any point that is less than four (4) feet from the curb line. (See Figure 21) 
FIGURE 21: AWNINGS 

3.  Awning signs shall be constructed out of canvas or canvas-like material, unless other material is approved by the Zoning Administrator. Back-lit and metal awnings are prohibited. 
4.  Awning signs shall be securely attached to and supported by a building. All frames and supports shall be made of metal or other similar rigid material. 
5.  Only the name of the business, the service offered by that business, house number (no street name), and/or logo may be printed on the awning sign and shall be restricted to the valance only, except as allowed in Paragraph 6 below. Such valance shall be no more than eight (8) inches in height and any lettering printed on such valance shall be no more than six (6) inches in height. 
6.  In lieu of any wall sign, the name of the business or logo may be printed on the portion of the awning above the valance. Printing above the valance shall be limited to one (1) awning, except in the case of a corner lot where one (1) awning with printing above the valance shall be allowed on each street frontage. Such name or logo printed above the valance shall be limited as follows (see Figure 22: Printing on Awnings (Above Valance)): 
a.  Lettering shall be limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of the height of the awning, as measured from the point of attachment to the building to the bottom of the fully extended awning excluding the valance. Lettering shall also be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the width of the awning. (See Figure 22) 
b.  A logo shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the height of the awning, as measured from the point of attachment to the building to the bottom of the fully extended awning excluding the valance. (See Figure 22) 
FIGURE 22: PRINTING ON AWNINGS (ABOVE VALANCE) 

7.  All awnings containing signs shall comply with the following design standards: 
a.  Awnings shall be compatible in material and construction to the style and character of the building. The color of the awning shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the façade. 
b.  When feasible, awnings shall be generally aligned with others nearby in order to maintain a sense of visual continuity. 
c.  Awnings shall be tailored to serve the opening into the building and positioned so that distinctive architectural features remain visible. 
B.  Canopy Sign. Canopies that are an architectural feature of a structure and are not used for identifying the premises or the goods and/or services sold are not considered a sign. Canopies used as signs are only allowed in commercial and special purpose districts and are subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Signage is only allowed on the vertical face or fascia of the canopy. 
2.  Canopy signs shall not extend above the roofline or beyond the corners of the building. In no case shall the wall sign extend more than twelve (12) inches from the vertical face or fascia to which the sign is to be placed. 
3.  No more than one (1) canopy sign shall be allowed per street frontage (alleys are not considered as street frontage) and shall be limited to the business name and/or logo. Canopy colors and striping are not included in the calculation of sign area. 
4.  The sign surface area of a canopy sign shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the vertical section or fascia of the canopy. The vertical section or fascia of canopy is calculated as the vertical dimension of the canopy multiplied by the horizontal dimension of the canopy face (see Figure 23: Canopy Signs). 
5.  Back-lit canopies are prohibited. 
FIGURE 23: CANOPY SIGNS 

C.  Ground Monument Sign. Ground monument signs are allowed for non-residential uses within residential districts and in all commercial districts, except the Uptown Core Sub-District and the Uptown Commercial Sub-District in the B-4 District and subject to the following: 
1.  In residential districts and the B-1 District and the Uptown Commercial Sub-District, Transitional Commercial Sub-District and Public/Institutional Sub-District of the B-4 District, ground monument signs may not exceed six (6) feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area (See Figure 24: Ground Monument Sign Size for the B-1 District and the Uptown Commercial Sub-District, Transitional Commercial Sub-District and Public/Institutional Sub-District of the B-4 District). In all other districts, such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in sign area (See Figure 25: Ground Monument Sign Size for all other Districts). However, multi-family dwellings in any district may have one (1) ground monument sign, subject to the requirements of Paragraph 5 below. 
FIGURE 24: GROUND MONUMENT SIGN SIZE FOR THE B-1 DISTRICT AND THE UPTOWN COMMERCIAL SUB-DISTRICT, TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL SUB-DISTRICT AND PUBLIC/ INSTITUTIONAL SUB-DISTRICT OF THE B-4 DISTRICT 

FIGURE 25: GROUND MONUMENT SIGN SIZE FOR ALL OTHER DISTRICTS 

2.  There may be only one (1) ground monument sign per zoning lot except that on a corner lot two (2) monument ground signs, one facing each street, shall be allowed. All monument signs shall be set back from the property line a minimum of five (5) feet, except for ground monument signs located in the B-3 Zoning District, which may encroach up to the property line. No part of any monument sign may be located on the public right-of-way and shall conform to Section 11.2.G of this Zoning Ordinance (View Obstruction). Directional signs, subject to the requirements of subsection 14.10.J (Directional Signs (Permanent)), are allowed in addition to other monument signs on that lot. 
3.  The sign base of any ground monument sign shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the width of the sign face. (See Figure 26: Monument Sign Base) 
FIGURE 26: MONUMENT SIGN BASE 

4.  Monument signs shall be mounted on either a decorative masonry or natural stone base. Where a monument sign is to be constructed for a non-residential use located within a brick or decorative masonry building, the sign base shall be constructed of a similar decorative masonry material. 
5.  One (1) multi-family dwelling ground monument sign may be displayed for a multi-family dwelling in any district. Only the name and address of the building and the name of the manager may be contained on the sign. No sign may be higher than six (6) feet above the established grade, nor shall such sign project beyond the property line. The area of such sign may not exceed: 
a.  Nine (9) square feet for multi-family dwellings containing ten (10) dwelling units or less; or 
b.  Twenty four (24) square feet for multi-family dwellings containing more than ten (10) dwelling units. 
D.  Ground Pole Sig. Ground poles signs are allowed only in the B-2 and B-3 Districts and are subject to the following: 
1.  The height of a pole sign may not exceed twenty (20) feet. The area of the pole sign may not exceed twenty (20) square feet or one half (1/2) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of front lot line whichever is greater. A pole sign may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area in the B-2 District (See Figure 27: Maximum Ground Pole Sign Size B-2 District) or fifty (50) square feet in sign area in the B-3 District (See Figure 28: Maximum Ground Pole Sign Size B-3 District). 

2.  There may be only one (1) ground pole sign per zoning lot except that on a corner lot one (1) additional ground pole sign shall be allowed for each street frontage of two-hundred (200) feet or more. All pole signs shall be set back from the property line a minimum of ten (10) feet. No part of any pole sign may be located on or over the public right-of-way (See Figure 29: Ground Sign Setback). Directional signs, subject to the requirements of Section 14.10.J (Directional Signs (Permanent)), are allowed in addition to other pole signs on that lot. 
FIGURE 29: GROUND SIGN SETBACK 

3.  The primary support of a pole sign shall be erected in such a manner that at least forty-two (42) inches of the length of the support is underground. This requirement may be modified based on the size of the sign and the height of the sign, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may require, in cases of signs over ten (10) feet in height, proper documentation from a structural engineer or manufacturer that indicates proper installation instructions for the sign, as well as the sign's ability to withstand wind pressures. 
E.  Marquee Signs. Marquees containing signs are permitted in the U-Core Sub-District of the B-4 District subject to the following: 
1.  The marquee shall not be extended beyond the curb line. 
2.  The marquee shall be at least the width of the building entrance, but may not extend more than five (5) feet beyond each side of the entrance. 
3.  The marquee is on a zoning lot of thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet or more. 
4.  No temporary sign may be attached to, or hung from, a marquee. This restriction shall not apply to a sign painted or illuminated directly upon the fascia of the marquee, or where the marquee is designed for changeable copy. No sign may extend vertically or horizontally beyond the fascia, except that individual, free standing letters may project to a height not exceeding two (2) feet above such marquee. 
5.  The marquee, including the anchor bolts, supports, rods and braces, shall be designed or specified by a structural engineer and be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. The marquee must be supported solely by the building to which it is attached, and columns or posts for support or any other purpose are prohibited. The marquee may not be attached to any building of wood frame construction. 
6.  The roof of the marquee may be used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof. No portion of the marquee shall be less than eight (8) feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare over which it projects. 
F.  Projecting Sign. Projecting signs are allowed only in the B-1 and B-4 Districts, subject to the following: 
1.  A projecting sign may not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area. Projecting signs for a business above the first floor are prohibited. There may be only one (1) projecting sign per ground floor business (See Figure 30: Projecting Sign). 
2.  A projecting sign may not extend more than four (4) feet from the face of the building to which it is attached, measuring from the point on the sign nearest the wall (See Figure 30). 
3.  A projecting sign is allowed to encroach two (2) feet into the public right-of-way. The bottom of every projecting sign shall be at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk or thoroughfare. A projecting sign may be located only on that portion of the building immediately above the first floor windows of the business and in the case of a two-story building, below the second floor window sill (See Figure 30). 
FIGURE 30: PROJECTING SIGN 

4.  No projecting sign affixed to a building, including the sign support structure, may project above the building height. 
5.  A projecting sign, including frame, braces and supports shall be designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer. No projecting sign may be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails nor may any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. Any movable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service opening shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges. A projecting sign may neither be attached to, nor supported by, a wood frame buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. 
6.  No floodlight, spotlight or reflectors of the goose-neck type shall be allowed on a projecting sign unless the wall sign for the same business is not illuminated. Lighting shall be shielded and directed toward the projecting sign to avoid nuisance illumination. 
7.  A projecting sign with internal illumination of any kind is prohibited. 
G.  Wall Signs. Wall signs are allowed for any non-residential use in any district subject to the following: 
1.  A wall sign is allowed for ground floor occupancies only. 
2.  A wall sign must face a public street (except where a building has a secondary entrance, such as a rear parking lot, an additional wall sign is permitted but shall be limited to no more than sixteen (16) square feet and may only indicate the name of the business and the words "entrance," "enter" or similar term). 
3.  No more than one (1) wall sign shall be allowed on any wall facing a public street (except in the case of a multi-tenant building, where (1) wall sign for each ground floor tenant unit is allowed). 
4.  A wall sign may only be located on the sign frieze, or the portion of the building immediately above the first floor door or window and below the second floor window sills in the case of a two-story building. 
5.  No wall sign may rise above the second story sill line. On one-story buildings, the top of the sign shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the top of the main display window on the first floor. 
6.  A wall sign may also be installed on the lower plane of a mansard style roof or mansard wall facing provided such mansard roof or wall facing is constructed at an angle of not less than seventy degrees (70°) from the horizontal plane. 
7.  A wall sign may not cover any portion of an architectural detail, window or door. A transom shall be deemed to be an architectural detail and an integral part of a door, whether operable or not. 
8.  A wall sign must be constructed of wood or metal. Any other material shall require approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
9.  Within the business districts, the maximum size of a wall sign shall be established as follows: 
a.  For properties having a single public street frontage, one (1) square foot per lineal foot of lot line frontage. 
b.  For properties facing more than one (1) public street, businesses shall be allowed to have one (1) secondary wall sign for each side of a building facing a public street other than the wall where the primary wall sign is located. A secondary wall sign shall be limited to one-half (0.5) a square foot per lineal foot of front lot line frontage. 
c.  For multi-tenant buildings, wall signs shall be limited to one (1) square foot per lineal foot of storefront for each unit. 
10.  Within residential districts, only one (1) wall sign shall be allowed. The wall sign shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet. 
11.  Wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall. Wall signs shall be affixed flat against the building wall and no part of the sign may project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall. No wall sign, including the sign support structure shall project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached (See Figure 31: Wall Sign). 
FIGURE 31: WALL SIGN 

H.  Window Signs (Permanent). Window signs are allowed in any commercial use in any district subject to the following: 
1.  Permanent window signs must be affixed to or painted on the inside of a window and may occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the surface of each windowpane area. Such permanent window signs are permitted on the upper floors of multi-story commercial buildings. 
2.  If temporary window signs are allowed, the total area of all temporary and permanent window signs shall be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of any window. Temporary window signs shall be subject to the regulations of Section 14.6.A.8 (Window Signs (Temporary)). 
3.  Neon window lighting shall be considered a permanent window sign and shall be included in the twenty-five percent (25%) limitation set forth in (1) above. However, no more than fifteen percent (15%) of total window area may be occupied by neon window signs. Neon window signs shall be measured by the height and width of the sign. 
4.  Series lighting or neon tubing used to accentuate or trim windows, architectural features, or to outline borders of windows, signs or buildings, is specifically prohibited. Neon window signs are prohibited in residential and special purpose districts. 
I.  Signs Placed on Automatic Teller Machines. Signs on automatic teller machines (ATMs) are allowed in all commercial uses in any district, subject to the following: 
1.  With respect to a drive-through facility or other exterior portion of a commercial building, ATM signs are allowed on the ATM machine only. 
2.  A signs on an ATM may contain only the word ATM and/or the name (not logo) of the financial institution. 
3.  Only one (1) sign is permitted for each ATM. The size of the sign shall be no more than three (3) square-feet and shall be on no more than one (1) side of the ATM. 
J.  Directional Signs (Permanent). Directional signs are exempt from sign permit requirements subject to the following: 
1.  A directional sign may be located only on the property to which it pertains. The sign may be used only to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances, open or closed drive-through lanes, exits and features of a similar nature, and may use logos, shape or color to do so. A directional sign may not include words identifying or advertising the use. 
2.  Only one (1) directional sign is allowed for each driveway access from a public street. One (1) additional directional sign is permitted for each intersection of driveways within a site, to identify traffic routing, entrances and services such as drive-through lanes. 
3.  A directional sign may not project beyond a property line. 
4.  A directional sign may not have a height greater than six (6) feet nor a surface area greater than three (3) square feet. 
5.  In addition, one (1) sign per parking area that designates the conditions of use or identity of such parking area is allowed. Such a sign shall be limited to a maximum height of seven (7) feet, when freestanding, with a maximum surface area of nine (9) square feet. 
K.  Pricing Boards. Pricing Boards are allowed in Commercial Districts subject to the following: 
1.  One Pricing Board is allowed per property. 
2.  If a drive through is permitted on the property, then the pricing board may be freestanding so long as it is located in the area between the building and the drive through lane. 
3.  A pricing board may be part of an otherwise permitted wall sign or ground sign, but shall be included in the calculating the total amount of signage and may not be more than 25% of the total amount of the sign face. 
4.  The pricing board may have a mechanical movement capability, including electronic scrolling. Price changes may not be made more twice in any 24 hour period. 
L.  Bus Shelter Signs. Bus shelter signs are allowed subject to the following: 
1.  On translucent enclosures only. 
2.  Only 25% of the wall space may have signage. 
3.  Complies with all other sections of this code. 
4.  The shelter must be located on private property. 
5.  Signage may only be located on the side of the bus shelter parallel to the road. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009) 
14.11 - Exempt permanent signs. 
    The following permanent signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements of this Section 14. If the limitations set forth are violated the penalty provisions of this Section 14 shall apply. No exempt signs shall encroach upon the public right-of-way. All signs must comply with the view obstruction requirements of Section 11.2.G (View Obstruction) of the Zoning Ordinance. 
A.  Bulletin Boards. A bulletin boards not over twelve (12) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions, when located on the premises of the institution. 
B.  Directory Signs. Multi-tenant commercial buildings are allowed to have one (1) exterior directory sign at the ground floor entrance to indicate the occupants of its businesses and their location within the building, such as suite or floor. Such signs shall be limited to six (6) square feet in area. 
C.  Flags. Flags of any government or governmental agency or any patriotic, religious, charitable, civic, educational or fraternal organization. There shall be no more than four (4) such flags per zoning lot. No flagpole in any district shall exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
D.  House Number and Identification Signs. Non-internally illuminated house number signs. House numbers shall be consistent with section 9-5-5, Numbering required, of the City Code. 
E.  Building Identification Signs. Non-illuminated identification signs, which contain only the name and address of a building or development. Such a sign may not exceed one (1) square foot in area. There shall be no more than one (1) such sign per dwelling or commercial unit. However, commercial units with a rear entrance or a dwelling with a detached garage located on an alley right-of-way may have an additional house number or identification sign at that rear entrance or on that detached garage. 
F.  Memorial Plaques. A memorial or commemorative plaque or tablet, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, denoting a location of historic significance or a building's name and/or date of erection . 
G.  Miscellaneous Information Signs. The following types of miscellaneous information signs: 
1.  Information appearing on gasoline pumps, and service station rate signs, including the names or grades of fuel and prices and conditions relating to prices such as full or self-service. 
2.  Information appearing on newspaper vending boxes. 
3.  Information appearing on or adjacent to entry doors such as PUSH, PULL, OPEN and/or CLOSED. 
4.  Information appearing on display windows or doors denoting hours of operation, credit cards accepted and similar information. 
5.  Operating instructions on vending machines. 
H.  Municipal Signs. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, kiosks for the purpose of listing community events or giving directions to municipal destinations, railroad crossing signs, signs regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or designating or giving direction to streets, schools, historic sites or public buildings, and such temporary emergency or non-advertising signs. Such signs are subject to the approval of the City Council. 
I.  Occupational Signs. Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant conducting business in the building. Such a sign must be a wall sign, and not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
J.  Warning Signs. "No Trespassing" or "No Dumping" signs, not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) square feet per sign. There may not be more than four (4) such signs per lot; except that under special circumstances permission may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for additional signs. 
14.12 - Alteration and maintenance operations. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from sign permit requirements: 
1.  Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing changeable copy sign or similar approved sign. 
2.  Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving structural changes or changes in the electrical components of the sign. 
14.13 - Prohibited signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect, install, allow or maintain the following signs: 
A.  Advertising Benches. Benches located on private or public property that advertise a business, product or service or contain any other type of message. 
B.  A-Frame Signs. A-frame signs, also known as "sandwich boards," except that such signs may be displayed as set forth in subsection 14.6.A.9 (Certain A-Frame Signs). 
C.  Banners and Pennants. Banners and pennants, except in accordance with subsection 14.6 (Temporary Signs). 
D.  Flashing Signs. A sign that has blinking or flashing lights, or other illuminating device that has a changing light intensity, brightness or color, traveling/chasing lights or rotating beacons. 
E.  Randomly Affixed Signs. Any sign painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to any tree, rock, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, sidewalk, curb or street, bench or trash receptacle is prohibited. Logos and labels located on mechanical equipment, recycling bins, trash containers or dumpsters, which are part of the equipment as manufactured and/or installed are not included in the prohibition. 
F.  Moving Part. A sign with moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, including wind-activated. Clocks with movable hands are not included in this prohibition. 
G.  Obsolete or Abandoned Signs. Any sign that advertises a business, product, service or activity that is no longer located on the premises where the sign is displayed. 
H.  Off-Premise Signs. Any sign, which advertises a business not conducted on the premises where the sign is located or a product not sold on the premises where the sign is located, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Off-premise signs are allowed in commercially zoned districts as set forth in Section 14.6.A.10 (Window Displays) or within six-hundred sixty (660) feet of Interstate 90 (I-90) and Interstate 294 (I-294), subject to the following standards and criteria: 
a.  The sign is adjacent to, intended to be viewed from and within six-hundred sixty (660) feet of Interstate 90 (I-90) or Interstate 294 (I-294) right-of-way. No off-premise sign is allowed more than six-hundred sixty (660) feet from Interstate 90 or Interstate 294 right-of-way. 
b.  No off-premise sign shall be erected less than one-thousand (1,000) feet from any other off-premise sign. 
c.  The maximum area of a sign face may not exceed one-hundred (100) square feet. 
d.  The maximum height of the sign may not exceed twenty (20) feet above grade. 
e.  Off-premise signs shall not be erected or maintained in such a place or manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with an official traffic control device or a railroad safety signal or sign, or to obstruct or physically interfere with a driver's view or approaching merging or intersecting traffic. 
2.  Within a school or park district athletic field or stadium, signs promoting a business, service or product that is the sponsor of a school or park district program are permitted. However, such signs must strictly adhere to the following standards and criteria: 
a.  The business, service or product being promoted must be approved, as a program sponsor, by the governing body of the school or park district. 
b.  The type of signs shall be limited as follows: 
i.  temporary free standing A-frame signs of not more than twelve (12) square feet per side; and 
ii.  a sponsorship sign on a single scoreboard, the primary purpose of which scoreboard is informing attendees of the time, score or other information pertinent to the event ("Scoreboard Sign"). 
c.  All such signs shall be within the field, stadium or seating area of the field or stadium, and shall be located so as to be seen by those attending the event and not for the purpose of attracting the attention of those passing by the field or stadium. 
d.  No additional lighting (other than that used for the event) shall be permitted to accent an A-frame sign. 
e.  Scoreboard Signs may be electronic and use lights. However, no individual sponsor's message may contain flashing, blinking or chasing lights. 
f.  The scoreboard upon which the Scoreboard Sign is located must be at least one-hundred (100) yards from any street from which the sponsor's message may be seen. 
g.  A Scoreboard Sign may only be placed below all other information on the scoreboard. 
h.  Signs permitted pursuant to this subsection 14.13.H.2 may be displayed only for actual events that are sanctioned by the school or park district. 
i.  Such signs may be displayed not more than two (2) hours before the event and shall be removed or, in the case of a Scoreboard Sign, turned off no later than two (2) hours after the conclusion of the event. 
I.  Painted-On Signs. Signs painted directly on an exterior wall, roof, fascia, parapet or chimney of a building or fence. 
J.  Roof Signs. Roof signs. However, those signs erected on the lower plane of a mansard style roof or mansard wall facing shall be considered "wall signs," provided such mansard roof or wall facing is constructed at an angle of not less than seventy degrees (70°) from the horizontal plane. 
K.  Signs of an Offensive Nature. Signs which display any matter in which the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeal to a prurient interest in sex, or are patently offensive because they violate contemporary community standards and are utterly without redeeming social value. 
L.  Signs on Parked Vehicles. Signs placed or painted on a vehicle that is parked in a location such that the primary purpose is to advertise a product or service, or to direct the public to a business or activity located on or off the premises. Signs displayed on trucks, buses or other vehicles, which are being operated and stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the owner or business using the delivery trucks, moving vans and rental trucks, are allowed, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicles is not the display of signs. Such a truck must be parked or stored in an area appropriate to its use. 
M.  Traffic Hazards. Signs which: 
1.  Obstruct the free and clear vision at any street, intersection, parking lot entrance or exit or driveway. 
2.  Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or cause confusion with any traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape, color or lighting. 
3.  Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER or any other word, phrase, symbol or character that tends to mislead, interfere with or confuse the driver of a motor vehicle. 
4.  Are illuminated in red, green or amber color; if that sign is in the line of sight between the driver of a motor vehicle and a traffic signal light. 
N.  Obstruction of Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes. Signs which are erected, located or maintained so as to inhibit ingress to and egress from any door, window or fire escape and signs which are attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
O.  Strobe Lights, Spotlights and Floodlights. Strobe lights, spotlights and floodlights used to advertise a business, event, service or product. 
P.  Trailer and Portable Signs. Trailer and portable signs. This includes temporary or permanent signs resting on, or attached to, vehicles or trailers used as a means to circumvent the provisions of paragraph L above. 
Q.  Unsafe Signs. Signs which constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or maintenance. 
R.  Balloon Signs. Balloon signs or signs painted on or attached to balloons or other inflatable devices. 
S.  Electronic Message Board Signs. 
14.14 - Master sign plan required. 
    The purpose of a Master Sign Plan is to provide for coordinated signs on multi-tenant buildings. The intent is to create a plan whereby current owners or tenants can establish a unified sign program for the building and provide sign guidelines to future tenants. 
A.  For a commercial development with multiple tenants, where more than one (1) wall sign, awning or canopy is proposed, the applicant shall submit a master sign plan for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
B.  A master sign plan shall provide for coordinated design for all building-mounted signs and shall include, at a minimum, criteria and specifications for general appearance, format of message, font size and style, lighting, location and construction materials, and shall not cover or overhang any architectural feature. Where signs are to be located on a wall of a multi-tenant strip commercial development, they shall be located at a generally uniform height on the building wall. 
14.15 - Sign standards for special purpose districts. 
A.  Open Space District. Each use permitted in the Open Space District shall be allowed one (1) identification sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in sign area. The maximum height of any ground sign shall be ten (10) feet. The minimum setback from the property line for ground signs shall be ten (10) feet. 
B.  Hospital District. Signs within the Hospital District shall comply with the sign regulations for the B-3 District (as shown in Figure 32C), except as follows: 
1.  Directional Signs (Permanent) 
a.  Such signs may designate hospital, parking, walkways, emergency room locations, and other hospital-related facilities, as well as entrances or exits, by means of symbols or words. 
b.  One (1) directional sign is allowed for each driveway access from a public street. One (1) additional directional sign is allowed for each intersection of driveways within a site, to identify traffic routing, entrances and services, such as drive-in lanes. Additional directional signs may be allowed subject to Zoning Administrator approval. 
c.  Directional signs shall be located entirely on the property to which they pertain. Directional signs shall not project beyond the property line. 
d.  Directional signs may have a maximum height of seven (7) feet and a maximum surface area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
e.  Directional signs may be illuminated. 
2.  Wall Signs. One (1) wall sign for identification of each building shall be allowed provided the surface area of such sign shall not exceed one-hundred (100) square feet. 
C.  Educational Boarding District. All signs allowed and sign regulations applicable within the B-2 District shall apply to the Educational Boarding District. 
D.  Sexually-Oriented Business District. All signs allowed and sign regulations applicable within the B-2 District shall apply to the Sexually-Oriented Business District. However, electronic message signs are prohibited. 
E.  Parking District. Only directional signs, in accordance with subsection 14.10.J (Directory Signs (Permanent)), shall be allowed in the Parking District. 
14.16 - Nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this Section 14, but which could not be erected in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to be a legally nonconforming sign and may continue to be in existence with the following conditions: 
A.  The sign must be properly maintained in a safe condition. No nonconforming sign shall have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign, including the removal of one or more tenant signs from a multi-tenant sign, unless the sign is specifically designed for changeable copy. The only other changes permitted are those that bring the nonconforming sign into conformance with the provisions of this Section 14. 
B.  No nonconforming sign, or any structure, frame, hardware or associated equipment, shall be allowed to remain after the activity, business, or use to which it relates has been discontinued. 
C.  If a nonconforming sign is damaged in such a manner that the estimated expense of repairs exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the sign shall not be allowed to remain and must be removed. 
D.  Nothing in this Section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or structure, or the owner of the property on which it is located, from compliance with the provisions of this Section regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs and structures. No repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair may modify the sign, structure or copy in any way that makes it more nonconforming. 
14.17 - Unsafe and unlawful signs. 
    If the Zoning Administrator determines that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a threat to the public safety, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this Article, the following shall apply: 
A.  Written notice shall be given to the person or entity who derives the principal benefit from the sign. Such notice shall be given by first class mail, personal service or posting of the notice on the main entrance of the premises to which the sign principally relates. 
B.  The Zoning Administrator shall recommend to the City Council the revocation of the permit covering the sign and thereupon the permit may be revoked by order of the City Council. 
C.  If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the City regulations within ten (10) days after such notice, then such sign may be removed or altered by the Zoning Administrator at the expense of those persons or entities set forth in subsection 14.19 below. 
D.  The Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or other advertising structure, which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be summarily removed without notice. 
14.18 - Scope of appeals and variations. 
    An appeal of a staff decision on the denial of a permit based on the Design Guidelines shall be made to the Appearance Commission pursuant to Article 15 Chapter 7 of the City Code. Appeals regarding an interpretation by the Zoning Administrator regarding Section 14 may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals following the requirements of Section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. A variation, pursuant to the regulations of Section 4.4 of the Zoning Ordinance, may be requested from the height, area, and minimum distance requirements contained in this Section 14. 
14.19 - Liability and responsibility for compliance. 
    The permittee, the sign owner, the tenant benefiting from the sign, the legal owner of the property on which the sign is located, the beneficial owner of the property on which the sign is located and the manager of the property on which the sign is located shall each and all be jointly and severally responsible and liable for compliance with this Section 14, including but not limited to maintenance and payment of penalties. 
FIGURES 32A-C: PERMANENT SIGN REGULATIONS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
FIGURE 32A: B1 AND B4 DISTRICTS 

FIGURE 32B: B2 DISTRICT 

NOTE: There shall be only one (1) ground sign per lot, whether monument or pole ground sign, except that on a corner lot two (2) monument ground signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. There shall be only one (1) ground sign per lot, whether pole or monument ground sign, except that on a corner lot one (1) additional pole ground sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of two-hundred (200) feet or more. 
FIGURE 32C: B3 DISTRICT 

NOTE: There shall be only one (1) ground sign per lot, whether monument or pole ground sign, except that on a corner lot two (2) monument ground signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. There shall be only one (1) ground sign per lot, whether pole or monument ground sign, except that on a corner lot one (1) additional pole ground sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of two-hundred (200) feet or more. 
Section 15 - NONCONFORMITIES 

15.1 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, lots or uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be eliminated. 
15.2 - General standards of applicability. 
A.  Authority to Continue. Any structure, lot, or use that existed as a lawful nonconformity at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, and any building, structure, lot or use that has been made nonconforming because of the terms of this Ordinance or its subsequent amendments, may continue subject to the provisions of this Section so long as it remains otherwise lawful. A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, remains illegal if it does not conform with each and every requirement of this Ordinance, as described in Section 1.5.A (Existing Illegal Uses and Structures) 
B.  Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality. In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a nonconformity under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be upon the property owner of the nonconforming parcel, structure or use. 
C.  Safety Regulations. All police power regulations enacted to promote public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare including, but not limited to, all building, fire and health codes shall apply to nonconforming structures. 
15.3 - Nonconforming use. 
A.  Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use, provided it will not create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of nonconformity or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner. 
B.  Structural Alterations. No structural alterations shall be performed on any structure devoted to a nonconforming use, except in the following situations: 
1.  When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the building or structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with protecting the public safety. 
2.  When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing about a conforming use. 
3.  When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of any existing nonconformity or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner. 
C.  Expansion of Use. A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall not be expanded, extended, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall include, without limitation: 
1.  Expansion of any structure devoted entirely to a nonconforming use. 
2.  An expansion, extension or relocation of a use or its accessory uses to any land area or structure not currently occupied by such nonconforming use. 
3.  An expansion, extension or relocation of such use, including its accessory uses, within a structure, to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use. 
D.  Relocation. A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or parcel. The nonconforming use may only be relocated to another lot or parcel if the use conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated including all use regulations. 
E.  Change of Use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than one permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. When such a nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to a permitted use, the whole or part which has been made to conform may not be changed back to a use that is not permitted. A change of use shall be deemed to occur when an existing nonconforming use has been terminated and another use has commenced. Any change in use in violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed an abandonment of the previously existing lawful nonconforming use. 
F.  Discontinuation or Abandonmen. If a nonconforming use is discontinued, or the structure that it occupies becomes vacant, and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, such use shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be reestablished or resumed regardless of the intent to resume or to continue the use. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. The period of such discontinuance caused by government action, acts of God, or other acts without any contributing fault by the user, shall not be included in calculating the length of discontinuance for this Section. 
G.  Damage or Destruction. 
1.  In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is structurally damaged or destroyed by means within the control of the property owner or tenant, the structure and/or property and any subsequent use shall comply with all requirements of this Ordinance. 
2.  In the event that any structure and/or property that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use, is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, then the nonconforming use cannot be continued unless the structure, including foundation is made to conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.  In the event that any structure and/or property that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, the structure and/or property may be repaired, reconstructed or restored and the nonconforming use continued, provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit shall be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one (1) year of the date of damage or destruction, and construction shall be completed within one (1) year of issuance of the building permit. 
4.  The replacement value of the structure and/or property, which is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use, shall be based on: 1) the sale of that structure and/or property within the previous year or, if that is not applicable; 2) an appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not available; 3) the amount for which structure and/or property was insured prior to the date of damage or destruction or; 4) an alternative method determined acceptable by the City. 
5.  In the event that the permit is not obtained within one (1) year, or that repairs or restoration are not completed within one (1) year of the issuance of the building permit, then the nonconforming use shall not be continued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-80, 11-16-2009) 
15.4 - Nonconforming structures. 
A.  Repairs, Alterations, Additions and Enlargements. Normal maintenance, incidental repair, structural alterations, and additions or enlargements to nonconforming structures may be performed on any nonconforming structure when: 
1.  No existing nonconformity is increased in intensity; 
2.  No new nonconformity is created; and 
3.  The maintenance, repair, alteration, addition or enlargement meets all current applicable zoning standards. 
(See Figure 33: Alterations, Additions, and Enlargements) 
FIGURE 33: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS 

Note: The above figure is valid for both the vertical and the horizontal. 
B.  Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same zoning lot or parcel. A nonconforming structure may be relocated to another zoning lot or parcel if the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated. 
C.  Damage or Destruction. 
1.  In the event that any nonconforming structure is structurally damaged or destroyed by means within the control of the property owner or tenant, the structure, as restored or repaired, shall comply with all requirements of this Ordinance. 
2.  In the event that any nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, then the structure may not be restored or rebuilt unless the structure, including foundation is made to conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
3.  When such a structure is damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, it may be repaired and reconstructed provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit shall be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one (1) year of the date of damage or destruction, and the construction shall be completed within one (1) year of issuance of the building permit. 
4.  The replacement value of the structure shall be based on: 1) the sale of that structure within the previous year or, if that is not applicable; 2) an appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not available; 3) the amount for which the structure or property was insured prior to the date of the damage or destruction or; 4) an alternative method determined acceptable by the City. 
5.  In the event that the building permit is not obtained within one (1) year, or that repairs are not completed within one (1) year of the issuance of the building permit, then the structure shall not be restored unless it conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2019-14 , § 3, 2-4-2019) 
15.5 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    This section regulates lots of record which at one time were conforming, but which no longer conform to the lot area requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
A.  Lots of Record Held in Common Ownership (Any District). 
1.  If there are two (2) or more lots of record with contiguous frontage in common ownership, and one (1) or more of the lots does not meet the requirements for lot width or lot area as established by this Ordinance, the land so involved shall be considered to be a single undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of the parcel shall be used, transferred or conveyed which does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements established by this Ordinance. No division of the parcel shall be made which leaves the remaining lot(s) with lot width or lot area below the requirements of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for the use of any lot, or portion of a lot, transferred or conveyed in violation of this Section. 
2.  If there are two (2) or more lots of record with contiguous frontage in common ownership, and together the lots meet the bulk requirements as established by this Ordinance, the land so involved shall be considered to be a single undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of the parcel shall be used, transferred or conveyed which creates a violation of the bulk requirements of this Ordinance. No division of the parcel shall be made which leaves the remaining lot(s) in violation of the bulk requirements of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for the use of any lot, or portion of a lot, transferred or conveyed in violation of this Section. 
B.  Exceptions for Individual Lots of Record. 
1.  A nonconforming lot may not be improved. The only exception shall be: 
a.  In all residential districts, except for the R-1 District, a single-family dwelling may be erected on a single nonconforming lot of record that is at least six-thousand one-hundred fifty (6,150) square feet in lot area, provided that the lot meets all other zoning district bulk requirements, and that is was a lot of record as of September 2, 1975. 
b.  In the R-1 District every parcel which existed at the time the R-1 District was established on September 2, 1975, and which is reflected on a document filed with the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois, that does not meet the minimum requirements for lot width of seventy (70) feet and lot area of ten thousand (10,000) feet according to the requirements of the R-1 District may be used for a permitted use, provided that all other requirements of the R-1 District are met and that the parcel has a lot area of at least sixty five hundred (6,500) square feet and lot width of at least fifty (50) feet. 
2.  If an existing nonconforming lot of record in a residential district does not meet the requirements of Paragraph 1 or 2 above, whichever is applicable, it is unbuildable unless an administrative or major variance, whichever is applicable as determined by Section 4.4 (Zoning Variance), is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008) 
15.6 - Nonconforming signs. 
    The provisions for nonconforming signs are contained within Section 14.12 (Nonconforming Signs). 
Section 16 - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
History- Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008. 

16.1 - Purpose. 
    This Section of the Ordinance contains definitions for general terms and various generic uses permitted within the zoning districts and used throughout the Ordinance. 
16.2 - Interpretation. 
    The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
A.  The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
B.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present. 
C.  The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Both of the terms "shall not" and "may not" are prohibiting. 
E.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
F.  Whenever a defined word or term appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition. Any word appearing in parenthesis, between a word and its definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as that word. Words not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions considered to be normal dictionary usage. 
G.  If a definition contains a regulation and the use is inconsistent with that regulation, the use is prohibited. 
16.3 - General terms. 
    Abut. To have a common district boundary or zoning lot boundary. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a zoning lot line shall be considered to abut a zoning district even though it may be separated by any portion of a street, parkway, sidewalk, public way, alley, waterway or railroad right of way. The terms "adjacent," "adjoining" and "contiguous" shall have the same meaning as abutting. 
    Accessibility Ramp. A ramp or similar structure which provides wheelchair or similar access to a building. 
    Accessory Building or Structure. A building or structure located on the same lot as, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal building, the use of which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal building. (See Figure 34: Accessory Building) 
FIGURE 34: ACCESSORY BUILDING 

    Accessory Use. A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or building and located on the same lot as the principal use or building. 
    Addition or Enlargement. Any construction that increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or floor area. 
    Alley. A public right of way that normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. A street shall not be considered an alley. 
    Alteration. Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or structure. 
    Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment. An amateur (HAM) radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including equipment such as, but not limited to, a tower or alternative tower structure supporting a single, radiating antenna platform and other equipment. 
    Animal Hospital. An establishment for the care and treatment of the diseases and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their convalescence. An "Animal Hospital" shall not include "Kennel." 
    Appurtenance. An architectural feature of a structure that is higher than the remainder of the building it accompanies, such as a chimney, cupola, spire or parapet wall. 
    Architectural Feature. A part, portion or projection that contributes to the aesthetics of a structure, exclusive of signs, that is not necessary for the structural integrity of the building or to make the structure habitable. 
    Arbor. A freestanding structure used in a garden to support vines or climbing plants; also called a "Trellis." 
    Arrays. A group of antennas arranged by a wireless telecommunications service provider and placed on a tower, structure or building at a given height to provide the desired directional characteristics. 
    Art Gallery. A commercial establishment engaged in the sale, loan and/or display of paintings, sculpture, video art or other works. "Art Gallery" does not include "Cultural Facility," such as a library, museum or non-commercial gallery that may also display paintings, sculpture, video art or other works. 
    Assisted Living Facility. A facility that provides daily assistance and long-term residence for disabled or elderly individuals. This includes a combination of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living, such as dressing, grooming, bathing, etc. An "Assisted Living Facility" shall not include "Independent Living Facility," "Community Residence" or "Nursing Home". 
    Attic. An unfinished space below the roof of a structure. 
    Awning. A structure made of canvas, canvas-like or other materials affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure is able to be raised or retracted to a position against the building. For "Awnings" with advertising see "Sign, Awning". (See Figure 35: Awning) 
FIGURE 35: AWNING 

    Balcony. A platform which projects from the exterior wall of a building above the ground floor, is exposed to the open air, has direct access to the interior of the building, and is not supported by posts or columns extending to the ground. 
    Banquet Hall. An establishment which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions, such as banquets, weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations. Such use may or may not include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food, the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only during scheduled events and not open to the general public, and/or outdoor gardens or reception facilities. 
    Basement. That portion of a building located partly underground, but having one-half (1/2) or more of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground, which shall not count as a story. A basement with more than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor to ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground shall count as a story. (See Figure 36: Basement) 
FIGURE 36: BASEMENT 

    Bay Window. A window which projects outward from the building, that does not rest on the building foundation or on the ground. 
    Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise or fulfill other such purposes. 
    Body Art. The practice of physical body adornment, including, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, branding and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Illinois State Medical Board, such as implants under the skin. Nor does this definition include piercing of the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing systems. 
    Body Art Establishment. An establishment that offers or performs all or any kind of body art, either individually or in combination, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, profit or not for profit. 
    Body Piercing. Penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar that is generally permanent in nature, including, but not limited to, micro-dermal anchors, acts of suspension and sub-dermal/trans-dermal implants. "Body piercing" does not include practices that are considered medical procedures or the puncturing of the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear using a pre-sterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system. 
    Bowling Alley. Indoor facility for the sport of ten-pin or duck-pin bowling, with customary accessory uses such as snack bars. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one (1) or more streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of-way, bulkhead lines, shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the City of Park Ridge. 
    Building. A structure enclosed within exterior walls, built, erected and framed of a combination of materials and having a roof to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. 
    Buildable Area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the Ordinance have been subtracted. 
    Buildable Lot. A lot on which a building or other structure may be erected in conformity with this Ordinance and other City regulations. 
    Building, Attached. A building which has at least part of a wall in common with another building, or which is connected to another building by a roof. 
    Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot. A building connected to another building only by an unenclosed structure, such as a breezeway, shall be deemed to be a separate detached building. 
    Building Height (Principal Building). The vertical distance measured from grade, as defined by this Ordinance, to the highest point of the roof or the highest point of the structure. (See Figure 37: Building Height (Principal Building)) 
FIGURE 37: BUILDING HEIGHT (PRINCIPAL BUILDING) 

    Building Height (Accessory Building). The vertical distance measured from the floor to the highest point of the roof or structure. (See Figure 38: Building Height (Accessory Building or Structure)) 
FIGURE 38: BUILDING HEIGHT (ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE) 

    Building Line. The inner edge of any required yard or setback, and the corresponding outer edge of the buildable area. 
    Building Permit. An official document issued by the City which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving, or repair of a building or structure. 
    Building, Principal. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Building, Residential. A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one (1) or more families or households. This shall include, but is not limited to, the following types: single-family dwellings, two family dwellings, townhouse dwellings and multi-family dwellings. 
    Building, Temporary. Any building not designed to be permanently located, placed or affixed in the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed. 
    Bulk. A term encompassing the regulation of the size and location of a structure as it relates to its lot and to other structures. The term "bulk" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  Size and height of buildings. 
B.  Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to setback lines, lot lines, streets or other buildings. 
C.  All open spaces allocated to buildings. 
D.  Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit. 
    Bulletin Board. Any sign with a changeable message board erected in a permanent fashion by a public, charitable or religious institution upon the same property as the institution. 
    Business. An occupation, employment or enterprise that occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
    Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen (AANS) standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock, as measured at six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and as measured at twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
    Canopy. A permanent structure made of canvas, canvas-like or other materials affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure cannot be raised or retracted to a position against the building. For "Canopies" with advertising see "Sign, Canopy." (See Figure 39: Canopy) 
FIGURE 39: CANOPY 

    Car Wash. A commercial establishment engaged in the washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light duty equipment, whether automatic or by hand, within an enclosed building. 
    Carnival/Circus. A traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides, shows, games and/or concessions. 
    Cemetery. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, and necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries may be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    Central Business District. All blocks, parcels or tracts of land within the following described area shall be considered the Central Business District (CBD): Beginning at the intersection of the center lines of Busse Highway and Cumberland Avenue extended; thence south along the center line of Cumberland Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Garden Avenue; thence east along the center line of Garden Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Third Street; thence continuing southeast along the center line of Garden Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Fairview Avenue; thence southwest along the center line of Fairview Avenue to the intersection of the center line of the first alley southwest of Garden Avenue extended; thence southeast along the center line of alley to the intersection of the center line of the first alley southwest of Fairview Avenue; thence southwest and south along the center line of alley to the intersection of the center line of Crescent Avenue; thence east along the center line of Crescent Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Courtland Avenue; thence north along the center line of Courtland Avenue to the southerly property line of City Hall extended; thence in a generally easterly direction along the southerly property line of City Hall extended to the intersection of the center line of Vine Avenue; thence northeast to the intersection of the center line of Summit Avenue; thence southeast along the center line of Summit Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Ridge Terrace; thence northeast along the center line of Ridge Terrace to the intersection of the center line of Northwest Highway; thence southeast along the center line of Northwest Highway to the intersection of the center line of Washington Avenue; thence north along the center line of Washington Avenue to the intersection of the center line of Grant Place; thence west along the center line of Grant Place to the intersection of the center line of Prospect Avenue; thence continuing in a generally westerly direction along the center line of the first alley on the west side of Prospect Avenue north of Northwest Highway to the intersection of the center line of the first alley on the north side of Northwest Highway west of Prospect Avenue; thence north along rear property line of the lots facing Prospect Avenue to the north lot line of the second lot north of the alley on the west side of Prospect Avenue; thence west along the property line extended to the center line of the dead end alley parallel to Northwest Highway; thence northwest along the center line of the alley to the center line of the cross alley located on a line extended along the projection of the north right-of-way line of Summit Avenue; thence southwest, northwest, and north along the center line of the alley to the intersection of the center line of Cedar Street; thence west along the center line of Cedar Street to the intersection of the center lines of Meacham Avenue and Northwest Highway; thence northwest along the center line of Northwest Highway to the intersection of the center line of Morris Street; thence southwest and south along the center line of Morris Street to the intersection of the center line of Busse Highway; thence northwest along the center line of Busse Highway to point of beginning. 
    Chimney. A vertical shaft of reinforced concrete, masonry, or other material enclosing one (1) or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel. 
    Christmas Tree Sales Lot. A retail sales operation, generally conducted wholly outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis, Christmas trees and related holiday items such as wreaths and Christmas tree stands. 
    Classrooms with Laboratory Facilities (Medical-Related). Educational facilities for medical students, which may include laboratory facilities, for a medical-related educational program. "Classrooms with Laboratory Facilities (Medical-Related)" are specifically related to the H District and shall not include classrooms within the various "Educational Facilities." 
    Co-location. Placement of wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one (1) service or service provider on a single tower or site. 
    Commercial Vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire. This definition shall not include a commuter van, a vehicle currently being used for ride-sharing or a recreational vehicle that is not being used commercially. 
    Common Ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partner, or associate owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
    Community Residence. A group residence consisting of a group home or specialized residential care home licensed, certified or accredited by the appropriate state or federal agencies, and serving as a single housekeeping unit for the housing of unrelated persons with functional disabilities who share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects of residential living. "Community Residence" does not include a residence which services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse, nor does it include a nursing or medical facility. 
A.  Community Residence, Small: A community residence providing living accommodations for no more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff. Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence shall not be counted for purposes of establishing the number of residents. 
B.  Community Residence, Large: A community residence providing living accommodations for more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff. Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence shall not be counted for purposes of establishing the number of residents. 
    Compost Pile. A collection of decaying plant product for the purpose of producing a stabilized humus-like material that is potentially beneficial to plant growth and usable as a soil conditioner, top soil, growing medium additive or other similar use. 
    Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Park Ridge, as adopted and amended by the City Council. 
    Conforming Structure. Any structure that complies with all the regulations of this Ordinance, governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located or is designed or intended for a conforming use. 
    Contiguous. Adjoining or abutting. 
    Contractor Storage Yard. Any land or buildings used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery, building materials, paints, pipe, or electrical components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the conduct of any building trades or building craft. 
    Convent/Rectory. A building or group of buildings designed to provide group housing for persons under religious vows or orders. 
    Country Club. A club organized and operated primarily for social and outdoor recreation purposes with recreation facilities for members, their families and invited guests. 
    Court. An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building or buildings. 
    Cultural Facility. A use that is open to the public and provides cultural services and facilities including, but not limited to, museums, cultural centers, historical societies, aquariums and libraries operated by a public, private or non-profit organization. A "Heritage Center" shall not be included within the "Cultural Facility" use category. 
    Cupola. An architectural feature that consists of a small dome and a shaft that supportsit. 
    Currency Exchange. A commercial use that exchanges common currencies, sells money orders or cashiers checks, and cashes checks as its principal business activity. A "Currency Exchange" is not considered a "Financial Institution." 
    Day. When used in this Ordinance, "Day" shall mean one (1) calendar day 
    Day Care Center, Adult. A facility, other than within a residential dwelling unit, providing care for more than three (3) elderly and/or functionally-impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. "Adult Day Care Center" does not include a program operated by a "Place of Worship," that provides care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Day Care Center, Child. A facility, other than within a residential dwelling unit, providing care for more than three (3) children in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. "Child Day Care Center" does not include a program operated by an "Educational Facility" (all types) or "Place of Worship," that provides care for children three (3) years of age or older for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
    Day Care Home, Adult. A dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides care in a protective setting for up to twelve (12) elderly and/or functionally impaired adults who do not spend the night at the dwelling. 
    Day Care Home, Child. A dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides care for up to twelve (12), children from multiple households. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). 
    Deck. A raised platform structure built above grade, which is open to the sky and attached to the principal building. "Deck" shall not include "Terrace." 
    Density. The number of dwelling units per acre. 
    District. A contiguous portion of the City within which certain uniform regulations and/or requirements, apply under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    Dog House. An accessory structure designed for the containment of dogs and similar animals. 
    Dog Run. An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/or containment of dogs and similar animals. 
    Drip Line. An imaginary line encircling a tree corresponding to the furthest extension of the tree foliage. (See Figure 40: Drip Line) 
FIGURE 40: DRIP LINE 

    Drive-Through Facility. Premises used to provide or dispense products or services through an attendant, window or automated machine, to persons remaining in motor vehicles in a designated stacking aisle. A "Drive-Through Facility" may be in combination with other uses, such as a "Financial Institution," "Personal Services Establishment," "Retail Goods Establishment" or "Restaurant." A "Car Wash," "Motor Vehicle Service Station" or "Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Major and Minor)" shall not be considered to maintain a "Drive-Through Facility." 
    Driveway. A paved or unpaved strip of land providing vehicular access between the street and a parking space or garage of private or public property. 
    Driving Range. An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls and tees for practicing the striking of golf balls, which may include a snack-bar and pro-shop. Miniature golf courses are considered an "Outdoor Recreation Facility" and not a "Driving Range." 
    Dwelling. A building, or portion of a building, designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, townhouse and multi-family dwellings, but not including trailers, hotels/motels, rooming houses or automobiles. 
    Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor. Dwelling units within multi-story buildings located above non-residential uses on the ground floor. 
    Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling designed as a single structure, but containing more than one (1) dwelling unit, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate permanent residence for one (1) household or family. Each dwelling is separated from the other by a wall extending from the ground to the roof or a ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, Detached. A building containing a single dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building containing three (3) or more individual dwelling units with varying arrangements of party walls and entrances where each dwelling unit has an individual entrance to a common hallway or the outdoors. "Dwelling, Multi-Family" shall not include "Dwelling, Townhouse." 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one (1) individual dwelling unit, which is located on an individual lot and is not attached to any other dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, Townhouse. A structure consisting of no less than three (3) dwelling units, with no other dwelling, or portion of other dwelling, directly above or below,where each unit has a separate entrance and direct ground level access to the outdoors. These units are connected to other dwelling units by a single party wall with no opening. "Dwelling, Townhouse" shall not include "Dwelling, Multi-Family." "Dwelling, Townhouse" refers to the design of a building and does not reflect the type of ownership of the individual units. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed as a single structure, containing two (2) separate dwelling units, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate permanent residence for one (1) household or family. Each dwelling is separated from the other by a wall extending from the ground to the roof extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. Each dwelling unit shall have an individual entrance. "Dwelling, Two-Family" shall not include "Dwelling, Multi-Family" or "Dwelling, Townhouse." 
    Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit consists of a room or group of rooms, which include permanently installed bathroom and kitchen facilities, and are arranged, designed and used exclusively as living quarters for one (1) family or household. 
    Ear Piercing. The puncturing of the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear with a pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system, following manufacturer's instructions. Under no circumstances shall ear piercing studs and clasps be used anywhere on the body other than the non-cartilaginous portion and lobe of the ear. 
    Easement. An interest in land that provides for a specified use of that land by a person(s) other than the fee owner. 
    Eave. The projecting edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
    Educational Facility, College/University. A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees. The institution may also have research facilities, and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees. "Educational Facilities, College/University" also includes post-secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. "Educational Facilities, College/University" shall not include "Educational Facilities, Vocational." 
    Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary (Non-Residential). A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and/or senior high school levels. "Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary" also includes secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. 
    Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary (With Residential). A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and/or senior high school levels that includes residential boarding facilities for its students. 
    Educational Facility, Vocational School. A school established to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum. "Educational Facilities, Vocational School" shall not include "Educational Facilities, College/University." 
    Educational/Residential Boarding Campus. Any group of facilities offering residential and/or educational services for school-aged children (with or without their guardians) with accessory uses including parking and recreational services. (Ordinance 2011-88) 
    Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room only. A bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closet or dining alcove located directly off the principal room are customarily included within each efficiency unit. 
    Emergency Electrical Generator. A device for generating electrical energy. 
    Electronic Scrolling. The use of an electronic motor to move numbers or letters on a sign, either horizontally or vertically, through a range of numbers or letters built into the sign. 
    Elevator Penthouse. See "Penthouse." 
    EME/RF Study. A study of the amount of electromagnetic energy (EME) and radiofrequency (RF) emitted by a wireless telecommunications antenna. 
    Encroachment. The extension or placement of any structure or component of a structure into a required yard. 
    Entrance Way. The doorway into a building along with the architectural treatments that accompany it. 
    Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. 
    Exception. Modification to existing bulk and use standards within a zoning district granted as part of the special use or planned development application process. 
    Exterior Kitchenette. A complete cooking facility located outdoors typically involving a sink, stove or similar cooking range appliance and a food preparation counter. 
    Façade. The face of a building which looks onto any street or open space. 
    Fall-Out Shelter. An underground accessory building specifically designed for the protection of life from radioactive fallout. 
    Fall Zone. The area within a prescribed radius around the base of a wireless telecommunications tower. This is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris, such as ice, collapsing material or the collapse of the tower itself. 
    Family. A parent or parents and their children, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who are not parents and children, who maintain a common household in a dwelling unit. This definition does not include convents, rectories, sororities, fraternities or similar uses. 
    Farmer's Market. The offering for sale of produce or processed, packaged or prepared food, subject to the procedures and regulations set forth in the Park Ridge Municipal Code. 
    Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or other combination of materials of thirty (30) inches or more in height erected to enclose, screen or separate areas. Artificial barriers of less than thirty (30) inches shall be considered a landscape feature. 
    Fence, Open. A fence, including any gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at least fifty percent (50%) open space as compared to solid materials. 
    Fence, Solid. A fence, including gates, made entirely of opaque material. 
    Financial Institution. A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office, or automated teller machine (ATM). A "Financial Institution" shall not include a currency exchange or payday or title loan agency. 
    Fire Escape. A fireproof stairway, ladder or chute on the outside wall of a building intended to be used to help occupants escape from the building in case of fire or other calamity. 
    Flagpole. A freestanding structure on a lot used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. 
    Floor Area, Gross. "Gross Floor Area," when prescribed as the basis of measurement in this Ordinance and in accordance with Section 7.5 (Floor Area Ratio Measurement and Bonus Applicability), shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the plans of the several floors of a building, as measured from the outside face of the walls. 
    Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building or buildings are located, as measured from the outside face of the walls. "Floor Area Ratio" shall be measured in accordance with Section 7.5 (Floor Area Ratio Measurement and Bonus Applicability). 
    Footcandle. A unit of illumination. It is equivalent to the illumination at all points that are one (1) foot distant from uniform source of one (1) candlepower. 
    Forest Preserve. Designated open space that preserves natural features and protects wildlife and critical environmental features. A "Forest Preserve" may include opportunities for passive recreation and environmental education. 
    Frequency. The term "Frequency" signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound. 
    Funeral Home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial display of the deceased and rituals before burial or cremation. A "Funeral Home" includes chapels located within the building used for the display of the deceased and the conducting of rituals before burial or cremation. 
    Garage. A building, either attached or detached, used or designed to be used for storage of automobiles and accessory storage related to the use of the principal dwelling. 
    Gazebo. A freestanding outdoor structure that is open-sided and designed for recreational use and not for habitation. 
    Golf Course. A tract of land laid out with at least nine (9) holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms and shelters as accessory uses. A "Driving Range" may be included as part of a "Golf Course." 
    Government Facility and Offices. A building or structure owned, operated and/or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. "Government Facility and Offices" does not include "Public Safety Facility" or "Public Works Facility," nor does it include park district field houses or recreation centers, which would be considered a "Park," or school buildings, which would be considered "Educational Facilities." 
    Grade. The elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of principle buildings. "Grade" shall be the mean level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. The mean grade shall be calculated from the grade elevations at the four (4) points of intersection of an imaginary line drawn parallel to both the rear and front yard setback lines across the front and rear facades, where the imaginary line intersects the side yard setback. Where applicable, for structures other than the principle building, "Grade" may refer to the mean level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to a structure. 
    Green Roof. The creation of contained green space on the roof of a structure, where plants are not planted in the ground but applied as another layer of the roofing system. 
    Greenhouse, Private. A building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. 
    Health/Fitness Center. An establishment that provides exercise facilities such as running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports and swimming, as well as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, saunas and other related accessory uses. 
    Heavy Retail, Rental and Service Establishment. This use includes retail, rental and/or service establishments that have permanent outdoor service or storage areas, or partially enclosed structures including, but not limited to, large-scale home improvement centers, lumberyards, heavy equipment rental and leasing, recreational vehicles, and playground equipment sales and rental. 
    Hedge. A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes or other kind of plant forming a boundary or fence. 
    Height. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of a structure. See "Building Height." 
    Helistop. Any area used or to be used for the landing or take off of helicopters, or other steep gradient aircraft capable of hovering, but does not afford refueling, maintenance or repair facilities, and accommodates only a single helicopter. 
    Heritage Center. One or more buildings and/or open space, previously designated as a local landmark, within which an historically significant era or activity is displayed for public viewing. The retail sale of crafts and other works and the provisions of entertainment, may be included as part of a "Heritage Center" if they are complementary to the displayed area or activity. One (1) dwelling unit for the "Heritage Center" caretaker shall also be permitted within the premises. A "Heritage Center" shall not be included within the "Cultural Facility" use category. 
    Home Occupation. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the resident, where the use of the dwelling unit for the occupation is secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes 
    Hospital. An institution providing health services primarily for inpatient, or medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and including the related facilities located within a "Hospital," such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities and classrooms, central service facilities and staff offices are integral to the facility. 
    Hot Tub. An artificial container of water designed with a mechanical air injection system and/or circulating device for recreational use. 
    Hotel/Motel. An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary lodging services, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed linens, and telephone and desk service. Related ancillary uses may include, but shall not be limited to, conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars and recreational facilities. 
    Household. The person or persons living together in a dwelling unit. 
    Impervious Surface. The portion of a site occupied by structures, pavement or other surfaces that do not allow for the absorption of water. 
    Incompatible Use. A use that is incapable of direct association with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant. 
    Independent Living Facility. A residential complex containing dwellings where the occupancy is limited to persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age or older or, if two (2) persons occupy a unit, at least one (1) shall be fifty-five (55) years or older. Such facilities may include common areas for meals and socializing, offer minimal convenience services, but exclude institutional care such as medical or nursing care. An "Independent Living Facility" shall not include "Assisted Living Facility," "Community Residence" or "Nursing Home." 
    Indoor Entertainment Facility. Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building including, but not limited to, movie theaters and sport or game matches or exhibitions. An "Indoor Entertainment Facility" includes accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment stands, which are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons. "Indoor Entertainment" shall not include "Indoor Recreation" or "Live Entertainment." "Indoor Entertainment" is distinguished from "Indoor Recreation" in that the predominant use is spectator-oriented and not participatory. 
    Indoor Recreation Facility. Predominantly participant uses where recreational activities or games of skill are conducted within a wholly enclosed building including, but not limited to, a bowling alley, pool hall, miniature golf course, arcade, indoor tennis courts, indoor sports arenas, indoor swimming pools, or similar uses. An "Indoor Recreation Facility" shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment stands that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons. "Indoor Recreation Facility" may also include those establishments that maintain a restaurant on-premises for patrons of the establishment. "Indoor Recreation Facility" shall not include "Indoor Entertainment." Park district field houses with indoor recreation facilities are not considered "Indoor Recreation." 
    Intensity of Use. Any factor such as square feet of gross floor area, number of dwelling units or number of employees used as a basis for requiring parking or loading facilities. 
    Kennel. An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are temporarily boarded for pay or remuneration of any sort. "Kennel" shall include those facilities where pet animals are boarded for the day. "Kennel" shall not apply to zoos or animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law where the boarding of animals is accessory to medical treatment. 
    Kiosk. A small permanent municipal structure on a sidewalk or in a public place where one can obtain information, e.g. visitor information, shopping areas, and community events. 
    Land Banking. Designating land on a site to be held and preserved for an identified future purpose, such as additional parking. See "Parking, Land Banked." 
    Lighting, Goose-neck. A slender curved shape, resembling the neck of a goose. 
    Lighting, Series. A number of lights arranged in a pattern or coming one after the other in succession or a string of lights. 
    Lighting, Shielded. A fixture that is shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Lighting, Unshielded. A fixture that allows light, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture or a reflector, to be emitted above the horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Light Trespass. The spilling of light, whether directly, indirectly or by glare onto a lot, parcel or public way other than the lot or parcel on which the light fixture is located. 
    Live Entertainment. A musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret or comedy act performed live by one (1) or more persons. "Restaurants" that regularly host such performances shall be considered "Live Entertainment" uses. Nightclubs that include dancing by patrons and guests are considered "Live Entertainment" uses. A "Live Entertainment" establishment may possess a liquor license and food for consumption on the premises. 
    Loading Berth. A space within a loading facility exclusive of driveways, aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscaping areas, office and work areas for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading goods or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access. 
    Logo. A business trademark or symbol. 
    Lot. A parcel of land with distinct boundaries. A lot may be a lot of record or a parcel that is not of record but bounded within a legal description. 
    Lot Area. The computed area contained within the boundary lines of a lot. 
    Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting streets, and where the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). The point of intersection of the lot lines abutting the street is the corner of the lot in question. A lot that abuts a curved street or streets shall be considered a "Corner Lot" if the tangents to the curve at the curve's point of beginning between the side lot lines, or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the lot line abutting the street, intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°). In such cases, the corner of the lot in question is that point on the lot line abutting a street nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents above described. (See Figure 41: Corner and Interior Lots) 
FIGURE 41: CORNER AND INTERIOR LOTS 

    Lot Coverage. The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory structures, expressed as a percentage of total lot area. Lot coverage shall not include driveways, parking spaces, patios, sidewalks, swimming pools or water gardens and other similar impervious or semi-impervious surfaces (See Figure 42: Lot Coverage) 
FIGURE 42: LOT COVERAGE 

    Lot Depth. The distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, determined by measuring from the deepest point of the rear lot line to the front lot line. (See Figure 43: Lot Width and Lot Depth) 
FIGURE 43: LOT WIDTH AND LOT DEPTH 

    Lot, Double-Frontage. A lot having frontage on two (2) streets at opposite ends of the lot, which is not a "Corner Lot." (See Figure 44) 
FIGURE 44: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT 

    Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a double-frontage lot. (See Figure 41) 
    Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot. Where any portion of the lot extends into an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the established or existing street or alley right-of-way line. 
    Lot Line, Front. The lot line which abuts an existing or dedicated street. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the "Front Lot Line" of a "Corner Lot" or a "Reverse Corner Lot" shall be the shortest street frontage of the lot. 
    Lot Line, Interior. A lot line which does not abut a street or alley. 
    Lot Line, Rear. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot and for purposes of determining the rear yard dimension, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten (10) feet in length, within the lot, which is parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. The ten (10) foot chord for an irregular lot is shown in Figure 45: Rear Lot Line Chord for Irregular Lots. 
FIGURE 45: REAR LOT LINE CHORD FOR IRREGULAR LOTS 

    Lot Line, Side. Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot of Record. A single lot which is part of a subdivision or resubdivision which has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois. 
    Lot, Reverse Corner. A "Corner Lot" where the side lot line adjoining a street is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. (See Figure 46) 
FIGURE 46: REVERSE CORNER LOT 

    Lot Width. The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the required front yard setback line. (See Figure 43) 
    Lot, Zoning. A single tract of land located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A "Zoning Lot" may or may not coincide with a "Lot of Record." 
    Luminaire. A complete lighting unit extending from a support structure, parallel to the ground, consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts. A "Luminaire" does not include a pole or other support. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure constructed of durable material extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground. 
    Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment shall include heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) units. "Emergency Electrical Generators" are not considered "Mechanical Equipment." 
    Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis, or as further defined by the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act and/or rules promulgated there under, as amended. 
    Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization. A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients, or as further defined by the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act and/or rules promulgated there under, as amended. 
    Medical/Dental Clinic. A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. "Medical Clinics" shall also include alternative medicine clinics, such as acupuncture and physical therapy offices, which provides integrated care in the treatment of permanent or temporary neurologic and musculoskeletal disabilities. Massage establishments where such service is provided by a practice by a certified massage therapist or similar licensed professional shall not be considered a "Physical Therapy Office," but rather a "Personal Services Establishment." 
    Medical/Dental Laboratory. A business establishment engaged in the testing and analysis of material for medical or dental services, or in the construction, alteration or repair of bridges, crowns, dentures, eyewear, contact lenses, orthodontic appliances or any other prosthetic appliances. Direct contact with patients for consultation, treatment or other services are not included as part of the business activities. 
    Medical Support Facilities. Uses and facilities such as, but not limited to, onsite medical waste storage and disposal, warehousing and storage of medical related equipment and supplies, garages, and other facilities commonly associated with the operation of "Hospitals." 
    Meeting/Event Room. A room not exceeding 2,200 square feet which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions, such as civic, non-profit, educational or social purposes. Such use may or may not include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food, the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only during scheduled events. 
    Memorial Plaque. A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure or site. 
    Mezzanine. A partial story occurring between two (2) main stories of a building. 
    Mortuary. An establishment where the deceased are prepared for burial. The facility may include a small chapel for the conduct of services prior to burial. 
    Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of persons or goods along public streets. 
    Motor Vehicle Dealership. Any business establishment that sells or leases new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats or motorcycles, or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An automobile dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on-site or at a nearby location, and may provide on-site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership. 
    Motor Vehicle Operations Facility. A privately-owned facility for the dispatch, storage and maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles, taxicabs and other livery vehicles. "Motor Vehicle Operations Facility" shall not include "Public Works Facility" or "Public Safety Facility," where the vehicles of the fire, police or other municipal departments are dispatched, stored and/or maintained. 
    Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment. Rental of automobiles and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of rental vehicles. 
    Motor Vehicle Service Station. A business where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel for motor vehicles are stored and dispersed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. 
    Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major. Such use includes, but shall not be limited to, establishments involved in engine rebuilding, major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, towing and collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and painting of motor vehicles. 
    Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. Such use includes, but is not limited to, minor repairs to motor vehicles, including repair or replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems, brake adjustments, relining and repairs, wheel servicing, alignment and balancing, repair and replacement of shock absorbers, and replacement or adjustment of mufflers and tail pipes, hoses, belts, light bulbs, fuses, windshield wipers/wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, and the like. "Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor" includes establishments where gasoline and/or fuel oil, and oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories are sold in addition to the repair facilities. 
    Movie Theater. A theater designed for showing movies or motion pictures. 
    MPE. "MPE" stands for Maximum Permissible Exposure to radiofrequencies. This standard, calculated by the Federal Communications Commission, is the safe level of exposure of persons to radiofrequencies, such as those emitted by wireless telecommunications antennas. 
    Nameplate. A sign indicating the name, address or profession of the person or persons occupying the lot or a part of the building. 
    Nonconforming Lot. A lot of record that does not meet the lot area or lot width requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming Structure. Structures which at one time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but because of subsequent amendments to the Zoning Ordinance no longer conform to applicable yard, height, lot coverage or other dimensional or bulk provisions or does not meet other on-site development standards, such as an insufficient number of parking spaces, of this Ordinance, are considered nonconforming structures. 
    Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use is the use of land and structures that, as of the effective date of this Ordinance, are used for purposes that are not permitted in the zoning district in which they are located. Uses that were specifically authorized as a special use shall not be considered nonconforming uses even if the use is no longer permitted within that zoning district. 
    Nursing Home. A facility providing bed care and inpatient services on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis for persons requiring regular medical attention. This definition excludes a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services, or a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease or communicable disease. A "Nursing Home" shall not include "Independent Living Facility," "Assisted Living Facility," "Community Residence" or "Hospital." 
    Occupancy Certificate. A certificate that permits the use and/or occupancy of a structure or portion of a structure after it is constructed, reconstructed, remodeled or moved, indicating that the proposed occupancy or use complies with all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
    Office Park. A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings and supporting ancillary uses with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility. 
    Office, Professional. A use that engages in the processing, manipulation or application of business information or professional expertise. Such an office may or may not offer services to the public. A "Professional Office" is not materially involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing of physical products for the retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the repair of products or retail services. It is characteristic of a "Professional Office" that retail or wholesale goods are not shown on the premises to a customer. Examples include, but are not limited to, professional offices for non-profit organizations, advertising, accounting, investment services, insurance, contracting, architecture, engineering, legal services and real estate services. "Professional Office" does not include government offices, which are considered "Government Facility and Offices." 
    Open Space (Bulk Regulation). Land within a zoning lot devoted to landscaping, lawns and other similar uses. Open space shall not include driveways, streets, parking lots or spaces, sidewalks, plazas, terraces, patios, swimming pools, decks or other similar impervious or semi-impervious surfaces. 
    Ordinance, This. This Zoning Ordinance, as from time to time amended. 
    Outdoor Dining. A seating area located outdoors of a contiguous restaurant, usually in addition to an indoor seating area. 
    Outdoor Entertainment Facility. Predominantly spectator uses conducted outdoors in open or only partially enclosed facilities. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, fairgrounds, outdoor stadiums, outdoor theaters, raceways, rodeos, music arenas, theme parks and amusement parks. "Outdoor Entertainment Facilities" shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment stands that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons. "Outdoor Entertainment Facility" shall not include "Outdoor Recreation Facility." 
    Outdoor Recreation Facility. Predominantly participant uses that take place outside of a building including, but not limited to, miniature golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, skateboard parks, and other similar facilities. "Outdoor Recreation Facilities" shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment stands that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons. "Outdoor Recreation Facilities" may also include those establishments that maintain a restaurant on-premises for patrons of the establishment. "Outdoor Recreation Facility" shall not include "Outdoor Entertainment Facility," "Parks," "Golf Courses" and "Driving Ranges." 
    Outdoor Sales and Display. Part of a lot used for outdoor sales and/or display of goods accessory to the principal use. 
    Outdoor Fireplace. A self-contained, manufactured noncombustible cooking unit provided with a tight-fitting screen or lid and supported off the ground by non-combustible legs. 
    Outdoor Storage. The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise or equipment not within an enclosed building. An item shall be deemed to be in storage if it is being maintained or repaired on a premises. 
    Owner. A titleholder of record, or if title is held in trust, the beneficiary of the trust. A long-term lessee may also be deemed an owner, provided that at time of application, not less than twenty (20) years remain on the lease. 
    Parapet Wall. That portion of a wall which extends above the roof line. 
    Park. A non-commercial, not-for-profit facility designed to serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. "Parks" include, but are not limited to, ballfields, football fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, playgrounds and park district field houses that may have indoor recreation facilities. 
    Parking, Land Banked. Designating land on a site to be held and preserved for an additional parking. 
    Parking, Off-Street. The storage space for an automobile on premises other than streets, alleys or rights-of way. 
    Parking, On-Street. The storage space for an automobile that is located within the street right-of-way. 
    Parking, Tandem. A parking space within a group of two (2) or more parking spaces arranged one behind the other. 
    Parking Lot (Principal Use). An open, hard-surfaced area, other than street or public way, available to the public, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles. Such storage may be for compensation, free or as an accommodation to residents of a multi-family dwelling, or clients and customers of a business. 
    Parking Structure Principal Use. A structure composed of one (1) or more levels or floors used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking structure may be totally below grade, as in an underground parking garage, or either partially or totally above grade with those levels being either open or enclosed. 
    Parkway. The area, excluding the sidewalk, if any, between the property line and the curb or, in the absence of a curb, between the property line and the nearest edge of the street paving. 
    Party Wall. A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof, that separates one (1) building from another, but is in joint use by each building. 
    Patio. An impervious surface at finished grade designed and intended for recreational use by people and not as a parking space. 
    Penthouse. An enclosed structure above the roof of a building, other than a roof structure or bulkhead. A "Penthouse" shall not be used for purposes other than shelter of mechanical equipment or shelter of vertical shaft openings in the roof. 
    Performance Standards. A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare of heat generated by or inherent in use of land or buildings. 
    Pergola. A freestanding structure usually consisting of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of girders and cross rafters. A "Pergola" is built as an outdoor sitting area with lattice or open slat roof for partial shade. 
    Permanent Make-up. The practice of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin for the purpose of permanent cosmetic enhancement or restoration of the eyebrows, lips, hair line on the top of the skull, or for areola re-pigmentation. Permanent make-up does not include body art, body piercing or the adornment of the body with letters, images, drawings, or other illustrations. Permanent make-up is a form of tattooing, and is also known as: cosmetic tattooing, permanent cosmetics, micropigmentation, dermal implantation, micro blading / micro stroking, eyebrow embroidery, and long-time/long-lasting makeup. 
    Permanent Make-up Establishment. An establishment that offers or performs permanent make-up procedures, either as a stand-alone business, or as part of another personal services establishment. 
    Permitted Use. A use permitted in a zoning district upon satisfaction of the standards and requirements of this Ordinance. A permitted use does not require special administrative review and approval. 
    Person with a Disability. A person has a "disability" for purposes of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) if she or he: 1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity; 2) has a record of such an impairment; or 3) is regarded as having such an impairment. A person must satisfy at least one (1) of these three (3) parts of the definition to be considered an individual with a disability. 
    Personal Services Establishment. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, permanent make-up, massage parlors, shoe repair, laundromats, pet groom establishments, rental and repair shops, dry cleaners and tailors. Not included under the definition of "Personal Services Establishment" are body art and body art establishment. 
    Place of Worship. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. 
    Planned Development. The subdivision and/or development of a land area as a single unified development, where certain Zoning Ordinance regulations, such as bulk and use standards, may be modified to allow for more flexible planning in conformance with the planned unit development standards and approval processes. 
    Playground. An area developed for active play and recreation that may contain courts for such games as basketball or tennis, or recreational equipment such as trampolines. 
    Porch. A structure, which can be enclosed or unenclosed, that projects from the exterior wall of a building, has direct access to the street level of the building, and is covered by a roof or eaves. An "Unenclosed Porch" is a porch that is open on two (2) or more sides. An "Enclosed Porch" is a porch that is enclosed by walls, screens, lattice or other material on two (2) or more sides. A screened-in porch shall be considered an "Enclosed Porch." 
    Principal Use. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from an accessory use. 
    Property Line. The lines forming the boundary of a zoning lot. 
    Public Safety Facility. Facilities operated by public safety agencies including fire stations and other fire prevention and firefighting facilities, and police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities. The vehicles of fire and police may be dispatched, stored and/or maintained within the "Public Safety Facility." 
    Public Use Area (for Parking Standard Calculations). The area within a use to which the public or select members of the public have access including, but not limited to, such areas as dining rooms, restrooms, bar seating, display areas, etc. 
    Public Works Facility and Utility. All production, storage, transmission and recovery facilities for water, sewer, telephone and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency or utility. This includes any municipal repair, storage or production facility or public works yard, as well as any accessory office or meeting rooms. Municipal vehicles may be dispatched, stored and/or maintained within the "Public Works Facility." "Public Works Facility and Utility" does not include "Public Safety Facility." 
    Pumpkin Patch. A retail sales operation, generally conducted wholly outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis, pumpkins and related holiday (Halloween) items. 
    Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle, or similar means of human transportation, used primarily for recreational purposes. "Recreational Vehicle" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Boat/Raft. Any unit that is used for water travel. 
B.  Camper Trailer. A non-self propelled motor vehicle designed to be towed and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational use. 
C.  Motor Home. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self propelled vehicle. 
D.  Pickup Coach. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation uses. 
E.  Snowmobile. A "Snowmobile" is a motorized vehicle used for travel over snow or ice. 
F.  Jet Ski. A "Jet Ski" or other type of personal watercraft is a motorized vehicle used for travel over water. 
    Real Estate Model Unit. A residential unit temporarily used for display purposes as an example of dwelling units available or to be available for sale or rental in a particular subdivision or other residential development. Model units may also incorporate sales or rental offices for dwellings within the development. 
    Rehabilitation Facility. Structures and land used for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where one (1) or more patients are provided with care, meals and lodging. 
    Research and Development Facility. An establishment where research and development is conducted in the following industries: biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. "Research and Development Facilities" do not involve the manufacture, fabrication, processing or sale of products. 
    Retaining Wall. A raised area of soil that is supported or enclosed around an edge or edges by stone or timber, designed to resist lateral earth and/or fluid pressures. This definition of "Retaining Wall" shall, for the purposes of this Ordinance, exclude terracing of thirty (30) inches or less used as a landscape feature. 
    Restaurant. A structure in which the principal use is the preparation and sale of food and beverages for consumption on the premises or for carry-out. "Restaurant" shall not include accessory restaurants, snack bars or refreshment stands accessory to "Indoor or Outdoor Entertainment Facilities" and "Indoor or Outdoor Recreation Facilities." A "Restaurant" with live performances (music, theater, etc.) shall be considered "Live Entertainment." 
    Retail Goods Establishment. A commercial enterprise that provides physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. "Retail Goods Establishment" shall not include "Heavy Retail, Rental and Service Establishments." 
    Satellite Dish Antenna. A dish antenna designed for transmitting signals to a receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, communication or other signals from other antennas, satellites, or other services. 
    Self-Service Storage Facility. A facility used only for the storage of personal property (no commercial storage) where individual renters control individual storage spaces and no commercial transactions are permitted other than the rental of the storage units. 
    Setback. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a property line. (See Figure 47: Setback) 
FIGURE 47: SETBACK 

    Sexually-Oriented Business. "Sexually-Oriented Business" shall include the following, as defined by this Section and this Ordinance: adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets, adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theaters, adult novelty stores, and other similar uses. 
A.  Adult Bookstore. An establishment having at least twenty-five percent (25%) of its sales or display area devoted to books, magazines, films for sale or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Anatomical Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." This shall include any establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated booths or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
B.  Adult Entertainment Cabaret. A public or private establishment which features topless dancers, strippers, go-go dancers, male or female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows, not infrequently features entertainers who display "Specified Anatomical Areas." Included are those uses which feature entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or conduct, perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in explicit simulation of "Specified Sexual Activities." 
C.  Adult Health Spa/Sauna. A health spa, sauna or massage parlor that provides steam bathes, heat bathing, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body, and is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." This definition does not include health clubs, health spas, salons or similar establishments that offer massage therapy or other manipulation of the human body provided by a licensed massage therapist. 
D.  Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video cassette recorders, DVDs or DVD players, slides, or other photographic reproductions for viewing or recording, characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas" and/or rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four (24) hour period. 
E.  Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." 
F.  Adult Novelty Store. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing novelties, lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for "Specialized Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas." This includes an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
G.  Specified Sexual Activities. For the purpose of this Ordinance, "Specified Sexual Activities" means: 1) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 2) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and 3) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
H.  Specified Anatomical Areas. For the purposes of this Ordinance, "Specified Anatomical Areas" means: 1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 2) human genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Shade Tree. A deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy. A large shade tree is over forty (40) feet in height. Medium shade trees are between twenty-five (25) and forty (40) feet in height. Small shade trees reach up to twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
    Shed. A relatively small accessory building often purchased pre-built or as a kit in pre-fabricated sections not designed to be served by heat or plumbing, and not placed on a permanent foundation. A "Shed" is typically intended to store lawn, garden or pool care equipment. 
    Shopping Center. A group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned, owned and managed as a single property. The center's size and orientation are generally determined by the market characteristics of the trade area served by the center. The two (2) main configurations of shopping centers are malls and strip centers. See "Strip Center Development" below. 
    Sign. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or attention-getting device which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or lot, and which directs attention to a person, business, product, service, place, organization or entertainment. "Sign" shall not include the flag of any nation, state or governmental entity. With respect to installation, permitting and maintenance regulations, the term "sign" shall apply to the entire structure including the foundation and supports. 
    Sign, Advertising Bench. Any bench that is used in whole or in part for advertising purposes by means of a message or design painted on, printed on, affixed to or otherwise designed as an integral part of the bench. 
    Sign, A-Frame. An advertising device ordinarily in the shape of an "A," or some variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily movable, and usually two-sided. 
    Sign, Awning. A sign that is mounted on, painted on or attached to an awning. 
    Sign, Balloon. Any sign that is any lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon attached by means of a rope or tether to a definite or fixed location. Displays designed to inflate or move by use of a fan or blower shall also be considered a balloon sign. 
    Sign, Banner. Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material with or without frames. 
    Sign, Canopy. . A sign on a rigid structure attached to a building or other freestanding structure with a roof that is designed with drive lanes underneath the structure. 
    Sign, Construction. A sign that identifies the name of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
    Sign, Directional. A sign that identifies parking lot entrances and exits, restrooms, public telephone, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar nature. 
    Sign, Directory. A sign that serves as common or collective classification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zoning lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons or businesses included, but carry no other advertising matter. 
    Sign, Election. Signs announcing the support or opposition of political candidates, political parties or referenda for any national, state or local election. 
    Sign, Electronic Message Boards. Any permanent sign which uses a pattern of lights to form a message or messages wherein the sequence of messages may be modified by electronic processes allowing the sign face to intermittently change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face. 
    Sign, For-Sale/For-Rent. A sign advertising property for-sale or for-rent. 
    Sign, Ground. A sign that is attached to a completely self-supporting structure. A freestanding sign may be a pole or monument sign. See "Sign, Ground - Monument" and "Sign, Ground - Pole." 
    Sign, Ground - Monument. Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure. "Freestanding Monument Signs" are typically mounted on a masonry base. As distinguished from "Sign, Freestanding - Pole," the sign base of any monument sign shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the width of the sign face that is to be situated upon the base. See also "Sign, Ground." 
    Sign, Ground - Pole. A sign erected and maintained on one (1) or two (2) freestanding mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building, but not including "Sign, Ground - Monument." See also "Sign, Ground." 
    Sign, Identification. A sign containing only the name and address of the building or development 
    Sign, Marquee. A sign that is attached to a marquee. 
    Sign, Municipal. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to, and in discharge of, any municipal functions or as required by law including, but not limited to, speed limit signs, stop signs, City limit signs, street name signs, historical or government site, and directional signs. 
    Sign, Nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance that does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
    Sign, Occupational. A sign indicating the name and profession of an occupant of the lot or a part of the building. 
    Sign, Off-Premise. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at any location other than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
    Sign, Pennant. Any lightweight material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Sign, Permanent. A sign attached to a building, structure or the ground which is made of materials intended for long-term use. 
    Sign Permit. A permit for erection, alteration or relocation of a sign. 
    Sign, Political. A sign advocating action on a public issue. 
    Sign, Projecting. Any sign that is attached to a building or other structure, and extends beyond the surface of the building or structure to which it is attached. 
    Sign, Portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended, by design and construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. "Portable Signs" shall include but are not limited to signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed. 
    Sign, Roof. Any sign wholly erected, constructed or maintained upon or above the roof structure or parapet of any building with the principal support attached to the roof structure. 
    Sign, Static Pricing Boards. An illuminated freestanding changeable copy sign intended to display a menu selection/pricing board for restaurant drive-up windows located in the area between the building and the drive-through land or for gas stations to display the price of gas on a permitted ground or pole sign. 
    Sign Support Structure. Any structure that supports, or is capable of supporting, a sign, including decorative cover. 
    Sign, Vertical. Also referred to as Teardrop Wind Banners, Beachingwings, Feather Flag, Flapping or Wave signs are signs with a pole primarily on one side that has a lightweight material hung from the pole in a vertical direction and designed to move in the wind. May be single sided or double sided and may or may not rotate. 
    Sign, Wall. A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than twelve (12) inches from the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. "Wall Sign" shall not include "Window Sign." 
    Sign, Window. A sign attached to, placed upon, or printed on the interior or exterior of a window or door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such a building. A "Window Sign" may be either permanent or temporary. 
    Single Ownership. A lot where the owner does not own adjoining vacant property. 
    Site Plan Review. The review of a site plan and other studies to assist in determining the manner in which the applicant intends to make use of his/her property. 
    Social Club or Lodge. A membership organization and its premises that holds regular meetings and caters exclusively to members and their guests for social, intellectual, recreational or athletic purposes. A "Social Club or Lodge" may, subject to other regulations controlling such uses, maintain dining facilities, possess a liquor license, or engage professional entertainment for the enjoyment of dues-paying members and their guests. "Social Club or Lodge" shall not include "Country Club." 
    Special Use. A use that owing to some special characteristics attendant to its operation or installation is permitted in a zoning district only after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and approval by the City Council. A use is a special use if it is designated as such in this Ordinance. 
    Stacking Space. A space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles patronizing a drive-in business. 
    Steps and Stoops. An exterior floor typically, but not necessarily, constructed of concrete and/or masonry, with a finished floor elevation higher than the adjacent ground level. A stoop typically has with steps leading up to it and is utilized primarily as an access platform to a building. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement with less than one-half (1/2) of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground shall count as a story. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there is not more than a four (4) foot difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one third ( 1 / 3 ) of the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is more than twenty four (24) feet. (See Figure 48: Story) 
FIGURE 48: STORY 

    Story, Half. A story located directly under a sloping roof where the area that has a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet is less than two-thirds ( 2 / 3 ) of the area of the story below. 
    Street. A permanent public or private right of way or easement which is platted for common use as the primary means of access for motor vehicles to properties adjoining it. 
    Street, Arterial. A Street that traverses the City and provides for through traffic movement in the region while permitting direct access to abutting property. Arterial Streets are identified in the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Park Ridge 
    Street, Frontage. All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all of the property along the side of the street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead end street. 
    Street Level. The story of a building that has its floor at the closest level to the street, with direct pedestrian access to that story from the outside. 
    Street Line. The street right of way line abutting a property line of a lot. 
    Street Wall. The wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street. 
    Strip Center Development. A pattern of commercial development comprised of two (2) or more separate businesses, generally one (1) lot in depth with commercial activity arranged in a line, usually along an arterial street. 
    Structural Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
    Swimming Pool. A receptacle for water and/or an artificial pool of water over twenty-four (24) inches in depth, or with a surface area exceeding two-hundred fifty (250) square feet designated for recreational or fitness use by persons. 
    Tattooing. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
    Temporary Contractor Trailer. This use includes security trailers, construction equipment sheds, contractor trailers and similar uses incidental to a construction project and sales of homes within a newly constructed development. 
    Temporary Overnight Shelter. A building, or portion of a building not otherwise zoned or approved for temporary occupancy, in which limited sleeping accommodations are provided. 
    Temporary Storage Trailers and Temporary Storage Containers. Temporary self-storage trailers and containers delivered to residential or commercial uses for the resident or business owner to store belongings, and then picked up and returned to a warehouse. These trailers and containers are also known as "PODS" (Portable On-Demand Storage). 
    Tent. Any temporary structure or enclosure, the roof of which or one-half or more of the sides are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric, or similar pliable material. 
    Terrace. A raised impervious surface designed and intended for recreational use by people and not as a parking space. A "Terrace" shall be distinguished from a "Deck" in that the raised impervious surface is built upon a solid base, such as an earthen mound. 
    Thoroughfare. An arterial or collector street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Tractor. A motorized commercial vehicle designed and constructed to pull other vehicles, including, but not limited to trailers, semi-trailers, farm equipment or construction equipment. 
    Trailer, Storage. A trailer that serves as a temporary structure limited to the provisions of Section 10.4. 
    Trailer, Vehicle. Any non-self-propelled, wheeled vehicle, designed for carrying persons or property when drawn by a motor vehicle. This definition of "trailer" also includes "semi-trailer." A "semi-trailer" is a type of trailer without a front axle and/or where a portion of the weight of the trailer is supported by a dolly, landing gear apparatus, tail of another trailer, or by the fifth wheel or other portion of a tractor. 
    Transition Yard. Land area with landscape plantings and other components used to visibly separate one use from another, or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
    Trellis. A freestanding structure used in the garden to support vines or climbing plants; also called an "Arbor." 
    Use. The purpose or activity for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
    Use, Principal. The dominant use of land or a structure as distinguished from an "Accessory Use." 
    Utility, Private. Utilities that are not subject to City acceptance for operation or maintenance. For purposes of this Ordinance, private utilities include natural gas lines, power lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, fiber optic lines and other communication lines, their appurtenances and components and the utility companies' operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of same. Aboveground private utility structures, such as pedestals for cable wire access or other access points for underground infrastructure (communications wiring, fiber optic, etc.) shall be considered a "Private Utility." 
    Wall. An upright structure of building material, such as masonry or plaster, serving to enclose, divide or protect an area. 
    Warehouse/Distribution. The storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies and equipment. 
    Water Garden. Any ornamental tub, pool, or other natural or artificial water container planted with aquatic plants. 
    Window Light Well. An enclosure installed below grade that: retains the earth around a window that is either entirely or partially below grade, and is constructed for the primary purpose of providing light and ventilation to a basement. 
    Window Well, Escape. An enclosure installed below grade that: retains the earth around a window that is either entirely or partially below grade, and is constructed for the primary purpose of egress from a below grade space during an emergency. 
    Wireless Telecommunications Antenna. A specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. "Wireless Telecommunications Antenna" does not include "Satellite Dish Antenna." 
    Wireless Telecommunications Facility. An un-staffed structure used to house and protect the equipment necessary for processing telecommunications signals, which may include air conditioning equipment and emergency generators. 
    Wireless Telecommunications Tower. A structure designed and constructed to support one (1) or more "Telecommunications Antennas" and including all appurtenant devices attached to it. A tower can be freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the ground) or supported (attached directly to the ground and with guy wires) of either lattice or monopole construction. 
    Yard. A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for obstructions specifically permitted by this Ordinance. A yard extends along a lot line for a depth specified by the zoning district in which such lot is located. (See Figure 49: Yards) 
FIGURE 49: YARDS 

    Yard, Corner Side. A side yard on a corner lot which abuts a public street. (See Figure 49) 
    Yard, Front. A yard extending the full width of the lot between side lot lines for the required minimum depth, as specified by the zoning district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. (See Figure 49) 
    Yard, Interior Side. A side yard that does not abut a street right-of-way. (See Figure 49) 
    Yard Line. A line along a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the required depth or width of the applicable yard. 
    Yard, Rear. A yard extending between the side lot lines for the required minimum depth, as specified by the zoning district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to the rear lot line. (See Figure 45) In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten (10) feet in length, within the lot, which is parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. (See Figure 45) 
    Yard, Reverse Corner Side. A side yard of a reverse corner lot which abuts a public street. (See Figure 50) 
FIGURE 50: REVERSE CORNER SIDE YARD 

    Yard, Side. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yard, for the required minimum depth, as specified for the district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to the side lot line. (See Figure 49) 
    Zoning Amendment, Text. A change in the wording, context, or substance of this Zoning Ordinance. 
    Zoning Amendment, Map. A change in the zone boundaries or area district boundaries upon the Zoning Map. 
    Zoning Appeal. A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance. 
    Zoning Certificate. A zoning certificate verified that buildings, structures, or uses are consistent with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions. 
    Zoning Districts. The districts into which the City of Park Ridge, Illinois, has been divided as set forth on the Official Zoning Map. 
    Zoning Interpretation. An interpretation of the specific provisions of the Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator in light of the general circumstances that the specific provision was intended to address. 
    Zoning Map. A map entitled the "Official Zoning Map of Park Ridge, Illinois," which is incorporated into this Ordinance, as part thereof, for the purpose of designating zoning districts. 
    Zoning Variance. A decision of the Zoning Administrator or Zoning Board of Appeals that, if approved by the City Council, permits an applicant to depart from the precise regulations of this Ordinance. A variance may be granted only in the specific instances authorized in this Ordinance and only in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-50, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2008-65, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2008-83, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 2009-50, 7-6-2009; Ord. No. 2010-33, 4-5-2010; Ord. No. 2014-09, 2-17-2014; Ord. No. 2014-56, 10-20-2014; Ord. No. 2015-37, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 2018-28 , §§ 3, 4, 8-6-2018; Ord. No. 2019-09 , § 5, 2-4-2019) 
Note- "Payday or Title Loan Agency," and "Physical Therapy Office," definitions were eliminated per Ord. No. 2008-50, adopted July 6, 2009. 
APPENDIX A 
  

Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.3 for Appeals of a Zoning Administrator Determination. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, indicating the nature of the request for appealing a Zoning Administrator determination, as well as the rationale for the request. Statements shall also reference the specific property address, if necessary, and the section(s) of the Ordinance related to the request. 
3.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
4.  Other Documents. Provide any other statements, documents or plans deemed necessary to support the request. 
5.  Section 3.3 - Notice for Public Hearings. The applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and submit notice to the City. If the appeal is related to a specific subject property, the applicant is required to prepare a mailed notice to send to all properties within 250 feet of the subject property also within 15 to 30 days of the hearing. 
6.  Fee. A check for $300, payable to the City of Park Ridge, shall accompany the application 
7.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 15 copies of each item submitted with the application. All documents must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
8.  Any other information or documentation, as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 


Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 5.0 for Planned Developments. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 5.0 of the Zoning Ordinance, that indicates the following: describe the nature of the planned development request, including the existing and proposed use for the property; list all proposed exceptions and community benefits requested as part of the special use, including references to specific sections of the Zoning Ordinance; and indicate how the planned development supports each of the conclusions in Section 5.5.C.2.b. 
3.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
4.  Minimum submittal requirements for a Stage 1 development plan (refer to Section 5.5.C.1): 
a.  Plat of Survey. The Plat must be to scale, show all parcels or lots (whether in whole or in part) comprising the subject property), the actual dimensions of the parcel(s) and all existing structures. 
b.  Proof of ownership. Applies to the subject property or properties, consisting of a warranty deed, title certificate or title insurance verification (photocopy). If the applicant is not the owner, a signed statement by the owner must be submitted certifying acknowledgement of the application. 
c.  Site Location Map. Drawn to scale and show the land use and zoning designation of all properties within 600 feet of the subject property. 
d.  Preliminary Site Plan. The plan must be drawn to scale, and show (where applicable): the dimensions of the entire subject property, total lot area, location of all existing and proposed structures, building setback lines, lot coverage calculations, driveways, off-street parking and loading facilities, the total number of dwelling units and bedrooms, and other information relevant to illustrate the site plan. 
e.  Building Elevations and Floor Plans. Show the general architectural character and interior layout of all proposed buildings, structures or additions. 
f.  Traffic Circulation Plan. Indicate proposed vehicle movements, in and around the site. Include information on pedestrian access and safety. 
g.  Traffic generation plan. Provide an analysis prepared by a qualified professional indicating amount of traffic projected by the proposed special use and the expected impact of the proposed special use on existing traffic patterns. 
h.  Off-street parking and loading facilities plan (Section 12). Show the location, quantity and dimensions of all parking and loading facilities, including all parking lot lighting (Section 11.3). 
i.  Utilities and Stormwater Drainage Plans. Plans and an analysis shall be prepared by a qualified professional showing the locations of existing and proposed water and sewer lines, and stormwater drainage facilities. The analysis shall indicate the adequacy of all utilities to serve the site. 
j.  Preliminary Landscape, Screening and Open Space Plans (Section 13). Show the location of all proposed landscaping (indicate species, sizes and quantities of all plantings), existing trees at six inches or more in diameter and proposed trees, fencing (indicate location, dimensions and type of materials), all open space (type, location and calculations), and screening for all refuse storage areas (indicate type of screening and dimensions). 
k.  Sign plans (Section 14). Submit plans for all signs used for identification, and include the location, design and dimensions of each sign. 
5.  Notice Requirements (Section 3.3). The applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the public hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and will provide a copy of the notice to the City. In addition, the applicant shall comply with Section 3.3.B.1 and 2 and prepare a mailed notice to send to all properties within 250 feet of the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall provide a list of property owners to receive the notice to the Zoning Administrator at least five days prior to the public hearing. 
6.  Posted Sign Notice (Section 3.3.C). The applicant shall post a sign (provided by the City) on the subject property for between 15 and 30 days prior to the Zoning Administrator's decision, in the case of an administrative variance, and between 15 and 30 days prior to a public hearing, in the case of a minor or major variance. 
7.  Fee. A check for $750 payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany each application. This includes a $700 application fee and $50 for a Zoning Sign. 
8.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 17 copies of all documents, which must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
9.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 



Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.5 for Site Plan Reviews. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.5 of the Zoning Ordinance, indicating the nature of the request for a site plan review, including the existing and proposed use for the property. 
3.  Proof of ownership. Applies to the subject property or properties, consisting of a warranty deed, title certificate or title insurance verification (photocopy). If the applicant is not the owner, a signed statement by the owner must be submitted certifying acknowledgement of the application. 
4.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
5.  Plat of Survey. The Plat must be to scale, show all parcels or lots (whether in whole or in part) comprising the subject property, the actual dimensions of the parcel(s) and all existing structures. 
6.  Design Standards for site plan reviews. Submit the following documents, where applicable: 
a.  Building elevations and floor plans. Show the general architectural character and interior layout of all proposed buildings, structures or additions. 
b.  Site Plan. The plan must be drawn to scale, and show (where applicable): the dimensions of the entire subject property, total lot area, location of all existing and proposed structures, building setback lines, lot coverage calculations, driveways, off-street parking and loading facilities, the total number of dwelling units and bedrooms, and other information relevant to illustrate the site plan. 
c.  Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities Plan and Analysis (Section 12). Show the location, quantity and dimensions of all parking and loading facilities, including all parking lot lighting (Section 11.3), as well as an analysis of all required and proposed parking spaces. 
d.  Traffic Circulation Plan. Indicate proposed vehicle movements, in and around the site. Include information on pedestrian access and safety. 
e.  Landscape, Screening and Open Space Plan (Section 13). Show the location of all proposed landscaping (indicate species, sizes and quantities of all plantings), existing trees at six inches or more in diameter and proposed trees, fencing (indicate location, dimensions and type of materials), all open space (type, location and calculations), and screening for all refuse storage areas (indicate type of screening and dimensions). 
f.  Utilities and Stormwater Drainage Plans. Plans and an analysis shall be prepared by a qualified professional showing the locations of existing and proposed water and sewer lines, and stormwater drainage facilities. The analysis shall indicate the adequacy of all utilities to serve the site. 
g.  Sign Plans (Section 14). Submit plans for all signs used for identification, and include the location, design and dimensions of each sign. 
7.  Posted Sign Notice (Section 3.3.C). The City will post a sign on the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the public meeting. 
8.  Fee. A check payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany each application: 
?  Administrative: $100 
?  Planning and Zoning Commission: $250 includes $200 fee, plus $50 for a notification sign. 
9.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 17 copies of all documents, which must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
10.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 

Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.4 for Variances. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.6 of the Zoning Ordinance, that contains the following: 
a.  Description of the specific variance request, including the specific section of the Zoning Ordinance and the specific modification of minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance which would be necessary to permit the proposed use or construction; 
b.  The particular requirements of the Zoning Ordinance which prevent the proposed use or construction; 
c.  The characteristics of the subject property which prevent compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance; 
d.  A response to Section 4.4.E.I stating that no variance from the provisions of this Ordinance shall be granted unless the Zoning Administrator, Zoning Board of Appeals and/or the City Council make specific written findings of fact based directly on the standards and conditions imposed by this section, which are as follows: 
a)  The strict application of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance will result in undue hardship; 
b)  The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and 
c)  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
3.  Proof of ownership. Applies to the subject property or properties, consisting of a warranty deed, title certificate or title insurance verification (photocopy). If the applicant is not the owner, a signed statement by the owner must be submitted certifying acknowledgement of the application. 
4.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
5.  Site Location Map. Drawn to scale and show the land use and zoning designation of all properties within 250 feet of the subject property. 
6.  Plat of Survey. The Plat must be to scale, show all parcels or lots (whether in whole or in part) comprising the subject property, the actual dimensions of the parcel(s) and all existing structures. 
7.  Plans and documents. Submit the following plans and documents, where applicable: 
a.  Site plan. The plan must be drawn to scale, show the entire subject property and graphically illustrate the proposed variance request. 
b.  Building Elevations and Floor Plans. Show the general architectural character and interior layout of all proposed buildings, structures or additions. 
c.  Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities Plan and Analysis. Show the location, quantity and dimensions of all parking and loading facilities, in accordance with Section 12, as well as an analysis of all required and proposed parking spaces. 
d.  Traffic Circulation and Generation Study. When changes are proposed in the intensity of use of a subject property, provide a study prepared by a qualified professional indicating the impact of the proposed variance on existing traffic patterns, vehicular circulation patterns, and pedestrian access and safety. 
e.  Sign Plans. Submit plans for all signs used for identification, and include the location, design and dimensions of each sign, in accordance with Section 14. 
8.  Notice Requirements (Section 3.3). For administrative variances, the applicant shall comply with the notification requirements in Section 3.3 to send notices between 15 and 30 days prior to the Zoning Administrator's decision on the case. For minor and major variances requiring a public hearing, the applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and submit notice to the City. The applicant shall comply with Section 3.3.B.1 and 2 and prepare a mailed notice to send to all properties within 250 feet of the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing, return address to Community Preservation and Development, 505 Butler Place, Park Ridge, Illinois 60068. In all cases, the applicant shall provide a list of property owners to receive the notice to the Zoning Administrator at least five days prior to the Zoning Administrator decision in administrative variances or the public hearing, in the case of a minor or major variance. 
9.  Posted Sign Notice (Section 3.3.C). The City will post a sign on the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the public hearing. 
10.  Fee. A check payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany each application. The fee is $150 to $400 (depending upon the type of application). 
11.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 10 copies of each item submitted with the application. All documents must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
12.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 

Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.6 for special uses. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.6 of the Zoning Ordinance, that indicates the following: describe the nature of the special use request, including the existing and proposed use for the property; list all proposed exceptions requested as part of the special use, including references to specific sections of the Zoning Ordinance; and indicate how the special use supports each of the following conclusions (refer to Section 4.6.E.1): 
a.  The establishment, maintenance and operation of the special use, in the specific location proposed, will not endanger the public health, safety, morals or general welfare of any portion of the community; 
b.  The proposed special use is compatible with adjacent peroperties and other property within the immediate vicinity; and 
c.  The special use, in the specific location proposed, is consistent with the pirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Proof of ownership. Applies to the subject property or properties, consisting of a warranty deed, title certificate or title insurance verification (photocopy). If the applicant is not the owner, a signed statement by the owner must be submitted certifying acknowledgement of the application. 
4.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
5.  Plat of Survey. The Plat must be to scale, show all parcels or lots (whether in whole or in part) comprising the subject property, the actual dimensions of the parcel(s) and all existing structures. 
6.  Design Standards for special uses. Submit the following documents, where applicable: 
a.  Building elevations and floor plans. Show the general architectural character and interior layout of all proposed buildings, structures or additions. 
b.  Site Plan. The plan must be drawn to scale, and show (where applicable): the dimensions of the entire subject property, total lot area, location of all existing and proposed structures, building setback lines, lot coverage calculations, driveways, off-street parking and loading facilities, the total number of dwelling units and bedrooms, and other information relevant to illustrate the site plan. 
c.  Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities Plan (Section 12). Show the location, quantity and dimensions of all parking and loading facilities, including all parking lot lighting (Section 11.3). 
d.  Traffic Circulation Plan. Indicate proposed vehicle movements, in and around the site. Include information on pedestrian access and safety. 
e.  Traffic Generation Plan. Provide an analysis prepared by a qualified professional indicating amount of traffic projected by the proposed special use and the expected impact of the proposed special use on existing traffic patterns. 
f.  Landscape, Screening and Open Space Plan (Section 13). Show the location of all proposed landscaping (indicate species, sizes and quantities of all plantings), existing trees at six inches or more in diameter and proposed trees, fencing (indicate location, dimensions and type of materials), all open space (type, location and calculations), and screening for all refuse storage areas (indicate type of screening and dimensions). 
g.  Utilities and Stormwater Drainage Plans. Plans and an analysis shall be prepared by a qualified professional showing the locations of existing and proposed water and sewer lines, and stormwater drainage facilities. The analysis shall indicate the adequacy of all utilities to serve the site. 
h.  Sign Plans (Section 14). Submit plans for all signs used for identification, and include the location, design and dimensions of each sign. 
7.  Notice Requirements (Section 3.3). The applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the public hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and will provide a copy of the notice to the City. In addition, the applicant shall comply with Section 3.3.B.1 and 2 and prepare a mailed notice to send to all properties within 250 feet of the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall provide a list of property owners to receive the notice to the Zoning Administrator at least five days prior to the public hearing. 
8.  Posted Sign Notice (Section 3.3.C). The applicant shall post a sign (provided by the City) on the subject property for between 15 and 30 days prior to the Zoning Administrator's decision, in the case of an administrative variance, and between 15 and 30 days prior to a public hearing, in the case of a minor or major variance. 
9.  Fee. A check for $450 payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany each application. This includes a $400 application fee and $50 for a Zoning Sign. 
10.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 17 copies of all documents, which must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
11.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 


Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.8 for Zoning Map Amendments. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.8 of the Zoning Ordinance that indicates the following: describe the nature of the zoning map amendment request, including the existing and proposed use for the property; and indicate how the amendment supports each of the conclusions listed in Section 4.8. E Table 1. 
3.  Proof of ownership. Applies to the subject property or properties, consisting of a warranty deed, title certificate or title insurance verification (photocopy). If the applicant is not the owner, a signed statement by the owner must be submitted certifying acknowledgement of the application. 
4.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
5.  Site Location Map. Drawn to scale and show the land use and zoning designation of all properties within 600 feet of the subject property. 
6.  Plat of Survey. The Plat must be to scale, show all parcels or lots (whether in whole or in part) comprising the subject property, the actual dimensions of the parcel(s) and all existing structures. 
7.  Notice Requirements (Section 3.3). The applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the public hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and will provide a copy of the notice to the City. In addition, the applicant shall comply with Section 3.3.B.1 and 2 and prepare a mailed notice to send to all properties within 250 feet of the subject property between 15 and 30 days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall provide a list of property owners to receive the notice to the Zoning Administrator at least five days prior to the public hearing. 
8.  Posted Sign Notice (Section 3.3.C). The applicant shall post a sign (provided by the City) on the subject property for between 15 and 30 days prior to the Zoning Administrator's decision, in the case of an administrative variance, and between 15 and 30 days prior to a public hearing, in the case of a minor or major variance. 
9.  Fee. A check for $300 to $450 payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany each application. This includes a $250 application fee for rezoning requests to the R-1 or R-2 Districts, or $400 for rezonings to all other districts, in addition to $50 for a Zoning Sign. 
10.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 17 copies of all documents, which must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
11.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 

Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.8 for Zoning Text Amendments. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
12.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
13.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.8 of the Zoning Ordinance that indicates the following: describe the nature of the zoning text amendment request and indicate how the amendment supports each of the conclusions in Section 4.8.E Table 1. 
14.  Applicant Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement regarding ownership interest located in the Zoning Ordinance Appendices (based on Municipal Code Article 2, Chapter 24, Section 1). 
15.  Disclosure Statement. Complete this statement located in the Appendices of the Zoning Ordinance or Article 2, Chapter 24 of the Municipal Code. 
16.  Notice Requirements (Section 3.3). The applicant will prepare a legal notice to be published in the local newspaper between 15 and 30 days prior to the public hearing, in accordance with Section 3.3.A, and will provide a copy of the notice to the City. 
17.  Fee. A check for $300 payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany the application. 
18.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with 17 copies of all documents, which must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
19.  Any other information or documentation required by the Zoning Administrator. 


Minimum Filing Requirements 
The application must be completed in accordance with the provisions in Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance and Section 4.2 for Zoning Interpretations. The application must be accompanied by the following, unless specifically waived by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Application. Provide all required information and the appropriate signature(s). 
2.  Statement. Provide a statement, in accordance with Section 4.2 of the Zoning Ordinance, indicating the nature of the request for interpretation, as well as the rationale for the request. Requests must be for the purpose of furthering some actual development, which must be noted in the statement. Statements shall also reference the specific property address, if necessary, and the section(s) of the Ordinance related to the request. 
3.  Other Documents. Provide any other statements, documents or plans deemed necessary to support the request. 
4.  Fee. A check for $100 payable to the City of Park Ridge shall accompany the application. 
5.  Copies. Submit the original application (with the original signature) and all supporting documents, along with one copy of each item submitted with the application. All documents must be on 8.5" × 11" or 11" × 17" paper, except where specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
6.  Any other information or documentation, as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
APPENDIX B - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT CERTIFICATIONS FOR FINAL SITE PLANS FOR STAGE 2 DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
Provide all information required in Section 5.5.D.1 of the Zoning Ordinance on all Stage 2 - Final Site Plans. 
a.  A final site plan drawn to an appropriate scale on a mylar or other material suitable for recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. The final site plan shall include the following information: 
i.  Final designation of the location, ground area, height, bulk and exact dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the planned development. 
ii.  A detailed tabulation of each separate land use area, including land and building areas, and where applicable, the total number of residential dwelling units, the number of bedrooms in each unit, and the residential density. 
iii.  The use or uses to be made of such existing and proposed buildings or structures. 
iv.  The dimensions of all perimeter setbacks and the distances between all buildings and structures. 
v.  The final location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways, driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the number of parking spaces serving each building or land use type and all parking related screening and landscaping. 
vi.  The exact location and dimensions of any areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of worship, school sites, public buildings, or for any other public or quasi public use. 
b.  An accurate legal description of the entire zoning lot upon which the planned development is to be located, and a legal description of each separate subdivided parcel, including any areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for public or quasi public uses. 
c.  All covenants, easements, agreements and other provisions required to govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned development, along with an agreement assuring that the applicant, any subsequent owner or, where applicable, a homeowners' association shall be responsible for all street, utility and common open space maintenance within said development and for snow plowing and refuse disposal. 
Reference recording numbers and dates recorded for existing easements. 
An easement provision statement and signatures lines for each private utility company are required for all new easements. 
d.  Reprint the Ordinance for the Stage 1 Planned Development, as approved by the City Council. 
e.  All certificates, seals and signatures appropriate for the Final Site Plan. 


Certificate of Mortgage Holder for each owner (if applicable) 
Certificates vary depending upon the mortgage holder. 




Certificate of the Cook County Clerk 
The Cook County Clerk provides its own certificate. 
Party Ordering the Final Site Plan 
Provide the name and address of the party ordering the Final Site Plan of the Stage 2 Development Plan. 
Return Final Site Plan to 
Provide a statement asking to return the Plan to: 
City of Park Ridge 
Community Preservation and Development Department 
505 Butler Place 
Park Ridge, Illinois 60068 
APPENDIX C 





APPENDIX D - FEE SCHEDULE 

APPENDIX E - DENSITY CONVERSIONS 
The following table provides the maximum permitted density-in terms of dwelling units per acre-for each district. This table is for reference purposes only and shall not be used in determining compliance with bulk regulations. 

(Ord. No. 2015-37, 6-1-2015) 
APPENDIX F - RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS 
Recommended Plant Materials for the City of Park Ridge 
Canopy Trees Acer nigrum Black Maple Acer saccharum Sugar Maple Acer miyabei Miyabei Maple Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye Alnus glutinosa Black Adler Betula alleghaniensis Yellow Birch * Spring plant only Carya cordiformis Bitternut Hickory Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory Catalpa speciosa Catalpa Celtis occidentalis Hackberry Ceridiphyllum japonicum Katsura Tree Corylus colurna Turkish Hazel Diospyros virginiana Persimmon Fagus grandiflora Beech Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Gleditsia triacanthos Honeylocust Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree Juglans cinerea Butternut Larix laricina Tamarack Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree Nyssa sylvatica Black Tupelo Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn redwood Ostrya virginiana American Hophornbeam, Ironwood Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak Quercus alba White Oak Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak Quercus ellipsoidalis Hill's Oak Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak Quercus muhlenbergii Chinquapin Oak Quercus robur English Oak Quercus rubra Red Oak Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress Tilia americana American Linden Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden Tilia tomentosa Silverleaf Linden Ulmus (species) Elm (Hybrids) Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova Understory Trees Acer buergerianum Trident Maple Acer campestre Hedge Maple Acer ginnala Amur Maple Acer griseum Paperbark Maple Acer tataricum Tatarian Maple Amelanchier (species) Serviceberry Asimina triloba Pawpaw Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam, Blue Beech, Musclewood Cercis canadensis Redbud Chionanthus virginicus White Fringetree Cladrastris kentukea Yellowwood Cornus mas Cornelian Cherry Dogwood Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood Crataegus mollis Downy Hawthorn Halesia carolina Carolina Silverbell Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenraintree Larix decidua European Larch Magnolia acuminata Cucumber Tree Magnolia Magnolia loeberni Loebner Magnolia Magnolia soulangiana Saucer Magnolia Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Magnolia virginiana Sweet Bay Magnolia Malus (species) Disease Resistant Crabapple Prunus maackii Amur Chokecherry Prunus virginiana Canada Red Chokeberry Sassafras albidum Sassafras Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac Syringa pekinesis Peking Lilac Shrubs Amelanchier (species) Serviceberry Amorpha canescens Lead Plant Amorpha fruticosa Desert False Indigo Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry Azalea (species) Azalea Berberis (species) Barberry Ceanothus americanus New Jersey Tea Chaenomeles (species) Flowering Quince Clethra alinfolia Summersweet Clethra Comptonia peregrina Sweetfern Cornus obliqua Pale Dogwood Cornus racemosa Gray Dogwood Cornus rugosa Roundleaved Dogwood Cornus stolonifera (sericea) Red-osier Dogwood Corylus americana American Hazelnut Cotinus coggygria Smoke Tree Cotoneaster dammeri Cotoneaster Deutzia gracilis Slender Deutzia Diervilla lonicera Dwarf Honeysuckle Euonymus alata Burning Bush Euorymus alatus Dwarf Winged Euonymus Forsythia (species) Forsythia Fothergillia (species) Fothergilla Hamamelis vernalis Vernal Witch Hazel Hamamelis virginiana Common Witch Hazel Hydrangea (species) Hydrangea Hypercium (species) St. John's Wort Ilex verticillata Winterberry Holly Kerria japonica Japanese Kerria Lindera benzoin Spicebush Lonicera dioica Red Honeysuckle Lonicera prolifera Yellow Honeysuckle Myrica pensylvanica Northern Bayberry Physocarpus opulifolius Ninebark Ptelea trifoliata Wafer Ash Rhododendron 'PJM' 'PJM' Rhododendron Rhus aromatica Fragrant Sumac Rhus copallina Shining Sumac Rhus glabra Smooth Sumac Rhus typhina Staghorn Sumac Rosa blanda Early Wild Rose Rosa carolina Pasture Rose Rosa setigera Illinois Rose Sambucus canadensis Elderberry Sambucus pubens Red Berried Elderberry Shepherdia canadensis Buffalo Berry Spirea (species) Spirea Staphylea trifolia Bladdernut Stephanandra incisa Cutleaf Stephanandra Symphoricarpos albus Snowberry Syringia (species) Lilac Viburnum acerifolium Maple-leaf Viburnum Viburnum dentatum Arrow-wood Viburnum lentago Nannyberry Viburnum plicatum var. Doublefile Viburnum Viburnum prunifolium Black Haw Weigela (species) Weigela  
Invasive, Non-Native Plants that Should Not be Planted 
Prohibited Trees and Shrubs Acer negundo Boxelder Acer saccharinum Silver Maple Ailanthus altissima Tree-of-heaven Albizia julibrissin Mimosa Cichorium intybus Chicory Elaeagnus umbellata Autumn Olive Hibiscus trionum Flower-of-the-hour Lonicera X bella Hybrid Honeysuckle Lonicera japonica Japanese Honeysuckle Lonicera maackii Amur Honeysuckle Lonicera morrowii Morrow's Honeysuckle Morus alba White Mulberry Morus rubra Red Mulberry Paulownia tomentosa Princesstree Populus alba White Poplar Populus deltoides Cottonwood Rhamnus cathartica Common Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula Smooth Buckthorn Ulmus pumila Siberian Elm Prohibited Herbaceous Plants Alliaria officinalis Garlic Mustard Alliaria petiolata Garlic Mustard Aster sagittifolius drummondii Drummond's Aster Carduus nutans Nodding Musk Thistle Celastrus orbiculatus Oriental Bittersweet Chrysanthemum leucanthemum pinnatifidum Oxeye Daisy Cirsium arvense Canada Thistle Cirsium vulgare Bull Thistle Coronilla varia Crown Vetch Daucus carota Wild Carrot Dioscorea batatas Chinese Yam Dipsacus laciniatus Cutleaf Teasel Dipsacus sylvestris Common Teasel Euphorbia esula Leafy Spurge Galinsoga ciliata Peruvian Daisy Geum canadense White Avens Glechoma hederaca Creeping Charlie Hesperis matronalis Dames Rocket Lespedeza cuneata Sericea Lespedeza Lotus corniculatus Bird's-foot Trefoil Lychnis alba White Campion Lythrum salicaria Purple Loosestrife Lysimachia nummularia Moneywort Melilotus alba White Sweetclover Melilotus officinalis Yellow Sweetclover Microstegium vimineum Eulalia, Japanese Grass Myriophyllum spicatum Eurasian Watermilfoil Oenothera biennis Evening Primrose Pastinaca sativa Parsnip Phalaris arundinacea Reed Canarygrass Phragmites australis Common Reed Phytolacca americana Pokeweed Polygonum cuspidatum Japanese Knotweed Prunella vulgaris Common Selfheal Prunus serotina Wild Black Cherry Pueraria lobata Kudzu Sanicula gregaria Clustered Black Snakeroot Solanum americanum Black Nightshade Solanum carolinense Horsenettle Solanum dulcamara Climbing Nightshade Sorghum halepense Johnsongrass Taraxacum officinale Dandelion Tragopogon pratensis Common Goat's Beard Verbascum blattaria Moth Mullein Verbascum thapsus Common Mullein Wisteria sinensis Chinese wisteria  
COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Zoning Ordinance beginning with Supplement 1. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2016-49  7- 5-2016 1 4.4(d)(3) 2 4.4(e)(1) 3 4.5(d)(2)b. 4 4.6(d) 5       Added 4.6(e)(3) 6 4.6(h) 7 4.8(c)(2)b. 8 4.8(e) 9 5.6(c)(2)c. 10 5.6(c)(4) 2017-23  4- 5-2017 2 8.1 3 5.1-5.11 2017-33  6-19-2017 2       Added 4.5(g) 2018-25  8- 6-2018 3 12.13 2018-28  8- 6-2018 3, 4 16.3 2019-09  2- 4-2019 3 10.3(n) 4 12.11 5 16.3 2019-14  2- 4-2019 3 15.4  
