12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 1/735
Rock Island, Illinois
City Code
This code was last updated by
PREAMBLE
The Rock Island City Code, originally published by Municipal Code Corporation in 1984, has been kept
current by regular supplementation. In 1995, Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service for
the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Rock Island, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 056-2018, passed September 24, 2018. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Rock Island of a general
and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such
ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto.
The chapters of the Code arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are
catchlined to facilitate usage. Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1963 Rock
Island Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is
included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note
indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use
of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section
included herein.
Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the
state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within
the Code is included, at the back of this volume.
Numbering System
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local codes. Each
section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash
representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within
the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the second section of Chapter 3 is
3-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at that same time, new sections
or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for
amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come
between sections 2-4 and 2-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-4.1, 2-
4.2 and 2-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to
be included between Chapters 6 and 7, it will be designated as Chapter 6.1. Care should be taken that
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 2/735
the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and
new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of
the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division.
Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under
several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology,
and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous
cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item
in which he is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the
Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be
properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to
holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting
the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part
thereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance.
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of
the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have
the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the
publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them
and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Milton
E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is
gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Bernard C. Gilliman, City Attorney, and Ms. Jacqueline Vander
Meersch, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It
is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will
make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the
day-to-day administration of the City's affairs.
August, 1984
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 84-36
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Rock Island, Illinois; Establishing the
Same Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of
Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall
Become Effective.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 3/735
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Rock Island, Illinois:
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 16, each inclusive, is hereby
adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Rock Island, Illinois", which Code shall
supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before November 8, 1982, to
the extent provided in section 2 hereof.
Section 2. That all provisions of such code shall be in full force and effect from and after November 1,
1984, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City, adopted on final passage on or
before November 8, 1982, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code.
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.
(Ord. 84-36, 8-27-1984)
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code, or
any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), as provided in section 1-13 of such Code. Any fine imposed by this code
which increases by the passage of time alone, shall not increase if, prior to the time the increase occurs
pursuant to the terms of the ordinance, the alleged violator files a written request for review of the
alleged violation with the appropriate agency. If, after the alleged violator exhausts his review rights, the
violation has not been paid or rescinded, the violator shall have a like time to pay the fine as provided in
the ordinance before the increase shall take effect. (Ord. 84-36, 8-27-1984; Ord. 23-2003, § 1, 4-14-
2003)
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments.
Section 6. That in the case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not
provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-13 of such
Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a
penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same
chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended,
unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after November 8, 1982, which amends or refers to ordinances which
have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such
Code.
Section 8. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective November 1, 1984.
/s/ James R. Davis
Mayor
PASSED: August 27, 1984
APPROVED: August 28, 1984
ATTEST: Jacqueline L. Vander Meersch
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 4/735
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. Designation Of Code 1:
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall be designated as the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Rock Island, Illinois. (1963 Code, Ch. 1, Art. I)
Sec. 1-2. Definitions; Rules Of Construction 2:
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances now in force or which may hereafter be passed, the
rules in this Section shall be observed unless such construction is excluded by express provision of the
Code or ordinance, is inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or is repugnant to the
context thereof:
City : The City of Rock Island in the State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
Computation Of Time : The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal
holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a
holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
Council, City Council : The Council of the City of Rock Island, Illinois.
County : Rock Island County in the State of Illinois.
Court : The term "court" includes courts not of record as well as courts of record.
Gender : Words importing the masculine gender may be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations, corporations, companies and organizations.
Generally : All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be liberally construed, in
order that the true intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried out.
Heretofore; Hereafter : The word "heretofore" shall mean any time previous to the day on which the
ordinance takes effect, and the word "hereafter" shall mean at any time after such day.
Ill. Rev. Stat : The abbreviation "Ill. Rev. Stat," shall mean the latest edition of the Illinois Revised
Statutes, as amended. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or any other ordinance of the City,
the rules of construction set out in Ill. Rev. Stat. chapter 1, section 1001 et seq., shall apply to this
Code and to all other ordinances of the City as far as is practicable.
In The City : The words "in the City" or "within the City" mean and include all territory over which the
City shall now possess or hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers by virtue of any Constitutional law or State statute.
Joint Authority : Words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
Laws Or Ordinances Now In Force : The term "laws or ordinances now in force" or words of similar
import shall mean the laws and ordinances in force at the time the ordinance containing the words
takes effect.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 5/735
Mayor : The term "Mayor" shall apply as well to the acting mayor.
Month : A calendar month.
Number : Words importing the singular number may extend and may be applied to several persons
or things, and words importing the plural number may include the singular.
Oath : The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the word "sworn" shall be
construed to include the word "affirmed".
Occupant Or Tenant : The word "occupant" or "tenant", applied to a building or land, means any
person who holds a written or oral lease of or who actually occupies the whole or part of such
building or land, either alone or with others.
Officers And Departments Generally : Whenever any officer, department or other agency is referred
to by title, such as "clerk", "chief of police", "police department" or "chief building inspector", such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Rock Island, Illinois".
Or, And : "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
Owner : The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person : "Person" shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
Personal Property : "Personal property" includes every species of property, except real property as
defined by this Section.
Preceding, Following : The word "preceding" means the next before, and the word "following" means
the next after.
Property : The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real Property : "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace
all chattels real.
Shall, May : The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
Sidewalk : That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the
adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
State : The term "State" or "the State" means the State of Illinois.
Street : The entire width between property lines of every way or place when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Tense : Words in the present tense include the future.
Written, In Writing : The term "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of
representing word; and letters.
Year : A calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1963 Code, Ch. 1, Art. I)
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines Of Sections:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 6/735
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4. History Notes:
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any
legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections.
Sec. 1-5. Provisions Construed As Continuations Of Existing Ordinances:
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the
time of the adoption of this Code shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
Sec. 1-6. Severability Of Parts Of Code 3:
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and of every code adopted by
reference herein are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence or paragraph shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this Code, including any code adopted by reference. (1963 Code, Ch. 1, Art. I)
Sec. 1-7. Certain Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect
the validity of:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the
issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the City.
(2) Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the City.
(3) Any budget or appropriation ordinance.
(4) Any right or franchise granted by the City Council to any person.
(5) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening,
vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City, or acquiring or vacating any easement in the City.
(6) Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City.
(7) Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor.
(8) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City, or providing regulations
for the same.
(9) Any ordinance annexing property to the City.
(10) Any zoning ordinance of the City.
(11) Any temporary ordinance.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 7/735
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length herein.
Sec. 1-8. Amendments To Code; Amendatory Language:
(a)Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by
specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That
section of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rock Island, Illinois, is hereby amended to read as
follows: . . . ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
(b)If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be
used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rock Island, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding
a section, to be numbered , which section reads as follows: . . . ." The new section shall then be set
out in full as desired.
Sec. 1-9. Supplementation Of Code:
(a)By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the City Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the City Council during the period covered by
the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they
have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance
included in the supplement.
(b)In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c)When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and
parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them
into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision
numbers.
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter", "this article",
"this division", etc., as the case may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the
Code).
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-10. Altering Code:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 8/735
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code,
or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner which
will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
Sec. 1-11. When Ordinances Are Repealed:
Whenever any ordinance or part of any ordinance that is required by law to be published shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of ordinance thus repealed or
modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying the
same shall take effect, unless therein otherwise expressly provided. When any ordinance repealing any
former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such last repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former original ordinance, clause or provision, unless therein so expressly provided. (1963
Code, Ch. 1, Art. I)
Sec. 1-12. Passage Of New Ordinances:
No new ordinances shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is
expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against the former ordinance, or as to any one
act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or any right accrued or claim arising under the
former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect,
save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinances in force
at the time of such proceedings. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a
new ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied to any judgment
pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or by implication. (1963 Code, Ch. I, Art. I)
Sec. 1-13.1. Attempt To Commit Violation Of An Ordinance:
(a)A person commits an attempt when he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the
commission of that violation, with intent to commit one of the following offenses:
(1) Chapter 10, section 10-54 of this code, attempted retail theft under one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
(2) Chapter 10, sections 10-56 and 10-88 of this code, attempted criminal damage to property less
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(3) Chapter 10, section 10-67 of this code, attempted theft of property generally.
(4) Chapter 3, section 3-10 of this code, attempt to gain entry into a liquor establishment without
presenting identification.
(5) Chapter 3, section 3-10 of this code, attempt to purchase alcohol by a person under twenty one
(21) years of age.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of this provision shall be one-half (1/2) of the minimum fine imposed
for violation of the actual offense. In the event a person is accused of a violation of this section and
does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then
the person so accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one-half
(1/2) of the amount provided for in this section as a minimum fine for the actual violation for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord. 97-20, 3-17-1997)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 9/735
Sec. 1-14. How Actions Are Brought; Costs:
All actions and prosecutions to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under this Code or any other
ordinance of this City shall be brought and the proceedings therein conducted as provided by law in
such cases. (1963 Code, Ch. I, Art. II)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION 5
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Corporate Seal Established 1:
The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the City (the impression of which is, in the center an
Indian with bow and arrow, standing beneath a tree; on the right a steamboat, with hills in the distance;
and on the left a locomotive, surrounded by the inscription "City of Rock Island, Illinois") is established
and declared to be the Corporate Seal of the City. (1963 Code art. 1-3)
Sec. 2-2. Municipal Year 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2.2:
(a)The Municipal year of the City shall coincide with the calendar year. Therefore, the Municipal year
shall commence on January 1 in each year and conclude on December 31 of the same year.
(b)Beginning January 1, 2015, the City will use the calendar year as the fiscal period and the
Municipality's budget, financial statements, and comprehensive annual financial report shall be
prepared to reflect financial activities based upon an operating period of January 1 through
December 31 of each year. The Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney, Accounts and Financial Officer,
City Treasurer and all other City staff are authorized to do all things necessary to efficiently and
effectively accomplish this change.
(c)In order to efficiently and effectively accomplish this change, there will be an interim Municipal year
commencing on Tuesday, April 1, 2014, and concluding on Wednesday, December 31, 2014.
(d)This section shall be effective as of January 1, 2015, with regard to the Code change and shall be
effective with regards to all other portions from and after passage, approval, and, if required by law,
publication in the manner provided for by law. (Ord. 052-2013, 9-9-2013)
Secs. 2-3, 2-4. Reserved:
Sec. 2-5. Legal Department - Created:
There is hereby created a Legal Department in the City. This department shall consist of attorneys duly
licensed to practice law in the State, to be appointed by and subject to the direction and control of the
City Manager on a retainer basis. The attorneys shall be designated as City Attorney and Assistant City
Attorneys, and shall be paid a monthly retainer and additional hourly compensation as provided in a
contract approved by the City Council. (1963 Code art. 2-3; Ord. 83-17, 5-23-1983; Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 2-6. Legal Department - Duties:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 10/735
The attorneys in the Legal Department for their respective retainers shall provide legal counsel for all
Council meetings, provide legal advice for the officers of the City, City Manager and all City departments,
and prosecute, on behalf of the City, cases in the Rock Island Division of Circuit Court, 14th Judicial
Circuit. (1963 Code art. 2-3; Ord. 83-17, 5-23-1983; Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Secs. 2-7, 2-8. Reserved:
Sec. 2-9. Commencement Of Terms Of Office:
All City officials elected or appointed in April shall take office on the first Monday in May. (Ord., 4-6-1981)
Sec. 2-10. Hunting And Fishing Licenses:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-11. Circuit Court:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-12. Availability Of City Records Under State Freedom Of Information Act:
(a)Procedure: Request forms are provided by the City Clerk and are available on the City's website but
are not required. Requests for information must be submitted in writing. For requests seeking law
enforcement records, requests can be directed by mail to 1212 - 5th Avenue, Rock Island, IL, 61201,
or personal delivery, email, or fax to the Rock Island Police Department. All other requests can be
directed by mail to 1528 - 3rd Avenue, Rock Island, IL, 61201, or personal delivery, email, or fax to
the Office of the City Clerk.
(b)Appeals: Any person denied access to inspect or copy any public record may refer to 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq.
(c)Fees: Refer to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq., for any fee imposed for the reproduction of
information in relation to the State Freedom of Information Act. (Ord. 011-2018, 3-26-2018)
Sec. 2-13. Personnel Department - Created:
There is hereby created a Personnel Department in the City. This department shall be administered by a
Personnel Director appointed by and subject to the direction and control of the City Manager. (Ord. 87-
22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 2-14. Personnel Department - Duties Of Director:
The Personnel Director shall supervise and coordinate activities relating to health insurance, risk
management, employee benefits, recruitment, legal services, training, public access channel and labor
negotiations, and in addition thereto, shall perform such further duties as may from time to time be
directed by the City Manager. (Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987; Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-15. Martin Luther King, Jr., Center Board:
(a)Established; Duties: There is hereby established a Martin Luther King, Jr., Center Board, which will be
involved in the continual planning process for the Martin Luther King, Jr., Center and the supervision
and distribution of the Activity Fund. This board will consider policy matters and will make
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 11/735
recommendations to the City Council regarding services, priorities and operation of the facility. Such
recommendations shall be channeled through the Director of Martin Luther King, Jr., Center and the
City Manager for their consideration and comments. This board shall be created and operated
consistent with the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Center, Inc., an
Illinois not for profit corporation.
(b)Members; Terms: The membership of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Center Board shall consist of one
Alderman appointed by the Mayor, Finance Director and nine (9) members representing the
neighborhood of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Center and the community at large. All members of the
board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The Finance Director
shall be a permanent member of the board.
(c)Chairman; Meetings: After appointment, the Martin Luther King, Jr., Center Board shall meet and
choose a Chairman from its membership. Meetings of the committee shall be held from time to time
upon the call of the Chairman or three (3) members of the board. At least one meeting shall be held
each year, and an annual report shall be submitted each year to the City Council. (Ord. 87-22, 3-23-
1987; Ord. 93-79, 8-9-1993; Ord. 94-65, 7-25-1994; Ord. 98-64, 9-14-1998; Ord. 003-2019, 1-14-
2019)
Sec. 2-16. Trespassing On King Center Property:
No person shall be on the following described premises: between Eighth and Ninth Streets and Sixth
and Seventh Avenues in the City, including the public right-of-way surrounding that area, unless he or
she is on those premises to attend a function sponsored by the Martin Luther King, Jr. Center, or
conducted in conjunction with any office or activity in the center; and, in any event, that person shall
leave the premises when requested to do so by the Martin Luther King, Jr. Center Director, or his
designee, or police authority. (Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 2-17. Smoke Free Areas In City Owned Facilities:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Secs. 2-18-2-25. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND COUNCIL GENERALLY
Sec. 2-26. Composition Of Council; Election:
The City of Rock Island shall be divided into wards as established in section 2-302 of this chapter with
one Alderman elected from each ward and the Mayor elected from the City at large. (1963 Code art. 2-1;
referendum dated 4-12-1983)
Sec. 2-27. Qualifications 1:
No person shall be eligible to the Office of Councilman or Mayor unless he is a qualified elector of the
City, and also complies with all requirements set forth in the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1963 Code art.
2-1)
Sec. 2-28. Mayor As Presiding Officer:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 12/735
The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings and shall have the powers as provided in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-3-1 through 5-3-5. (1963 Code art. 2-1; referendum dated 4-12-1983)
Sec. 2-29. Mayor Pro Tem 65 ILCS 5/3-11-7.2:
If a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor incapacitates him from the performance of his duties
but does not create a vacancy in the office, the City Council shall elect one of its members to act as
Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and
possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor. (1963 Code art. 2-1)
Sec. 2-30. General Powers 65 ILCS 5/5-3-6.3:
The Council has and shall exercise all legislative powers, functions and duties conferred upon the City or
its officers. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council shall have power to:
(1) Appoint and remove the City Manager.
(2) Establish other administrative departments.
(3) Adopt the budget of the City.
(4) Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance.
(5) Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the City and make investigations
as to Municipal affairs.
(6) Provide for an annual independent audit.
(7) Approve payment of expenses and liability. (1963 Code art. 2-1)
Sec. 2-31. Rules Of Procedure 65 ILCS 5/3-10-7, 5/3-11-11.4:
The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, as provided by State Statute. All parliamentary
questions will be determined by "Robert's Rules of Order". Minutes of each Council meeting shall be
kept by the City Clerk, and the minutes shall be available for public inspection as provided in the Illinois
Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. (1963 Code art. 2-1; Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 2-32. Meetings - Regular:
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held twice a month at six forty five o'clock (6:45) P.M. on
the second and fourth Mondays of the month except for December when regularly scheduled meetings
shall be held on the second and third Monday of the month. If the day for holding a regular meeting falls
on a holiday on which the City Hall is closed for business, then the meeting shall be held on the third
Monday of the month. Meetings shall be held in the City Hall.
(1) Policy Statement: It is the policy of the City of Rock Island, Illinois, that a member of the City
Council, which is subject to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/1 et seq., may attend and participate in any open or closed meeting of the City Council from a
remote location via telephone, video or internet connection, provided that such attendance and
participation is in compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 13/735
(2) Prerequisites: Any member of the City Council shall be provided the opportunity to attend an open
or closed meeting via electronic means from a remote location if a quorum is physically present at
the meeting site, the quorum votes to approve the attendance by electronic means, and the
requesting member meets the following conditions:
a. The member must notify the City Clerk at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled
meeting, unless such notice is impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be
arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request
for electronic attendance.
b. The member must assert one of the three (3) following reasons why he or she is unable to
physically attend the meeting:
1. Due to personal illness or disability;
2. Due to employment purposes or other City business;
3. Due to a family emergency or other emergency.
3. Due to a family emergency or other emergency. (3) Quorum And Vote Required: Providing the
above prerequisites have been met and following roll call to establish that a quorum is physically
present at the meeting site, a motion shall be made and considered as to whether to allow the
member to remotely attend the meeting via electronic means. A vote may be taken to permit
participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason applies to each case and proper
notice has been provided to the City Clerk. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each remote
participation via electronic means. The motion must be approved by a vote of a majority of the City
Council.
(4) Adequate Equipment Required: Any member participating electronically and other members of
the City Council must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be
able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing remote attendance via electronic
means at any meeting, the City Council must be satisfied that adequate remote access is available to
satisfy these requirements.
(5) Meeting Minutes: Any member attending remotely via electronic means shall be counted as
present for the meeting. The meeting minutes shall reflect and state specifically whether each
member is physically present, absent, or present by electronic means and shall state the approved
reason necessitating attendance via electronic means.
(6) Rights Of Remote Member: Any member permitted to participate remotely via electronic means
shall be permitted to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate in the same
capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The remote member shall be heard, considered, and
counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any remote members shall be called during
any vote taken and his or her vote counted and recorded by the City Clerk and placed in the meeting
minutes. A member participating remotely via electronic means may leave a meeting and return as in
the case of any member, provided the member attending via electronic means shall announce his or
her leaving and returning to the quorum present.
(7) Costs: Any member participating remotely via telephone shall be reimbursed for the cost of the
telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any other costs associated with attendance and
participation via electronic means, including video conferencing and other audio and video
equipment, must be approved by the City Council prior to incurring such costs. (Ord. 072-2018, 12-
10-2018)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 14/735
Sec. 2-33. Meetings - Special 5 ILCS 120/1 - 120/6, 120/2.02 et seq.; 65 ILCS 5/3-11-13.5:
Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or three (3) Councilmen and notice
thereof shall be given to each member of the Council by the City Clerk at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to said meeting and notice thereof shall be given the public as provided in the Illinois Open
Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
(1) Policy Statement: It is the policy of the City of Rock Island, Illinois, that a member of the City
Council, which is subject to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/1 et seq., may attend and participate in any open or closed meeting of the City Council from a
remote location via telephone, video or internet connection, provided that such attendance and
participation is in compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
(2) Prerequisites: Any member of the City Council shall be provided the opportunity to attend an open
or closed meeting via electronic means from a remote location if a quorum is physically present at
the meeting site, the quorum votes to approve the attendance by electronic means, and the
requesting member meets the following conditions:
a. The member must notify the City Clerk at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled
meeting, unless such notice is impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be
arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request
for electronic attendance.
b. The member must assert one of the three (3) following reasons why he or she is unable to
physically attend the meeting:
1. Due to personal illness or disability;
2. Due to employment purposes or other City business;
3. Due to a family emergency or other emergency.
(3) Quorum And Vote Required: Providing the above prerequisites have been met and following roll
call to establish that a quorum is physically present at the meeting site, a motion shall be made and
considered as to whether to allow the member to remotely attend the meeting via electronic means.
A vote may be taken to permit participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason applies
to each case and proper notice has been provided to the City Clerk. Otherwise, a vote must be taken
to allow each remote participation via electronic means. The motion must be approved by a vote of a
majority of the City Council.
(4) Adequate Equipment Required: Any member participating electronically and other members of
the City Council must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be
able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing remote attendance via electronic
means at any meeting, the City Council must be satisfied that adequate remote access is available to
satisfy these requirements.
(5) Meeting Minutes: Any member attending remotely via electronic means shall be counted as
present for the meeting. The meeting minutes shall reflect and state specifically whether each
member is physically present, absent, or present by electronic means and shall state the approved
reason necessitating attendance via electronic means.
(6) Rights Of Remote Member: Any member permitted to participate remotely via electronic means
shall be permitted to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate in the same
capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The remote member shall be heard, considered, and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 15/735
counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any remote members shall be called during
any vote taken and his or her vote counted and recorded by the City Clerk and placed in the meeting
minutes. A member participating remotely via electronic means may leave a meeting and return as in
the case of any member, provided the member attending via electronic means shall announce his or
her leaving and returning to the quorum present.
(7) Costs: Any member participating remotely via telephone shall be reimbursed for the cost of the
telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any other costs associated with attendance and
participation via electronic means, including video conferencing and other audio and video
equipment, must be approved by the City Council prior to incurring such costs. (1963 Code art. 2-1;
Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008; Ord. 006-2016, 1-18-2016)
Sec. 2-34. Quorum; Compelling Attendance:
A majority of the members of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller
number, however, may adjourn from time to time and may compel absentees to attend any regular or
special meeting by a written citation, which citation shall be signed by the mayor or councilman issuing
the same and shall be served upon the absentee by any officer authorized by law to serve processes in
the city, by reading the same to such absentee and serving him with a copy thereof. Any councilman
refusing to obey such citation shall forfeit ten dollars ($10.00), to be deducted out of his salary; and upon
the repeated refusal to obey such citation, without good cause, such councilman may be expelled and
his office declared abandoned. The council may also compel members of boards and commissions to
attend meetings of those bodies. (1963 Code, ch. II, art. I)
Sec. 2-35. Ordinances - Adoption:
No ordinance shall be adopted by the city council at the same meeting at which it is offered for
consideration, but each ordinance shall pass to a second reading and shall not be adopted at a meeting
occurring less than five (5) days after the meeting at which its consideration was moved, or at which it
was referred. A motion may be made to consider, suspend operation of this rule, and adopt the
ordinance; and the ordinance shall be adopted if two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the city council vote
favorably therefor. (1963 Code, ch. II, art. I; Ord., § 1, 5-3-1976)
Sec. 2-36. Ordinances - Publication:
The city clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances required to be published by law. (1963 Code,
ch. II, art. I)
Sec. 2-37. Independent Annual Audit:
As soon as possible after the close of each fiscal year the council shall cause an audit of the funds and
accounts of the city by independent certified public accountants; and copies of the audit shall be filed
with the city clerk, the comptroller of the state, and such other places as required by law. (1963 Code,
Ch. II, Art. I)
Sec. 2-38. Term Of Office:
The term of office of the mayor and councilmen shall be four (4) years and until their successors are
elected and qualified. Their election shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I)
Sec. 2-39. Vacancy:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 16/735
If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or councilman, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment or
election as provided in the state statutes. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I)
Sec. 2-40. Conduct At City Council Meetings:
It shall be unlawful for any person to by his conduct interfere with the orderly conduct of a city council
meeting after first being warned that his conduct is disrupting the assembly and is given the opportunity
to cease and yet fails to do so.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to use or possess any bullhorn or similar sound amplification
equipment in the city council chambers other than the equipment utilized by the city or by members of
the regular news media in the course of the news reporting functions.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 94-49, 5-23-1994)
Sec. 2-41. Violation Of City Council Policies At City Council Meetings:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the policies adopted by the city council for the
conduct of its meetings after first being warned that his conduct is disrupting the assembly and is given
the opportunity to cease and yet fails to do so.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 94-49, 5-23-1994)
Sec. 2-42. Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with section 2-40 or 2-41 of this article are hereby
repealed insofar as they do so conflict. (Ord. 94-49, 5-23-1994)
Sec. 2-43. Effective Date:
Sections 2-40 and 2-41 of this article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval as required by law. (Ord. 94-49, 5-23-1994)
Secs. 2-44--2-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-51. Oaths; bonds:
(a)Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices and positions, all officers elected or
appointed shall take and subscribe the oath as required by state statute.
(b)Officials and employees of the city designated by the council shall execute a bond in the amount
required by the council with security to be approved as provided by law. Each bond shall be payable
to the city, shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the
payment of all money received by such officer, and shall be filed with the city clerk. (1963 Code, Ch.
II, Arts. I, III; Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 17/735
Sec. 2-52. Residency Requirement For City Employees:
(a)All employees of the city hired after June 11, 1991, shall live within ten (10) miles of the intersection of
17th Street and 31st Avenue in Rock Island, Illinois, and within the state of Illinois unless their
collective bargaining agreement grants an exception to this section.
(b)All new employees of the city hired after June 11, 1991, shall be allowed up to six (6) months from the
expiration of their probationary period to relocate into the defined area.
(c)This section shall not apply to employees where both husband and spouse are employees of the city
of Rock Island and one of said employees was hired prior to June 10, 1991, and the other spouse
subsequent to said date. (Ord. 91-72, § 1, 6-10-1991; Ord. 91-131, §§ 1-3, 12-2-1991; Ord. 94-75, §§
1, 2, 9-12-1994; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Secs. 2-53--2-65. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. CITY MANAGER
Sec. 2-66. Office created:
The office of city manager is hereby created. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 2-67. Appointment:
The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for an indefinite term. The city
manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with
special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the
duties set forth in this division. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or the
state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 2-68. Powers And Duties:
The city manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city. The manager shall have and
exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute and such other authority as may be granted by
the city council. In addition to the powers and duties required by statute, the manager shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To enforce all laws and ordinances within the city insofar as the enforcement is within the powers
of the city.
(2) To attend all meetings of the city council and to recommend to the council such action as may be
necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city.
(3) To hire and discharge all employees authorized by the city council to be hired at such
compensation as may be set or authorized by the city council. All employees shall perform their
duties subject to the direction of the city manager or that of the superior to whom the manager may
assign such employee. Provided that the manager may delegate to any other official or employee the
authority to hire or discharge any employees so authorized.
(4) To retain, appoint and discharge the city attorney and assistant city attorneys. In addition to the
aforesaid legal staff, to appoint, with the consent of the city council, such legal counsel as the city
manager deems necessary to perform such duties as may from time to time be directed by the city
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 18/735
manager or the city attorney. The special counsel as may be appointed shall not perform any
services for the city until the manner in which they shall be compensated for their services shall be
resolved. The city council shall determine the manner of compensation for the special counsel.
(5) All appointive offices of the city shall be filled by appointment by the city manager, except where
otherwise required by statute and except for offices on boards and commissions established by local
ordinances; and the manager shall report to the mayor and to the city council such appointments, or
any removal from office, made by him as soon as possible after the appointment or removal. Every
administrative department of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager,
who shall have the power to appoint and remove all department heads except where otherwise
specifically required by statute.
(6) The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party and may
sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the city council, excepting where the city council
directs or has directed that some other officer or officers shall do so. Any contract for purchase of
supplies, materials and equipment, and any and all contracts for contractual services made by the
city wherein said total price or contractual service price exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00), except for operating supplies, shall be made only after prior authorization by the city
council. The city manager shall see that all terms of any contract to which the city is a party are fully
performed by all parties thereto.
(7) The city manager shall cause to be prepared each year the annual budget in time for
consideration and enactment by the city council, during the first quarter of the fiscal year; and to
prepare the tax levy ordinance for passage, and file a certified copy thereof with the county clerk
within the time required by law. He shall keep current accounts of the amounts appropriated and the
amounts spent out of such appropriation, showing the unexpended appropriations at all times.
(8) The city manager shall recommend to the city council the salaries to be paid each appointive
officer and subordinate employee of the city.
(9) The city manager may make investigations into the affairs of the city or any department or division
thereof, and may investigate all complaints in relation to the administration of the government of the
city and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.
(10) The city manager shall maintain an office in the city hall and shall devote his entire time to the
discharge of his official duties.
(11) The city manager may consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his
jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council, and he may be the head of one or more
departments.
(12) The city manager shall appoint the members of the board of local improvements. This board
shall consist of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) members. One of such members shall
be designated by the city manager as president of the board. The board shall meet at such times as
it may determine or upon call of the president thereof, and shall have the powers and duties granted
to it by statute.
(13) In cases of an accidental injury to or death of firemen and policemen, the city manager will follow
all applicable state laws such as the workers' compensation act 1, workers' occupational disease act
2, line of duty compensation act 3, public safety employee benefits act 4 and public employee
disability act 5.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 19/735
a. Medical Care: In case of an accident resulting in an injury to or death of a policeman or fireman
in the employ of the city while in the performance of his duties, the city manager or his designee
shall have authority to secure and provide all necessary first aid, medical and surgical services,
and all necessary medical, surgical, and hospital services thereafter incurred, limited, however, to
that which is reasonably required to cure or relieve the effects of the accidental injury.
b. Investigation Of Facts: It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to make a
complete investigation of all facts surrounding any accident resulting in an injury to or death of a
policeman or fireman in the employ of the city while in the performance of his duties, to obtain the
statements of all material witnesses and to present a report thereof to the council. Such report
shall also show the date and hour of any such accident, the place of occurrence of the same, the
names and addresses of witnesses, the apparent nature and extent of the injury and whether the
injury or death was caused under circumstances creating a legal liability for damages on the part of
some person other than the city. Where the injury or death for which compensation is payable was
caused by some other person other than the employer, then legal proceedings may be taken
against such other person to recover damages notwithstanding such employer's payment of or
liability to pay compensation.
c. Payment Of Expenses: All bills showing the items of expenses incurred for any medical care and
hospital treatment referred to in subsection (13)a of this section shall be presented to the city
manager, who shall satisfy himself as to the reasonableness of the charges made for the services
so rendered and approve the bills submitted by the personnel department and make his
recommendation to the council as to the payment of such claim expenses by the city.
d. Reimbursement By Third Person: If the city attorney is of the opinion that any accident referred
to in this section created a legal liability for damages on the part of some person other than the
city, it shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to demand from such person
reimbursement to the city for the amount expended by the city for the medical care and hospital
treatment of any such policeman or fireman. In default of payment of such amount so expended,
the city attorney may institute proceedings to recover for the city the amount so expended.
(14) The city manager shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city council.
(1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 2, 2-14-1977; Ord. 93-08, § 1, 2-8-1993; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 2-69. Absence Or Incapacity:
In the event that the city manager shall be absent from the city or incapacitated from performing the
duties of his position, the city council may designate a qualified administrative officer to act as city
manager during such absence or incapacity. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 2-70. Removal 21:
The city manager may be removed by the council by a majority vote of its members. The city manager
may demand written charges or a written statement of the reasons for removal, which the council shall
furnish to the city manager within twenty (20) days after the filing of such request. During this period, the
city manager may be suspended from office without pay. The action of the council in removing the city
manager shall be final. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 2-71. Administrative Assistant:
(a)Position Created: There is hereby created the position of administrative assistant to the city manager.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 20/735
(b)Residence; Appointment; Removal: The administrative assistant shall be appointed and removed by
the city manager. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or the state, but
during his employment by the city he shall reside within the city.
(c)Duties: The administrative assistant shall be directly responsible to the city manager, and his duties
shall be assigned to him from time to time by the city manager. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Secs. 2-72-2-85. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-86. Appointment; Term Of Office 22:
The city clerk shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years as provided by law. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art.
I; Ord., 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-87. Duties Generally 23:
(a)The corporate seal of the city shall be and remain in the custody and keeping of the city clerk, to be
used by him in all cases provided for by the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, and in all
such other cases where, by the laws and customs of any state or nation, the use of the corporate
seal of the city may be requisite or proper.
(b)He shall keep all papers belonging to the city, the custody and control of which are not given to other
officers. He shall attend all meetings of the city council and keep a full record of its proceedings in the
journal.
(c)He shall keep and maintain a license record showing to whom, for what purpose, for what time, for
what license fee and for what length of time licenses have been granted.
(d)He shall perform such additional duties as are assigned to him from time to time by the director of
finance of the city. Further, he shall keep a current index of all special ordinances of the city and keep
a current revision of the revised ordinances of the city. (1963 Code, Ch. I, Art. III, and Ch. II, Art. I;
Ord., 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-88. Deputy Clerk 24:
The city clerk may designate a deputy clerk to do such acts and exercise such authority as is granted by
law. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I)
Secs. 2-89-2-100. Reserved:
DIVISION 4. CITY TREASURER 25
Sec. 2-101. Appointment; Term Of Office 26:
The city treasurer shall be appointed and serve for a term of four (4) years. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I;
Ord., 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-102. Duties Generally 27:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 21/735
The city treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city, and he shall keep accurate and
complete books of account of all city receipts and expenditures and all of his transactions as treasurer
as required by law. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I)
Sec. 2-103. Deposits 28:
The city treasurer shall deposit all city funds in his custody in the name of the city in such banks as are
designated by the city council as depositories. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. I)
Sec. 2-104. Records Of Bonds:
The city treasurer shall keep in his office books containing a correct list of all outstanding bonds of the
city showing the number and amount of each and for and to whom the bonds were issued. When city
bonds are purchased, paid or canceled, these books show these additional facts. (1963 Code, Ch. II,
Art. I)
DIVISION 5. STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT 1
Sec. 2-105. Definitions:
For purposes of this division, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
Campaign For Elective Office : Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection,
nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office
in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice presidential
electors, but does not include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, 2) relating to collective bargaining, or 3) that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person's official duties.
Candidate : A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an
elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for
placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 2.
Collective Bargaining : Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public
labor relations act 3.
Compensated Time : With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that
counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment,
but for purposes of this division, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to
officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when
the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
Compensatory Time Off : Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in
whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a
condition of his or her employment.
Contribution : Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code 4.
Employee : A person employed by the city of Rock Island whether on a full time or part time basis or
pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 22/735
to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
Employer : The city of Rock Island.
Gift : Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible
item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
Leave Of Absence : Any period during which an employee does not receive: 1) compensation for
employment, 2) service credit towards pension benefits, and 3) health insurance benefits paid for by the
employer.
Officer : A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance,
regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
Political Activity : Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any
political organization, but does not include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, 2) relating to collective bargaining, or 3) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
Political Organization : A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not
incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a
county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code 5, but only with regard to those activities that require
filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
Prohibited Political Activity :
(1) Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
(2) Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or
receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
(3) Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of
value intended as a campaign contribution.
(4) Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for
elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
(5) Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine
probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
(6) Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
(7) Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or
against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
(8) Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 23/735
(9) Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection
with a campaign for elective office.
(10) Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
(11) Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other
campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
(12) Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
(13) Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
(14) Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
(15) Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
Prohibited Source : Any person or entity who:
(1) Is seeking official action: a) by an officer or b) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee;
(2) Does business or seeks to do business: a) with the officer or b) with an employee, or with the
officer or another employee directing that employee;
(3) Conducts activities regulated: a) by the officer or b) by an employee, or by the officer or another
employee directing that employee; or
(4) Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the
official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-106. Prohibited Political Activities:
(a)No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any
"compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the city of Rock Island in connection with any prohibited political activity.
(b)At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform
any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of
employment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
(c)No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in
consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in
consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
(d)Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in
as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a
voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this division.
(e)No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or
2) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to
the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 24/735
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a
member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-107. Gift Ban:
Except as permitted by this division, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family
member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that
violates this section. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-108. Exceptions:
Section 2-107 of this division is not applicable to the following:
(1) Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general
public.
(2) Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member,
pays the fair market value.
(3) Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or b) activities associated with a
fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
(4) Educational materials and missions.
(5) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
(6) A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son,
daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband,
wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
(7) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has
reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position
or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship,
the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the
history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including
any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or
employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
(8) Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single
calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which
they were purchased or prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this subsection, "catered" means
food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 25/735
(9) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or
employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
(10) Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this act, "intragovernmental
gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and
"intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
(11) Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
(12) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative
total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
(Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-109. Disposition Of Gifts:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or
employee, does not violate this division if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501 (c)(3) of the internal revenue code of
1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-110. Ethics Advisor:
The Rock Island city attorney is appointed to serve as the "ethics advisor" of the city of Rock Island. The
ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the city of Rock Island concerning
the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this division and state ethics laws. The ethics
advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the city council. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-
2004)
Sec. 2-111. Ethical Standards Policy:
The city of Rock Island ethical standards policy is incorporated herein by reference and to the extent that
it is less restrictive than the state officials and employees ethics act (public act 93-615 as amended by
public act 93-617) and this division, then the provisions of the state act and this division shall prevail.
(Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-112. Ethics Commission:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics commission of the city of Rock Island.
The commission shall be comprised of three (3) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the city council. No person shall be appointed as a member of the commission who is related
either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the city of Rock
Island.
At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees shall draw lots to determine their initial
terms. Two (2) commissioners shall serve two (2) year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 26/735
one year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms. Commissioners
may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson from their number.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall
consist of two (2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the affirmative vote
of two (2) members.
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may remove a commissioner in case of
incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service on the commissioner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the commissioner and after
providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10) days' notice.
Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of
its powers.
(2) Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and
deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with this
division and refer violations of this division to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The
commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this
division and not upon its own prerogative.
(3) To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional
information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this division.
(4) To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers
pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the city of Rock Island
to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to
cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
(5) The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this
division. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-113. Complaints:
(a)Complaints alleging a violation of this division shall be filed with the ethics commission by delivery to
the city clerk.
(b)Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him
or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business
days after receipt by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also
advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint
and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
(c)Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this
division, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the
complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the
open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 27/735
commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to
proceed within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-107 of this division and there is
a determination of probable cause, then the commission's notice to the parties shall include a
hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to
prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is
deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the
decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-106 of this division, then the
commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute
such actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the
custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
(d)On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the
commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the
open meetings act.
(e)Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the
commission shall either: 1) dismiss the complaint or 2) issue a recommendation for discipline to the
alleged violator and to the city manager or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular
findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of
public information.
(f)If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing
on the complaint within seven (7) business days after the issuance of the recommendation for
discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall
conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the
hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7)
days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator
and to the city manager or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
(g)If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the
respondent is a candidate, the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (e)
of this section within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days
preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if
possible.
(h)The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-107 of this
division in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous
complaint alleging a violation of this division in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars
($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may recommend
any appropriate discipline up to and including discharge.
(i)A complaint alleging the violation of this act must be filed within one year after the alleged violation.
(Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-114. Penalties:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 28/735
(a)A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-106 of this division may be punished by
a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than
three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(b)A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-107 of this division is subject to a fine in
an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
(c)Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this division
to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not
more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(d)A violation of section 2-106 of this division shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for
the city of Rock Island by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such
offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction
shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section 2-107 of this division may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the city of Rock Island in circuit court, or, by the ethics commission as an administrative
adjudication pursuant to chapter 10, article VI of this code.
(e)In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or
employee who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-106 or 2-107 of this division is subject
to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-115. Amendments And Constitutionality:
Any amendment to the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act") that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall be
incorporated into this division by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this division by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city of Rock Island.
If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this division shall be
repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This division shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city of Rock Island if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme
court.
If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of
the remainder of the act, or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this division shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this division relating to
the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city of Rock Island. (Ord. 55-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Secs. 2-116-2-120. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. COMPENSATION 36
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 29/735
Sec. 2-121. Unclassified Positions:
The officers or employees of the city named in this section shall receive in payment for their services as
such the following compensation payable out of the city treasury:
Mayor, annually: Fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).
Councilman, annually: Six thousand dollars ($6,000.00).
The city clerk, city manager, city attorney and assistant city attorneys shall be compensated as
provided in their respective contracts approved by the city council. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Arts. I, III;
Ord., 6-10-1963; Ord., 5-7-1964; Ord., 5-14-1964; Ord., 6-20-1966; Ord., 7-10-1967; Ord., 10-16-
1967; Ord., 6-24-1968; Ord., 11-18-1968; Ord., 2-24-1969; Ord., 7-14-1969; Ord., 6-26-1972; Ord.,
10-23-1972; Ord., 1-22-1973; Ord., 6-25-1973; Ord., 6-10-1974; Ord., 4-28-1975; Ord., 2-7-1977;
Ord., 2-14-1977; Ord., 4-25-1977; Ord., 2-13-1978; Ord., 7-10-1978; Ord., 6-25-1979; Ord., 4-14-
1980; Ord., 6-16-1980; Ord., 4-20-1981; Ord., 9-28-1981; Ord. 84-7, 4-16-1984; Ord. 89-3, 1-3-1989;
Ord. 89-7, 2-20-1989; Ord. 89-61, 11-6-1989; Ord. 90-03, 2-6-1990; Ord. 91-15, 2-11-1991; Ord. 92-
24, 2-3-1992; Ord. 92-49, 3-23-1992; Ord. 93-07, 2-1-1993; Ord. 93-10, 2-8-1993; Ord. 94-13, 3-7-
1994; Ord. 94-17, 3-14-1994; Ord. 94-21, 3-21-1994; Ord. 94-86, 10-10-1994; Ord. 95-19, 3-6-1995;
Ord. 95-25, 3-27-1995; Ord. 96-17, 3-18-1996; Ord. 96-30, 4-15-1996; Ord. 97-27, 4-7-1997; Ord.
98-35, § 1, 4-20-1998; Ord. 99-15, § 1, 3-15-1999; Ord. 25-2000, § 1, 4-17-2000; Ord. 29-2001, § 1,
4-2-2001; Ord. 16-2002, § 1, 3-4-2002; Ord. 32-2003, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. 61-2004, § 1, 5-17-2004;
Ord. 051-2005, § 1, 6-13-2005; Ord. 095-2005, § 1, 11-14-2005; Ord. 087-2006, § 1, 12-4-2006; Ord.
058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-122. Position Classification And Pay System:
(a)Effective the first full pay period of the fiscal year, the classification and salary plan listed herein shall
be in effect for all employees in the classified service (excluding employees represented by American
Federation of State, County Municipal Employees (chapters A and B), Command Officers
Association, Fraternal Order of Police, International Association Fire Fighters and United Auto
Workers of the city.
CLASS SPECIFICATION
Class Code Title Salary Grade
Clerical And Office
10401 Office assistant I NA1
10403 Office assistant II NA3
10406 Office assistant III NA6
10408 Administrative secretary NA8
10409 Executive secretary NA9
10411 Benefits coordinator NA9
Human Services
10407 Human services specialist I NA6
10410 Human services specialist II NA10
Technical Professional
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 30/735
10450 Office manager NA12
10458 Assistant to the finance director NA12
10412 Budget coordinator NA12
10414 Accountant NA13
10459 Auditor NA15
10416 Network administrator NA16
10424 Lead program officer NA16
10446 Special projects manager NA16
10426 Economic development coordinator NA17
10447 Information management project manager NA18
Management
10413 Accounts receivable and customer service supervisor NA14
10415 Risk manager/personnel assistant NA15
10417 Equipment maintenance supervisor NA15
10418 Electrical and equipment maintenance supervisor NA15
10419 Sanitation supervisor NA15
10420 Marina manager NA15
10456 Water distribution supervisor NA15
10457 Assistant to the public works director NA15
10421 Budget/collections supervisor NA16
10422 Utilities maintenance supervisor NA16
10423 Assistant city engineer NA16
10427 Telecommunications supervisor NA16
10455 Technical services manager NA16
10425 Street maintenance supervisor NA17
10428 Wastewater treatment plant supervisor NA18
10429 Water treatment plant supervisor NA18
10448 Assistant information technology director NA18
15427 King Center director NA18
10430 Accounting supervisor NA19
10432 Building official NA19
28431 Assistant fire chief NA19
10434 Fleet services director NA20
10460 City stormwater engineer NA20
10461 Street and technical services manager NA20
10435 Utilities superintendent NA21
10436 Planning and redevelopment administrator NA21
15427 Personnel director/assistant to city manager NA21
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 31/735
10438 Municipal services superintendent NA21
10439 City engineer NA21
15440 Information technology service director NA22
15441 Director of finance NA23
15442 Chief of police NA23
27443 Fire chief NA23
15444 Public works director NA23
15445 Community and economic development director NA23
15444 Assistant city manager/public works director NA24
Miscellaneous
99396 Camp counselor
99397 Planning intern
99398 GIS intern
99399 Engineering intern
10982 Management intern
(b)Personnel Rules: All employees in the classified service of the city are subject to the personnel rules
dated June 2, 2003, as amended, published in pamphlet form and on file with the city clerk. Nothing
in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect said rules, and they are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this
section. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., 2-13-1964; Ord., 5-7-1964; Ord., 6-28-1965; Ord., 6-20-
1966; Ord., 12-17-1966; Ord., 6-26-1967; Ord., 8-28-1967; Ord., 1-15-1968; Ord., 6-17-1968; Ord.,
4-7-1969; Ord., 6-16-1969; Ord., 7-13-1970; Ord., 7-12-1971; Ord., 6-26-1972; Ord., 6-25-1973;
Ord., 5-20-1974; Ord., 11-22-1976; Ord., 4-17-1978; Ord., 6-26-1978; Ord., 12-17-1979; Ord., 12-17-
1979; Ord., 3-17-1980; Ord., 8-11-1980; Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord., 10-12-1981; Ord. 82-31, 9-27-1992;
Ord. 82-59, 12-20-1982; Ord. 82-85, 3-21-1983; Ord. 84-5, 4-9-1984; Ord. 86-25, 5-12-1986; Ord.
86-30, 6-16-1986; Ord. 86-65, 12-8-1986; Ord. 87-23, 3-23-1987; Ord. 87-29, 3-23-1987; Ord. 87-66,
8-10-1987; Ord. 88-05, 1-18-1988; Ord. 88-63, 11-7-1988; Ord. 89-4, 2-6-1989; Ord. 89-18, 4-3-
1989; Ord. 89-20, 4-3-1989; Ord. 89-37, 7-10-1989; Ord. 91-25, 3-18-1991; Ord. 92-33, 3-16-1992;
Ord. 92-34, 3-16-1992; Ord. 92-53, 4-6-1992; Ord. 92-55, 4-16-1992; Ord. 93-15, 3-15-1993; Ord.
93-16, 3-15-1993; Ord. 94-69, 8-8-1994; Ord. 95-14, 2-20-1995; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-123. Increases During Fiscal Year-Authorized 1:
Under the powers granted by the Illinois constitution to home rule municipalities, the city council may
increase compensation paid to city employees during the fiscal year after the adoption of the annual
appropriation ordinance. (Ord., 2-3-1975)
Sec. 2-124. Increases During Fiscal Year-How Made:
Any increase of compensation to any employee of the city shall be done only by the official action of the
city council; except, however, the city manager shall have the authority to grant merit increases to
employees at any time during the fiscal year if in his discretion said increases are merited. (Ord., 2-3-
1975; Ord., 3-10-1975)
Secs. 2-125-2-140. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 32/735
ARTICLE V. FINANCE 40
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-141. Fiscal Year 41:
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on April 1 of each calendar year. Beginning January 1, 2015,
the fiscal year shall commence on January 1 of each calendar year. (1963 Code, ch. I, art. V; Ord. 052-
2013, 9-9-2013)
Sec. 2-142. Director-Generally:
(a)Office Created, Appointment: There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the
director of finance, who shall be, or be appointed by, the city manager with the approval of the city
council.
(b)Qualifications: The director of finance shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and shall have
had experience in budgeting and financial control. (Ord., 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-143. Director-Powers And Duties:
The director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to
that end he shall:
(1) Compile the current expense estimates for the budget for the city manager.
(2) Compile the capital estimates for the budgets for the city manager.
(3) Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all
expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded.
(4) Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices,
departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office,
department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city
budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid
therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it, and the unencumbered balance; and require reports of
receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be
made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient.
(5) Submit to the council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and
disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city.
(6) Prepare for the city manager, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and
report.
(7) Supervise and be responsible for all special assessments for the city government, and give such
notice of special assessments as may be required by law.
(8) Collect all special assessments, license fees and other revenues of the city or for whose
collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from the state or federal
government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 33/735
(9) Deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution
of the council, or, if no such resolution is adopted, by the city manager, subject to the requirements of
law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits; but all such interest shall be the property of
the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account.
(10) Approve all proposed expenditures; unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered
balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no
expenditure shall be made. (1963 Code, ch. I, art. IV; Ord., § 1, 10-12-1968; Ord., § 1, 6-21-1976;
Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-144. Work Programs; Allotments:
Before the beginning of the budget year, the head of each office, department or agency shall submit to
the city manager, when required by him, a work program for the year, which program shall show the
requested allotments of the appropriations for such office, department or agency for the entire budget
year. The city manager shall review the requested allotments in light of the work program of the office,
department or agency concerned and may revise, alter or change such allotments before approving the
same. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation available to said office,
department or agency for the budget year. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-145. Allotments Constitute Basis Of Expenditures And Are Subject To
Revision:
The city manager shall file a copy of the allotments with the director of finance, who shall authorize all
expenditures for the offices, departments and agencies to be made from the appropriations on the basis
of approved allotments and not otherwise. An approved allotment may be revised during the budget year
in the same manner as the original allotment was made. If, at any time during the budget year, the city
manager shall ascertain that the available income, plus balances, for the year will be less than the total
appropriations, he shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several offices, departments
and agencies and revise the allotments so as to forestall the making of expenditures in excess of the
said income. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-146. Transfers Of Appropriations:
The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof
between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of
the city manager and within the budget year, the council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered
appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. (Ord., § 1, 11-
22-1976)
Sec. 2-147. Accounting Supervision And Control:
The director of finance shall:
(1) Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments
and agencies of the city government.
(2) Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims,
demands or charges against the city government and with the advice of the legal department
determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges.
(3) Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in
any office, department or agency of the city government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 34/735
in his office. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-148. When Contracts And Expenditures Prohibited:
No officer, department or agency shall, during any budget year, expend or contract to expend any money
or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for
any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated or that general classification of expenditure. Any
contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this chapter shall be null and void. Any officer or
employee of the city who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall cease to hold his office or employment. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent the
making of contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part
by the issuance of bonds, nor the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the
budget year in which such contract is made, when such contract is permitted by law. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-
1976)
Sec. 2-149. Appropriations Lapse At End Of Year:
All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been
expended or lawfully encumbered. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-150. Fees Shall Be Paid To City Government:
All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city government and shall be paid daily
to the department of finance. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-151. Division Of Purchases:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-152. Competitive Bidding:
Before any purchase of or contract for supplies, materials or equipment, city departments shall give
ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such rules and regulations, and with such exceptions,
as the council may prescribe; however, the council shall not exempt individual contracts, purchases or
sales from the requirement of competitive bidding. (Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 2-153. Contracts For City Improvements:
Any city improvement costing more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be executed by contract
except where such improvement is authorized by the council to be executed directly by a city
department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All such contracts, except in
an emergency situation, for more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by ordinance, provided
the city manager shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. Alterations in any contract
may be made when authorized by the council upon the written recommendation of the city manager.
(Ord., § 1, 11-22-1976)
Sec. 2-154. Accounting Control Of Purchases:
Purchases shall be made pursuant to the purchasing policies, rules and regulations as prescribed by the
city council. All purchases made and contracts executed shall be pursuant to a written requisition from
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 35/735
the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged; and no contract or
order shall be issued to any vendor unless and until the director of finance certifies that there is to the
credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for
the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued,
unless authorized by the purchasing policies, rules and regulations prescribed by the city council. (Ord.,
§ 1, 11-22-1976; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-155. Returned Checks:
Any person who attempts to pay to the city for any city obligation by the use of a check which is later
dishonored by the drawer's bank shall pay to the city a service fee in the amount of thirty five dollars
($35.00) and any additional fees incurred by the city for the returned check. (Ord. 044-2013, 8-12-2013)
Sec. 2-156. Options On City Owned Property-Requests:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-157. Options On City Owned Property-Consideration Paid:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-158. Options On City Owned Property-Applicability:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-159. Bids On Behalf Of City At Tax Sales, Etc.:
The finance director and the city attorney are authorized to attend annually any sale of property to
enforce the collection of any tax or special assessment and bid for and on behalf of the city all
delinquent special assessments offered for sale, on default of other bidders therefor, as provided for in
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-98. (Ord. 82-32, § 1, 9-27-1982)
Sec. 2-160. Public Works Contract Wages:
(a)To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers
employed in any public works by state, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or
by anyone under contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the city is hereby ascertained to be the
same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in Rock Island County area as determined
by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June of the current year. As required by said
act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the department of labor of the state of
Illinois shall supersede the department's June determination and apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the city. The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are
also used in aforesaid act shall be the same as in that act.
(b)Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply general prevailing rate of wages as herein
ascertained to any work or employment except public works construction of the city to the extent
required by the aforesaid act.
(c)The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main
office of the city this determination of such prevailing rate of wages.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 36/735
(d)The city clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any association of
employers and to any person of association of employees who have filed or file their names and
addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates and particular class of
workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
(e)The city clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section with both the secretary of state and the
department of labor of the state. (Ord. 85-18, §§ 1-4, 6-17-1985; Ord. 86-40, 8-11-1986; Ord. 058-
2008, 8-25-2008)
Secs. 2-161--2-170. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. BUDGET POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 2-171. Establishment Of Policy:
There is hereby established a Budget Policy, which shall be implemented by the City Manager in the
orderly preparation of an annual budget. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-172. Implementation By Manager:
The City Manager shall:
(1) Establish and encourage the use of efficient fiscal management procedures in all departments of
the City.
(2) Prepare and present to the Council an annual budget.
(3) Obtain detailed information from all City departments for the purpose of compiling the budget.
Such information shall be in the form required by the City Manager. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-173. Budget - Compilation; Contents:
The budget shall contain estimates of revenue available to the City for the fiscal year for which the
budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for all departments. Revenue and
expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practices. The budget shall contain actual revenues and expenditures for the two (2)
budget years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. The budget shall
show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure is to be made. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-174. Budget - Passage; Effect:
Passage of the annual budget by the City Council shall be in lieu of the passage of the appropriation
ordinance as heretofore required. The budget shall be adopted by ordinance before the beginning of the
fiscal year to which it applies. Subsequent to the passage of the budget, an ordinance shall be passed
establishing Property Taxes to be levied for the fiscal year in accordance with applicable law. This
ordinance shall establish Property Taxes as may be required by the approved budget and shall be
known and referred to as the tax levy ordinance. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-175. Budget - Revision:
During the fiscal year, the City Manager may make adjustments with any departmental budget as
becomes necessary, providing that those revisions do not delete or basically change any activity or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 37/735
program approved by the City Council in the budget document. Any such adjustments shall not cause
total expenditures within the budget to exceed revenues. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-176. Contingency Funds:
The annual budget may contain funds set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed five percent
(5%) of the budget. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-177. Public Inspection, Notice And Hearing On Budget:
The City Manager shall make the proposed annual budget conveniently available for public inspection at
least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing on the budget as provided in this division. Notice of the
availability for inspection of the proposed budget shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the time of
the hearing. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-178. Holding Of Hearing; Notice Published:
At least one public hearing shall be held on the proposed annual budget prior to final approval thereof.
Notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord., 3-15-1982)
Sec. 2-179. Annual Financial Report; Home Rule:
Following the conclusion of each fiscal year the City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City
Council an annual report of the financial condition of the City and a summary of revenues and
expenditures for the preceding fiscal year. This report shall be substantially in accordance with the
recommendations of the Government Finance Officers Association for such reports. It shall be the
responsibility of the City Manager to see that the annual fiscal report is complete and made available for
public inspection. The State law requiring an annual appropriation ordinance and an annual Treasurer's
report shall not be applicable within the City. This division is adopted pursuant to the Illinois Constitution
and the City's power as a home rule unit. (Ord., 3-15-1982; Ord. 058-2008, 8-25-2008)
Secs. 2-180-2-200. Reserved:
ARTICLE VI. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES GENERALLY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-201. Meetings:
All boards and commissions created by the City Council shall hold meetings at least four (4) times each
year. (Ord., 6-28-1965)
Secs. 2-202-2-215. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. APPOINTMENTS; REMOVALS
Sec. 2-216. Compliance:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 38/735
(a)All appointments to boards and commissions of the City shall be for a three (3) year term unless
otherwise provided by State Statute or which are otherwise specifically provided by City ordinance
passed subsequent to the effective date hereof. All appointments to boards or commissions having
less than three (3) year terms prior to adoption of this section shall be for staggered terms in the
initial appointments made during the year commencing with the effective date hereof.
(b)A person is not eligible to serve on a board or commission if that person is in arrears in the payment
of a tax or other indebtedness due to the Municipality or has been convicted in any court located in
the United States of bribery or perjury.
(c)If, during a term of service on a board or commission, a violation of subsection (b) of this section
comes to the attention of the Mayor, the Mayor may give a 30-day written notice to cure the violation.
In the event the violation is not cured or not susceptible to cure, the Mayor may remove the board
member or Commissioner.
(d)Removal of the board member or Commissioner pursuant to subsection (c) of this section is
cumulative and not exclusive of other procedures that may be available to the City for any violation of
subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. 041-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 2-217. Application Forms:
The City Clerk shall have available in his office and at the City Hall reception desk application forms
wherein citizens of the City may apply for consideration to appointment to any board or commission in
the City. Any application received by the City Clerk pursuant to this division shall be submitted by him to
the mayor and city council for consideration at the time appointments are considered. (Ord., § 1, 1-14-
1974)
Sec. 2-218. Council Notified Of Vacancy:
Not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the term of any member of a board or commission
of the city, the mayor's office shall notify the members of city council in writing of the forthcoming
vacancy. In the event of a resignation, termination for cause or death of any member of any board or
commission of the city, the mayor's office shall notify the members of the city council in writing of this
information when the mayor's office receives the information. (Ord., § 1, 1-14-1974)
Sec. 2-219. Consideration Of Appointments:
During the thirty (30) day period prior to the expiration of a term of any member of a board or
commission of the city, or during the thirty (30) day period following the resignation, termination for
cause or death of any member of any board or commission, the mayor shall consult with the members of
the city council regarding possible candidates for the appointment to the vacant position; and all
applications from citizens of the city for appointment as set forth in this division shall also be considered.
(Ord., § 1, 1-14-1974)
Sec. 2-220. Decision Of Mayor And Council:
After due consideration of candidates for appointment described in this division, the mayor shall, within
the aforementioned thirty (30) day period, appoint the member or members to the boards or
commissions of the city with the consent of the members of the city council. (Ord., § 1, 1-14-1974)
Sec. 2-221. Failure To Appoint:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 39/735
In the event the mayor fails to make an appointment within the period described in this division, or in the
event the mayor makes an appointment within the period which is not confirmed by the city council, the
city council may, at the conclusion of the thirty (30) day period, appoint, at its discretion, someone to fill
the vacant position by a simple majority vote. (Ord., § 1, 1-14-1974)
Sec. 2-222. Termination For Cause:
The mayor and city council may terminate the term of any member of any board or commission of the
city if, after a hearing thereon, it is determined that there is due cause for the termination of the term of
the member. This action shall take place only after a majority of the city council and mayor vote to take
such action. (Ord., § 1, 1-14-1974)
Secs. 2-223-2-230. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Sec. 2-231. State Law In Effect:
All the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., not inconsistent with the provisions
of this division shall remain in full force and effect in the city. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980)
Sec. 2-232. Created:
There is hereby created in the city a board of fire and police commissioners, referred to in this division
as the "board". The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint the members of the board.
The board shall consist of three (3) members, whose terms of office shall be four (4) years and until their
respective successors are appointed and have qualified for office. Each member of the board shall take
an oath of office when appointed thereto. The members shall be subject to removal from office in the
same manner as other appointed officers in the city. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980)
Sec. 2-233. Quorum:
A majority of the board of fire and police commissioners constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all
business. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980)
Sec. 2-234. Duties Generally:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have charge of examinations for membership in the fire
and police departments and in conjunction with the chiefs of each department, making promotions within
the departments. The board shall also hear charges which may be brought against any fireman or police
officer of the city and may determine what punishment, in accord with section 2-241 of this division, is
appropriate if the board finds any of the charges have been proved. The board shall further act as an
appeal board to review any appeals of suspensions imposed by either chief of the fire or police
departments as hereinafter provided. The board shall also perform such other functions as provided by
ordinance. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 2-23-1970; Ord., § 1, 5-20-1974; Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980;
Ord. 82-75, § 1, 3-14-1983)
Sec. 2-235. Appointments Generally:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the fire and police
departments according to rules and regulations adopted by the board of police and fire commissioners of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 40/735
Rock Island, not inconsistent with the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et
seq. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-236. Examinations Of Applicants; Disqualifications; Removals:
(a)All qualified applicants, excluding those applicants accepted by the board of fire and police
commissioners under the lateral entry option of the police department, other than applicants for chief,
shall be subject to examination which shall be public, competitive and free to all applicants. All
applicants shall be subject to reasonable limitations as to health, habits and moral character in order
to qualify for examination. The board of police and fire commissioners of Rock Island shall establish
rules and regulations setting forth qualifications and disqualifications of applicants. The board of
police and fire commissioners shall, in accordance with its regulations, determine whether applicants
are qualified or disqualified.
(b)The examinations shall be practical in character and relate to those matters which will fairly test the
capacity of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek
appointment. The examinations may include, but not be limited to: 1) a polygraph test; 2) a written
examination; 3) an oral examination; 4) a test of physical agility; 5) a psychological test; and 6) a
medical examination. No applicant shall be examined concerning his political or religious opinions or
affiliations. The examination of applicants shall be as set forth by rules and regulations of the board
of police and fire commissioners of Rock Island. The examinations shall be conducted by or at the
direction of the board of police and fire commissioners. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord., § 2, 1-12-1981;
Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-237. Probationary Period:
(a)All original appointments are subject to a probationary period of not less than twelve (12) months and
shall be served by all members or officers of the fire or police department. Probationary periods may
be extended and are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the board of police and fire
commissioners of Rock Island. A member or officer shall only obtain "certified status" upon
completion of the probationary period and successful completion of the basic training course
prescribed by the Illinois government law enforcement officers training board, for police officers or the
certified firefighter II course as prescribed by the Illinois fire protection personnel standard and
education commission for firefighters, within the probationary period.
(b)Any employee promoted to a higher classification shall be subject to a probationary period and shall
not receive a permanent appointment for six (6) months and may be returned to his previous certified
status, for cause, within six (6) months from the date of promotion. This time period may be extended
an additional six (6) months by the chief. The promoted employee shall retain the right to
reemployment with the rank from which he was promoted and hold certified status providing the
previous rank still exists, and the employee is still otherwise qualified. Upon successful completion of
the probationary period, the promoted employee, upon the written request of the fire or police chief,
shall attain "certified" status in the new title and may be listed by the board in the official record of
"certified" employees for the new title. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-238. Temporary Appointments 1:
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary emergencies or to prevent
material impairment to the fire or police department, the police or fire chief, with the approval of the city
manager, may make temporary appointments to remain in force until regular appointments may be made
under the provisions of this division, but never to exceed six (6) consecutive months. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-
1980)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 41/735
Sec. 2-239. Promotions 2:
(a)Police Department:
(1) Basis; Eligibility: The board of fire and police commissioners, by its rules, shall provide for
promotion in the police department on the basis of ascertained merit, seniority in service and
examinations, and shall provide whenever it is practical, that vacancies be filled by promotion. All
examinations for promotion shall be competitive. All certified officers or members of the police
department appearing on the record of certified employees maintained by the commission who meet
the necessary training and experience requirements, as specified in the fire and police commission
rules and regulations, shall be eligible to take the promotional examination for a vacancy in the police
department.
(2) Promotional Examination: The promotional examination procedures shall be established by the
board of police and fire commissioners of Rock Island. Promotional examinations shall consist of a
written examination, an oral interview, seniority, and military credit where provided by statute.
(3) Eligibility List: All persons who have successfully completed the promotional examinations shall
be certified to the promotional list by the board in the order of their scores. An eligibility list for
promotion shall be in effect for a period of twenty four (24) months unless during that period of twenty
four (24) months a vacancy or vacancies existed which were not filled by promotion as provided
herein. In the event that a vacancy or vacancies existed for a period of time during the twenty four
(24) months, eligibility list shall be extended for a period of time equal to the time that the vacancy or
vacancies existed during the twenty four (24) month period. At the end of the twenty four (24) month
period or any extensions thereof which is heretofore described, a new list shall be compiled.
(4) Selection: At the time that a promotion is required in the police department, the top five (5)
individuals on the "certified promotion list" shall be eligible to be considered for the promotion. The
decision as to the person to be promoted to the open position shall be determined in the following
manner: Each of the top five (5) individuals for the promotional position shall be evaluated by the
board and the chief of the department involved, jointly. Upon completion of all five (5) evaluations
with the eligible candidates, the board and the chief of the department involved shall make a
determination as to the candidate to receive the promotion. The decision as to which candidate shall
be promoted shall be determined by a vote of the board and the chief, with each commissioner
having one vote and the chief of the department involved having two (2) votes.
(5) Appointment : After a decision is made as aforesaid, the candidate to be appointed shall be
appointed by the board to his new position subject to final certification upon recommendation as
provided by the police chief, as stated in the fire and police commission rules and regulations.
(b)Fire Department:
(1) The board of fire and police commissioners shall provide for promotion for each rank in the fire
department, except for the fire chief, according to the rules and regulations which are in compliance
with the fire department promotions act 3 of 2003. The board of fire and police commissioners may
promulgate rules and regulations supplementing the fire department promotions act but may not
promulgate any rule or regulation which alters or modifies a specific standard contained in the fire
department promotions act.
(2) The board of fire and police commissioners, in consultation with the fire chief, shall determine
when a vacancy exists. When a vacancy exists it shall be filled as soon as possible from the list of
qualified individuals. No employee is eligible for promotion who does not have at least three (3) years
of seniority in the Rock Island fire department.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 42/735
(3) Employees eligible for promotion are those who appear on the promotion list for each rank. An
individual's position on a promotion list shall be determined by a combination of factors including a
written examination, ascertained merit, seniority and subjective evaluations. Each factor shall be
measured in terms of one hundred (100) points per factor but the score for each factor shall then be
reduced by the weight assigned to each factor. The total weighted score may be subsequently
augmented by the application of any veteran's preference as provided by applicable law. (Ord., § 1,
1-7-1980; Ord., § 1, 1-12-1981; Ord. 88-48, § 1, 8-22-1988; Ord. 88-49, § 1, 8-22-1988; Ord. 004-
2005, § 1, 1-24-2005; Ord. 058-2008, § 1, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-240. Lateral Entry Option:
Any person who is presently employed full time as a sworn, commissioned law enforcement officer, and
who has successfully completed a certified state basic course at a law enforcement academy may apply
to the board for consideration under the police lateral entry option. If the board of fire and police
commissioners, in its discretion, accepts the applicant's application under this program, he or she shall
have the option of taking the written exam or in lieu thereof, accepting a score of seventy percent (70%)
without being required to take the exam. In addition to the foregoing, each applicant shall be required to
take an oral examination and a medical examination by the city physician and the pension board
physician if the applicant is eligible for the pension program. In addition, the board shall require the
applicant to take a test of physical agility and a psychological test. Upon successful completion of the
foregoing, the applicant's name shall be placed on the list of certified eligibles by the board as set forth
in section 2-235 of this division. (Ord., § 3, 1-12-1981; Ord. 87-46, § 1, 4-27-1987)
Sec. 2-241. Suspension; Demotion; Removal; Discharge:
(a)Except as hereinafter provided and as provided by the police and fire commission regulations, no
"certified" member of the fire or police department shall be suspended, removed, demoted or
discharged, except upon a hearing before the board of police and fire commissioners and a finding
by the board that the charge or charges of misconduct have been proven by a preponderance of the
evidence. All hearings and hearing procedures shall be as set forth in the police and fire commission
regulations.
(b)A demotion is an assignment of an officer for cause to a position in a lower class or rank and may be
imposed only by the board after a hearing, as provided in this section.
(c)The chiefs of the fire and police department may suspend for cause, without pay, a member of his
department for a period of not more than five (5) days. Any member so suspended by the fire or
police chief as aforesaid shall have the right to appeal that action within seven (7) calendar days from
notification thereof to the board in writing. Any of the aforementioned disciplinary action by the chiefs
shall be in writing and shall contain a statement of facts which show good cause for the disciplinary
action. The notice of disciplinary action shall be served upon the officer personally or by certified
mail.
(d)If an appeal of a suspension imposed by a chief is filed, the board of fire and police commissioners
shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing of the appeal to be commenced within thirty (30) days of the
filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to time. In the event the board determines
that there was cause for the action taken by the chief, the action shall be affirmed by the board. If the
board determines that the charges are not sustained or that there was not just cause for the action
taken, then the officer shall be reimbursed for any portion of his wages he might be entitled to after
the decision of the board. The board shall also have the authority to modify the disciplinary action
taken against the particular individual involved, to include any discipline which the board has
authority to impose under this division subject to any limitations contained in any applicable contract.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 43/735
(e)In the conduct of any hearing on written charges, or on any appeal, each member of the board shall
have the power to administer oaths and affirmations; and the board shall have the power to secure
by its subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and
papers relevant to the hearing. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980; Ord. 82-75, § 2, 3-14-1983; Ord. 058-2008, § 1,
8-25-2008)
Sec. 2-242. Administrative Review Law:
The provisions of the administrative review law and all amendments and modifications thereof and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of final
administrative decisions of the board of fire and police commissioners under this division. The term
"administrative decision" is defined as in section 3-101 of the code of civil procedure 4. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-
1980)
Sec. 2-243. Retirement:
The age for retirement of certified members or officers of the fire or police department in the service of
the city shall be as required by state law. The city manager may extend the retirement date for one year;
such extension may be repeated on a year to year basis. Such mandatory age shall not apply to the fire
chief or police chief. (Ord., § 1, 1-7-1980)
Secs. 2-244--2-255. Reserved:
DIVISION 4. FAIR HOUSING BOARD 43
Sec. 2-256. Application Of Division:
(a)Nothing in this division shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or
renting it, nor shall this division be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective
tenants or buyers for any reason other than religion, race or ancestry.
(b)Nothing in this division shall require an owner to offer property for sale or lease to any person if the
owner has any reason to believe that such person is not negotiating for the purchase or lease of such
property in good faith. (Ord., § 3, 10-9-1967)
Sec. 2-257. Generally:
(a)Established: For the purpose of this division the human rights commission of the city shall serve as
the fair housing board of the city.
(b)Duties: It shall be the duty of the fair housing board to:
(1) Process written and signed complaints of discrimination from bona fide applicants for housing
upon the filing of complaints with the city clerk and the payment of the filing fee.
(2) Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings of fact and make
recommendations to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(3) Render from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written report of its activities to the city
council.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 44/735
(4) Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions
of this division.
(c)Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation from the city. The city shall
appropriate and make available funds for any necessary secretarial or investigative expenses
incurred by the board in performing its duties.
(d)Procedures For Complaints:
(1) Filing: Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of the provisions of this division shall
file a written complaint setting forth his grievance with the city clerk. The complaint shall state the
name and address of the complainant and of the persons against whom the complaint is brought and
shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this division.
(2) Duty Of Clerk: The city clerk shall immediately transmit the complaint to the fair housing board.
(3) Investigation; Notice Of Hearing: After the filing of any complaint, the chairman of the board shall
designate two (2) of the members to make a prompt investigation in connection therewith; and if such
members shall determine after such investigation that probable cause exists for crediting the
allegations of the complaint, they shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful discriminatory
practice complained of by conference, conciliation and persuasion. In case of failure so to eliminate
such practice, or in advance thereof, if in their judgment circumstances so warrant, they shall cause
to be issued and served in the name of the board a written notice, together with a copy of such
complaint to all parties, of a full hearing of the complaint, at a time and place to be specified in such
notice. The person charged with having engaged in or engaging in the unfair housing practices shall
have the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear at the hearing in person or to be
represented by counsel, and to submit testimony. The complainant shall be allowed to present
testimony in person or by counsel.
(4) Hearing; Report: Such hearing shall be conducted by the board. The board shall not be bound by
the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. The board shall have full power to
subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by the board by proper
petition to the circuit court of the judicial circuit. The board shall have power to administer oaths and
to take sworn testimony. At the conclusion of the hearing the board shall render a written report and
recommendations, which shall be served by mail upon the parties. No report shall be delayed more
than sixty (60) days after the date of issuance of notice for commencement of the first hearing.
(5) Prosecution: In addition thereto, the board may include as part of its report a recommendation to
the city council that the city attorney prosecute any person or persons who violated any of the
provisions of this division. The penalty for violation of this division shall be a fine not exceeding two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(6) Revocation Of License: In addition thereto, the city council may direct the corporation counsel to
file with the department of registration and education of the state a complaint against any real estate
broker found guilty of violating any provision of this division, seeking suspension or revocation of the
license issued to such broker by the state. (Ord., § 2, 10-9-1967; Ord., § 1, 11-20-1967; Ord., §§ 1, 2,
3-8-1971; Ord. 87-56, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. 011-2008, 2-4-2008)
Sec. 2-258. Unfair Practices:
(a)It shall be an unfair practice and unlawful for any person to:
(1) Publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any
communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental or
leasing of any housing accommodation within the city which will indicate or express any limitation or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 45/735
discrimination in the sale, rental or leasing of such housing accommodation, predicated upon the
race, religion or ancestry of any prospective buyer, lessee or renter of such property.
(2) Discriminate or participate in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending of money,
guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the
purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation in the city because of race, religion or ancestry.
(3) Solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease of any housing accommodation within the city on
the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any
person or persons of any particular race, religion or ancestry.
(4) Distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner
of any housing accommodation in the city to sell or lease his property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, religion or ancestry of persons in the neighborhood.
(5) Make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing for sale or
the sale of any housing accommodation for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated
presence of persons of any particular race, religion or ancestry in the area will or may result in the
lowering of property values in the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
(6) Deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any listing of residential real estate within the
city to any person because of race, religion or ancestry.
(7) Refuse to sell, lease or rent any real estate for residential purposes within the city because of the
race, religion or ancestry of the proposed buyer or renter.
(b)The provisions of this section shall not apply to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family
dwelling and the rental of an apartment in an owner occupied two-family building. (Ord., § 1, 10-9-
1967)
Secs. 2-259--2-270. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Sec. 2-271. Generally:
(a)Created: There is hereby created the Rock Island human rights commission, referred to in this
division as the "commission", which shall consist of twelve (12) members, who are residents of the
city. The membership of the commission shall be broadly representative of the community, such as
representatives of the several religious faiths and of racial and nationality groups, and shall include
one member of the legal profession, one member from a lending institution, and one member who is
a realtor.
(b)Purpose: The overall purpose of the commission shall be through persuasion and education to
eliminate prejudice and discrimination based solely on the basis of race, color, creed, age, sex,
national origin, ancestry, religion, marital status, physical or mental disability, military status, sexual
orientation, or unfavorable discharge from military service and to safeguard the rights of all citizens
as defined by our laws and constitution. Areas of discrimination shall pertain to, but shall not be
limited to, employment, housing, public accommodations, finance/credit, public education and
economic opportunity. Furthermore, the commission shall protect all citizens from retaliation resulting
from filing a complaint to secure compliance with this division.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 46/735
(c)Objectives: The objectives of the commission shall be:
(1) To strive to remove the artificial barriers and controls which deny persons of the right to choose
their own homes.
(2) To seek through law, education, persuasion, negotiation and mediation the elimination of
discrimination in employment, including, but not limited to, selection, status, eligibility, promotion,
transfer, apprenticeship, membership, terms and conditions, privileges or benefits directly or
indirectly related to one's employment which may be affected by an employer, employment agency or
labor organization.
(3) To assist in the development of programs that aim toward equality and inclusion in educational
facilities and programs, and to ensure that they are available to all children according to their
potential and varying needs.
(4) To implement programs with the chief of police that address the diversity of the community.
(5) To stimulate active involvement of the business community in social programs encouraging
economic opportunity and full employment for all citizens.
(6) To develop a procedure to anticipate, prepare for and help ease community discomfort that may
arise from racial tensions.
(7) To act as a mediator and conciliator in instances of tension erupting into civil disturbance or riots,
and to offer recommendations that hasten necessary change which might eliminate the reoccurrence
of upheaval.
(8) To work for greater citizen participation in the planning and execution of public policy in all phases
of municipal life.
(d)Appointments: The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the city council. Special appointments to the commission shall be made by the mayor with the
approval of the city council as vacancies occur.
(e)Term: Each group of four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, thus assuring
a balance of twelve (12) members at all times.
(f)Meetings: The commission shall meet monthly at the city hall or at other venues at the call of the
chairman and at such further times as meetings are called by the chairman or majority of the
members of said commission. A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum which shall
be required before any business may be conducted. At the April meeting of the commission,
commission members shall elect a chair and vice chair who shall serve for a term of one year. (1963
Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 2-13-1967; Ord., § 1, 6-23-1975; Ord. 87-55, § 1, 6-1-1987; Ord. 011-
2008, 2-4-2008)
Sec. 2-272. Duties And Powers:
(a)Generally: The commission shall advise and consult with the mayor, city manager and city council on
all matters involving racial, religious, ethnic, age or sex prejudice or discrimination.
(b)Investigations: The commission shall conduct informal investigations with regard to complaints of acts
of prejudice or discrimination as defined by this division. Complaints filed with the commission shall
be on forms provided by the commission and shall be filed not later than ninety (90) days from the
date upon which the alleged prejudicial or discriminatory act occurred. Upon the filing of a complaint,
the chair and/or the commission's designated city staff member shall present the complaint to the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 47/735
commission for discussion at its next meeting. Complaints referred to the commission may be
reviewed and discussed by the commission and the commission shall seek to mediate and resolve
the dispute to the parties' satisfaction. The commission shall have the authority to refer the complaint
to such professional, governmental or adjudicatory agency as may be deemed appropriate based on
the nature of the complaint. In all matters, the commission shall give due consideration to other
proceedings which may already be in process and, where appropriate, delay its consideration until
such time as other proceedings have been concluded. Any two (2) members of the commission may
request review of a prior complaint or previous mediation.
(c)Report: The commission shall render an annual report to the mayor and city council.
(d)Community Groups: The commission shall invite and enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and
ethnic groups, community organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans' organizations,
professional and technical organizations and other groups in the city in carrying on its work. The
commission may aid in the formation of local community groups in such neighborhoods as it may
deem necessary or desirable to carry out specific programs designed to lessen tensions or improve
understanding in the community.
(e)City Departments: The commission shall request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data
from city departments through the city manager as may be reasonably necessary to carry out its
work. (1963 Code, ch. II, art. III; Ord., §§ 2, 3, 6-23-1975; Ord. 011-2008, 2-4-2008; Ord. 005-2013,
2-11-2013)
Secs. 2-273--2-285. Reserved:
DIVISION 6. BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 2-286. Created; Members:
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, and to provide for
reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this code, there is hereby created a building code board of
appeals. This board shall consist of five (5) members who are qualified by experience and training to
pass on matters pertaining to building construction. One member shall be a practicing architect, one a
competent builder, one a lawyer and two (2) structural engineers, each of whom shall have at least ten
(10) years of experience as an architect, builder, lawyer or structural engineer. The building official shall
be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the board. The board of appeals shall be
appointed by the mayor and shall hold meetings at its pleasure. The board shall adopt reasonable rules
and regulations for conducting its investigations, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the building official, with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the city council such
new legislation as is consistent therewith. (Ord. 92-03, § 1, 1-6-1992)
Sec. 2-286.1. Right Of Appeal:
Any person whose application for a building permit for the use of an alternate material or method of
construction that has been refused by the building official, or who may consider that the provisions of
this code do not cover the point raised, or that any particular provisions would cause a manifest injury to
be done, may appeal to the building code board of appeals by serving a written notice to the building
official within fifteen (15) days after the decision is made, in which it shall be stated that the applicant
desiring to use the alternate materials or method of construction shall guarantee payment of all
expenses for necessary tests made or ordered by the board of appeals. Such notice shall be at once
transmitted to the board, which board shall arrange for a hearing within fifteen (15) days on the particular
point raised. (Ord. 92-03, § 1, 1-6-1992)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 48/735
DIVISION 6A. PLUMBING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS 46
Sec. 2-287. Created; Members:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official
relative to the application and interpretations of this code, there is hereby created a plumbing code board
of appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters
pertaining to the plumbing design, construction, maintenance and the public health aspects of plumbing
systems. Such board shall consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom shall be qualified and active
in the plumbing field. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold meetings at its pleasure,
choosing its own meeting time and rules of procedure. The Building Official shall be an ex officio
member and shall act as secretary to the Board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the
Board. The Board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy
to the Building Official. (Ord. 92-05, 1-6-1992)
Sec. 2-287.1. Appeal Procedure:
Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by any decision of the inspector of the Plumbing Code
or from any requirement resulting from any enforcement of the Plumbing Code may appeal from such
decision to the Plumbing Code Board of Appeals. Any appeal may be made in writing to the Secretary
within fifteen (15) days after the decision is made, and the Chairman shall cause each member of the
Board to be notified of the appeal. The Board shall meet for a hearing within fifteen (15) days from the
date of appeal and shall render a decision within fifteen (15) days from the day of hearing. (Ord. 92-05,
1-6-1992)
DIVISION 6B. MECHANICAL CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 2-287.2. Created; Members:
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official
relative to the application and interpretations of the Mechanical Code of the City, there is hereby created
a Mechanical Code Board of Appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and
training to pass upon matters pertaining to mechanical design, construction and maintenance and the
public health aspects of mechanical systems and who are not employees of the City. Such Board shall
consist of at least seven (7) members: two (2) may be license holders engaged in the forced air, air
conditioning and ventilation business; one may be a license holder engaged in the hydronic and air
conditioning business; one may be a supervisor employed by the local gas utility company; one may be
a journeyman sheet metal worker; one may be a journeyman pipe fitter; and one may be a journeyman
refrigeration mechanic or a license holder engaged in the refrigeration business. A registered
professional engineer may serve as Chairman of the Board. The Building Official shall be an ex officio
member and shall act as secretary to the Board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the
Board. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold meetings at its pleasure. The Board
shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. (Ord. 92-04, 1-6-1992)
Sec. 2-287.3. Appeal Procedure:
Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by any decision of the inspector or from any requirement
resulting from any enforcement of this Code may appeal from such decision to the Mechanical Code
Board of Appeals. The appeal shall be made by the person aggrieved giving written notice of such
appeal to the building inspector or his designee within fifteen (15) days after the decision is made. The
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 49/735
appeal Board shall meet within fifteen (15) days after the giving of such notice, and shall render a
decision within fifteen (15) days thereafter. Any interested party, including the Building Official or his
designee, shall have the right to present the case to such appeal Board, whose decision shall be final
unless appealed to the court as provided by law. (Ord. 92-04, 1-6-1992)
DIVISION 6C. ELECTRICAL CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 2-287.3.1. Electrical Code Board Of Appeals:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Electrical Code Board of Appeals of the City,
which shall consist of six (6) members:
(1) The electrical inspector to serve as an ex officio member and act as Secretary of the commission.
(2) The Chief of the Fire Department.
(3) A licensed electrical contractor.
(4) A journeyman electrician.
(5) An electrical engineer.
(6) A representative of the local electric utility company.
This commission shall be appointed by the Mayor. If there is no person residing in the Municipality who
is qualified under any one of these descriptions, the Mayor may appoint some other person to fill that
position.
The Electrical Code Board of Appeals shall be and is charged with the duties of recommending safe and
practical standards and specifications for installing, altering, and use of electrical equipment designed to
meet the necessities of the Electrical Code of the City. The Electrical Code Board of Appeals may from
time to time as need or occasion demands, and in the interest of the public, require or recommend such
changes in the standards, specifications and fees as it may deem are necessary. Upon the changes of
any of the provisions set forth in this section, a copy of the same shall be filed in the Offices of the City
Clerk and the electrical inspector. Such recommendations made by the Electrical Code Board of Appeals
shall be subject to approval by the City Council. This commission shall also act as an Appeals Board for
appeals by individuals or organizations who wish to appeal a decision of the electrical inspector. This
Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. (1963 Code art. 2-3; Ord.,
11-8-1965; Ord., 6-26-1978; Ord. 92-06, 1-6-1992; Ord. 005-2018, 1-22-2018)
Sec. 2-287.3.2. Appeal Procedure:
Any person directly interested who is aggrieved by any decision of the inspector of this Code or from any
requirement resulting from any enforcement of this Code may appeal from such decision to the Board of
Appeals. The appeal shall be made by the person aggrieved giving written notice of such appeal within
fifteen (15) days after the decision is made. The Appeal Board shall meet within fifteen (15) working
days after being given such notice and shall render a decision within fifteen (15) days thereafter in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. Any interested party, including the
building official or his designee, shall have the right to present the case to such Appeal Board, whose
decision shall be final unless appealed to the court as provided by law. (1963 Code art. 2-3; Ord., 11-8-
1965; Ord., 6-26-1978; Ord. 92-06, 1-6-1992; Ord. 005-2018, 1-22-2018)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 50/735
DIVISION 6D. COMMUNITY/YOUTH PARTNERSHIP COMMISSION
Sec. 2-287.4. Generally:
(a)Created: There is hereby created a Community/Youth Partnership Commission, which shall consist of
twenty seven (27) members, two (2) of which will be ex officio members. The membership of the
board shall be broadly representative of the community and include five (5) representatives from
social service agencies, five (5) representatives from the community at large, four (4) representatives
from youth representatives, four (4) representatives from the schools, four (4) representatives from
City government, and three (3) representatives from churches. The other two (2) members of the
commission shall be ex officio members who shall serve as staff for the commission. They shall be
Martin Luther King Center Director and the Recreation Director.
(b)Appointments: The members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the City Council. Special appointments to the commission shall be made by the Mayor with consent
from the City Council as vacancies occur.
(c)Terms: Members shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years with the exception of the youth
representatives, who shall serve until their nineteenth birthday, and agency representatives, who
shall serve their term as long as they are employed by the agency.
(d)Meetings: The commission shall meet at City Hall at the call of the Chairman at least four (4) times
each year, and at such further times as meetings are called by the Chairman or a majority of
members of the commission. (Ord. 93-88, 10-18-1993)
Sec. 2-287.5. Purpose And Functions:
The Community/Youth Partnership Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity with the City Council
and shall be responsible for the following:
(a)Review the programs available for youth and identify areas that need changing and strengthening;
(b)Monitor the implementation of the goals established by the advisory task force on youth concerns;
(c)Provide leadership in raising funds and needed resources to establish and maintain the identified
youth programs;
(d)Promote the coordination of services by youth service providers; and
(e) Ensure that the public is made aware of all available youth services
and programs. (Ord. 93-88, 10-18-1993)
DIVISION 6E. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 2-287.6. Created; Members:
In order to hear and decide appeals or orders, decisions or determinations made by the chief building
official relative to the application and interpretations of the Property Maintenance Code of the City, there
is hereby created a Property Maintenance Code Board of Appeals consisting of members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are
not employees of the City. Such Board shall consist of three (3) members and not less than two (2)
alternate members. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 51/735
professional or financial interest. The chief building official shall be an ex officio member but shall have
no vote upon any matter before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold
meetings at its pleasure, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms. The Board shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the chief building official. (Ord.
005-2018, 1-22-2018)
Sec. 2-287.6.1. Appeal Procedure:
Any person directly affected by a decision of the chief building official or a notice or order issued under
this Code shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for
appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or
the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means. The Board of Appeals shall meet
within twenty (20) days after receipt of the application for appeal and shall render a decision thereafter in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the chief building official. Said decision shall be final
unless appealed to the court as provided by law. (Ord. 005-2018, 1-22-2018)
DIVISION 7. SUNSET MARINA BOATERS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sec. 2-288. Created; Members; Term:
There is hereby created a Sunset Marina Boaters Advisory Committee consisting of eleven (11)
members to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Nine (9) of the members
shall be Sunset Marina boaters and no more than two (2) members may be from the same dock series.
The other two (2) members of the committee shall be residents of Rock Island representing the general
public. All members shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years. (Ord. 87-39, 4-13-1987; Ord. 91-
75, 6-17-1991; Ord. 98-82, § 1, 10-19-1998)
Sec. 2-289. Meetings:
The Sunset Marina Boaters Advisory Committee shall meet on the third Wednesday of each month. The
Public Works Department shall provide staff support to the committee and record the minutes of each
meeting. (Ord. 87-39, 4-13-1987; Ord. 91-75, 6-17-1991; Ord. 055-2017, 12-18-2017; Ord. 001-2018, 1-
8-2018)
Sec. 2-290. Purpose And Functions:
The committee shall serve in an advisory capacity with the City Council and shall serve as a method of
communication between the boat owners and the marina management. (Ord. 87-39, 4-13-1987)
Secs. 2-291-2-294. Reserved:
DIVISION 8. LABOR DAY PARADE ADVISORY BOARD 48
Sec. 2-295. Established; Purpose:
A Labor Day Parade Advisory Board is hereby established in the City. The purpose of the board shall be
the planning and coordinating of an annual Labor Day parade to be held in September. (Ord. 89-2, 1-23-
1989)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 52/735
Sec. 2-296. Duties:
Duties of the Labor Day Parade Advisory Board shall be:
(1) To identify, and encourage groups, organizations, and individuals to participate in a Labor Day
parade which represents the rich labor history in the City of Rock Island.
(2) Foster civic pride in the City's cultural, social, business, educational and political
accomplishments.
(3) Foster and encourage a family-oriented event to promote the general welfare of the community.
(Ord. 89-2, 1-23-1989)
Sec. 2-297. Membership; Appointment:
The Labor Day Parade Advisory Board shall consist of at least eight (8) board members to be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. All board members, including the Chairperson and the
Treasurer of the board, shall be citizens of the City except for one board member who may reside
outside the City. The present volunteers who have been involved in the planning of the Labor Day
parade shall be given first consideration for appointment to the advisory board. (Ord. 89-2, 1-23-1989)
Sec. 2-298. Term:
The terms of the Labor Day Parade Advisory Board members shall be four (4) years except for the first
appointments, wherein half of the board members will have a two (2) year term and the other board
members a four (4) year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a four (4) year term. (Ord. 89-2,
1-23-1989)
Sec. 2-299. Municipal Parade Fee Waived:
The Municipal parade fee is expressly waived for the Labor Day parade organized by the Labor Day
Parade Advisory Board. (Ord. 89-2, 1-23-1989)
Sec. 2-300. Participants To Be Held Harmless From Claims:
The City will hold harmless any participants in the annual Labor Day Parade sponsored by the City from
any claims that might arise because of those individuals' participation in said parade. (Ord. 89-2, 1-23-
1989)
DIVISION 8A. NEIGHBORHOOD PARTNERS BOARD
Sec. 2-300A. Board Created:
(a)Created : There is hereby created the Neighborhood Partners of Rock Island, referred to in this
division as "Neighborhood Partners", which shall consist of full and associate members. Only full
members shall be voting members of the board. One-third (1/3) of the full membership, which is
determined at the annual membership meeting, will consist of City appointments. The membership of
the board shall be broadly representative of neighborhood interests in the City.
(b)Appointments : The one-third (1/3) City representatives on the board shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the City Council. Replacement appointments to the board shall be made as
vacancies occur. The number of City appointments will be reevaluated at the annual membership
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 53/735
meeting in February of each year so that the same ratio of appointments will continue from year to
year. The revised number of City appointments will be made by the Mayor and City Council no later
than April 30 following the annual membership meeting. The Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council, shall appoint the member organizations. Each member organization shall appoint its own
representative(s) to the board.
(c)Terms : Members shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years. Appointees may serve only two
(2) consecutive terms, but may be appointed again after a three (3) year waiting period. All initial
terms will officially begin with the first membership meeting in February 1997.
(d)Meetings : The neighborhood partners shall meet at least three (3) times each year, and at such
further times as meetings are called by the board president, board secretary or at least one-third
(1/3) of the members of the board. All neighborhood partners' meetings shall be held at such times
and in such locations as shall be convenient for the attendance of the membership. (Ord. 96-75, 10-
7-1996)
DIVISION 9. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY TEAM
Sec. 2-300.1. Establishment:
There is hereby established a sustainable development advisory team (hereinafter SDAT) for the city of
Rock Island, Illinois, whose primary purpose shall be to offer advice, input and guidance on the
application of sustainable development principles for projects and activities for the city of Rock Island,
Illinois. (Ord. 003-2007, § 1, 1-8-2007)
Sec. 2-300.2. Duties:
SDAT will serve in an advisory capacity as a resource for suggested methods and processes for the
incorporation of sustainable design concepts, methods and technologies into public and private
operations and/or into the construction or remodeling of buildings or properties within the city of Rock
Island, Illinois. (Ord. 003-2007, § 2, 1-8-2007)
Sec. 2-300.3. Objectives:
The primary objectives of the SDAT will be as follows:
(1) To provide the city of Rock Island, Illinois, with the unique development tool to assist businesses
desiring to expand or locate in the city of Rock Island, Illinois;
(2) To reinforce concepts, principles and benefits of sustainable design and development;
(3) To serve as a resource for input and advice on the sustainable design and construction of
facilities as they pertain to the built environment;
(4) To provide suggestions and guidance on the application of sustainable principles for city projects.
(Ord. 003-2007, § 3, 1-8-2007)
Sec. 2-300.4. Membership, Appointment And Term:
(a)The SDAT shall consist of eight (8) members appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city
council. Appointees shall represent the following professions: two (2) members shall be attorneys;
two (2) members shall be architects; two (2) members shall be engineers, and two (2) members shall
be urban planners.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 54/735
(b)The term of the SDAT membership shall be four (4) years. (Ord. 003-2007, §§ 4, 5, 1-8-2007)
Sec. 2-300.5. Meetings:
The community and economic development director or his designee shall call meetings of the SDAT at
such time when a public or private party wishing to utilize the service of the SDAT requests a review of a
project or process. The advice, guidance and input provided by the SDAT shall be given at no cost to the
party requesting the service, shall be advisory in nature, and shall not be binding on the requesting
party. (Ord. 003-2007, § 6, 1-8-2007)
ARTICLE VII. ELECTIONS 49
Sec. 2-301. Permanent Registration:
10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-1 through 5/4-31 is hereby adopted and made applicable to all
primaries and elections held within the city. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. II)
Sec. 2-302. Wards:
The boundaries of the various wards of the city shall be as follows:
(1) First Ward : That part of the city the boundaries of which are as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of 17th Street and the shore of the Mississippi River;
thence meandering westerly and southerly along the shoreline of the Mississippi River to the
centerline of 18th Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 18th Avenue to its intersection
with the centerline of 20th Street; thence north on the centerline of 20th Street to its intersection
with 12th Avenue; thence west along the centerline of 12th Avenue to its intersection with the
centerline of 17th Street; thence northerly along the centerline of 17th Street to the place of
beginning.
(2) Second Ward : That part of the city that lies south of a line described as follows:
The centerline of 18th Avenue extending east from the shore of the Mississippi River to its
intersection with the centerline of 9th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 9th Street to
its intersection with the centerline of 35th Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 35th
Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of 12th Street; thence southerly along 12th Street to
its intersection with the centerline of 11th Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of 11th
Street to its intersection with the shore of the Rock River; all territory west and south of the abovedescribed
boundary to the shore of the Mississippi River and north of the Rock River; also, that
part of the city which lies south of the Rock River.
(3) Third Ward : That part of the city the boundaries of which are as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of 18th Avenue and the centerline of 9th Street;
thence easterly on the centerline of 18th Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of 24th
Street; thence southeasterly on the centerline of 24th Street to the shore of the Rock River; thence
meandering westerly along the shoreline of the Rock River to its intersection with the centerline of
11th Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of 11th Street to its point of intersection with
the centerline of 12th Street extended southerly; thence northerly along the centerline of 12th
Street to its point of intersection with the centerline of 35th Avenue; thence westerly along the
centerline of 35th Avenue to its point of intersection with the centerline of 9th Street; thence
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 55/735
northerly along the centerline of 9th Street to its intersection with the centerline of 18th Avenue to
the point of beginning.
(4) Fourth Ward : That part of the city the boundaries of which are described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of 18th Avenue and the centerline of 24th Street;
thence easterly along the centerline of 18th Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline
of 30th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 30th Street to the point of intersection with
the centerline of 20th Avenue; thence easterly along the intersection of 20th Avenue to the point of
intersection with the centerline of 38th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 38th Street
to the point of intersection with the centerline 31st Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of
31st Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 30th Street; thence southerly along
the centerline of 30th Street to the shore of the Rock River; thence westerly along the shore of the
Rock River to the point of intersection with the centerline of 24th Street extended southerly; thence
northerly along the centerline of 24th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of 18th
Avenue to the point of beginning.
(5) Fifth Ward : That part of the city the boundaries of which are described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of a point on the shore of the Mississippi River and the centerline of
30th Street extended northerly; thence southerly along the centerline of 30th Street to the point of
intersection with the centerline of 18th Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 18th
Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 20th Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of 20th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of 12th Avenue; thence
westerly along the centerline of 12th Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 17th
Street; thence northerly along the centerline of 17th Street to the point of intersection with that
centerline and the shore of the Mississippi River; thence easterly along the shore of the Mississippi
River to the point of intersection with the centerline of 30th Street extended northerly to the point of
beginning.
(6)Sixth Ward: That part of the city the boundaries of which are described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of a point on the shore of the Mississippi River and the centerline of
30th Street extended northerly; thence southerly along the centerline of 30th Street to the point of
intersection with the centerline of 20th Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 20th Avenue
to the point of intersection with the centerline of 38th Street; thence northerly along the centerline of
38th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of 18th Avenue; thence easterly along the
centerline of 18th Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 39th Street; thence
northerly along the centerline of 39th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of 14th
Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 14th Avenue to the eastern limits of the city; thence
northerly along the eastern limits of the city to the intersection of the eastern limits and the shore of
the Mississippi River; thence westerly along the shore of the Mississippi River to the point of
intersection with the centerline of 30th Street extended northerly to the point of beginning.
(7)Seventh Ward: That part of the city the boundaries of which are described as follows:
Beginning at a point which is the centerline of 14th Avenue and the eastern limits of the city; thence
meandering southerly along the eastern limits of the city to the intersection of the shore of the Rock
River; thence meandering westerly along the shore of the Rock River to the point of intersection with
the centerline of 30th Street extended southerly; thence northerly along the centerline of 30th Street
to the point of intersection with the centerline of 31st Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of
31st Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 38th Street; thence northerly along the
centerline of 38th Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of 18th Avenue; thence
easterly along the centerline of 18th Avenue to the point of intersection with the centerline of 39th
Street; thence northerly along the centerline of 39th Street to the point of intersection with the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 56/735
centerline of 14th Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 14th Avenue to the eastern limits of
the city to the point of beginning.
(Code 1963, Ch. II, Art. II, § 1; Ord., § 1, 9-3-1964; Ord., § 1, 12-3-1964; Ord., § 1, 7-12-1965; Ord., § 1,
12-12-1966; Ord., § 1, 12-10-1968; Ord., § 1, 9-25-1978; Ord., § 1, 11-20-1978; Ord., § 1, 9-15-1980;
Ord. 83-56, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 84-37, § 1, 8-27-1984; Ord. 92-114, §§ 1, 2, 8-24-1992; Ord. 92-145, §
1, 12-14-1992)
Sec. 2-303. To Be Nonpartisan:
The election of all city officials shall be on a nonpartisan basis, and the ballots used in those elections
shall designate no party, platform political principle, appellation, or mark whatever, nor shall any circle be
printed at the head of the primary ballots. (Ord. 84-8, § 1, 4-23-1984)
Sec. 2-304. When Primary Election Not Necessary:
No primary shall be held for any position or office for which no more than four (4) candidates have filed.
(Ord. 84-8, § 2, 4-23-1984; Ord. 065-2009, § 1, 10-12-2009)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 50
Sec. 3-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Alcohol: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be
the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.
Alcoholic Liquor: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed by a human being and
containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
Bar: Any facility for serving or dispensing alcoholic liquor located on premises which have a valid liquor
license.
Bartender: Any male or female over the age of twenty one (21) employed in the mixing and serving of
alcoholic liquor.
Beer: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of and infusion or concoction of barley, or other
grain, malt and hops in water, and includes among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and
the like.
Caterer Retailer: A person, corporation or business entity who currently holds a class B, C, D, E, F, G, J
or L license and who serves or sells alcohol at a "catering location" as defined herein, within the city,
whether licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of its food preparation and service business.
Prepared meals and the sale or service of alcoholic liquor must be for a price agreed upon under
contract and may include a cash bar.
Catering Location: A location that may or may not be open to the general public where, pursuant to an
agreement with an event sponsor or host, the catering retailer licensee is providing prepared food and/or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 57/735
liquor at either a private or public function. The caterer retailer licensee is limited to serving or selling
alcohol only for consumption at the catering location.
Convenience Store: A retail establishment which offers for sale, a variety of food and nonfood items
including pop, cigarettes, snacks and toiletries, etc., in a limited physical space.
Discount Store: A retail establishment which concentrates in mass merchandising for the purpose of
offering goods for sale at reduced prices.
Drugstore: A retail establishment which offers the service of a licensed pharmacist to fill prescriptions of
licensed physicians, surgeons and dentists, as well as the sale of over the counter medication and
everyday home and office supplies such as toiletries, cosmetics and stationery.
Golf Course: A green available to the general public which is run by the Rock Island Park board and
contains at least nine (9) holes. This terrain shall be devoted to the game of golf only. Miniature golf shall
not be included in this description.
Grocery Store: A retail establishment which offers for sale all types of foodstuffs both perishable and
nonperishable for consumption off the premises. To a smaller extent, toiletries, magazines, cigarettes
and other pharmaceutical supplies are offered for sale. In some instances, a bakery, delicatessen and
meat section within the establishment may also be included in this definition.
Hotel/Motel: A single- or multi-story building where overnight accommodations are available for at least
twenty five (25) travelers and guests for an adequate fee.
Licensee: Any person, firm, partnership, club, association or corporation who receives a license under
this chapter by original application or renewal.
Liquor Store: A licensed establishment which engages in the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor for
use off the premises.
Live Entertainment: The availability of music, singing, dancing or acting whether it be live performance,
recorded music or instrumental.
Minor: Any person under the age of twenty one (21).
Motor Fuel Station: A retail establishment which offers the sale and pumping of gasoline as well as
vehicle maintenance items and repairs as its primary business.
Officer: Any director, stockholder, owner/manager or person who has a financial interest of any nature in
a private club or directs any policy of a private club.
Original Package: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or other receptacle or
container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic
liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
Premises: The location at which alcoholic liquor is licensed for retail sale. Except as otherwise provided
hereunder, parking lot areas shall not be considered part of the licensed premises.
Private Club: Any association, person, firm, corporation, key club, bottle club, locker club, pool club or
any kind of club or association excluding the general public from its premises or place of meeting or
congregating, which permits on its premises the drinking of alcoholic liquors by members, guests or
both, or which operates or exercises control over any other place where persons are permitted to drink
alcoholic liquors other than in a private home.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 58/735
Private Function: A prearranged private party, function, or event, lasting no longer than three (3) days
and is for a specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation, and not open to the
general public, where guests and attendants are served in a room, rooms or area designated and used
exclusively for the private party, function or event.
Public Function: A prearranged event, function, or activity that is open to the general public that takes
place in a defined area, lasting no longer than three (3) days and is for a specific social or business
occasion, where guests and attendees are served in a physically defined area and separated from
surrounding facility, property or other public areas.
Restaurant: Any public place where meals are prepared and served by workers specifically hired for
such duties; where overnight accommodations are not available; and the sale of alcoholic liquor is not
the major source of profit.
Retail Sales: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
Sale: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, including the sales made by any person whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
Spirits: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such
liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
Wine: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or
vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits.
Wine And Liquor Coolers: Any drink with an alcohol content mixed with other nonalcoholic liquids such
as seltzers or fruit juices. For the purposes of this chapter all wine and liquor coolers shall be
categorized with wine and beer. All coolers shall, therefore, be subject to the same requirements and
restrictions as wine and beer. (Ord. 047-2010, § 1, 7-26-2010; Ord. 011-2013, 3-18-2013)
Sec. 3-2. Liquor Control:
(a)The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner for that area which lies inside the corporate
limits of the city and shall be charged with the administration of the laws of the state as they relate to
licensing within the city and with the provisions of this chapter.
(b)The mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercises of the powers and the
performance of his duties. Such person or persons, together with the mayor, shall constitute the local
liquor commission and shall seek to promote the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city
by regulation and control of the sale of alcoholic liquor.
(c)The local liquor control commissioner and the local liquor commission shall possess all the powers
and duties as provided for in the Illinois liquor control act 235 ILCS 5/1-1 - 5/11-2; 815 ILCS 720/1 - 720/10.1.
(Ord. 88-14, § 1, 3-28-1988)
Sec. 3-3. Remedies For Violation:
(a)Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall be punishable by a
minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). In the event any person is accused of a violation
hereof and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the
violation, that person so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 59/735
These fines are in addition to administrative provisions for suspension, revocation or forfeiture of a
license issued pursuant to this chapter; and payment of such fine shall not constitute an admission of
guilt or innocence for purposes of such administrative proceedings for suspension, revocation or
forfeiture.
(b)The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him/her if he/she
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Illinois liquor
control act. In the case of a suspension, the suspension shall not exceed thirty (30) days. During
such period of suspension, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold, dispensed or consumed on the licensed
premises. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the local liquor control commissioner may instead levy
a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during the period of his/her license.
If the commission determines that a letter of reprimand is warranted or the license shall be
suspended or revoked, it shall issue a written order within five (5) days after the hearing, stating the
reasons for the determination, and shall cause a copy of such order to be served upon the licensee
within ten (10) days. In the event a fine is imposed, the order shall specify the date by which the fine
shall be paid. If the fine is not paid by the specified date, the license shall be suspended for a stated
period of time.
(c)Upon receipt of a complaint being made of a violation of the Illinois liquor control act or of this chapter,
the liquor commissioner shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of
the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge. Notice as herein required shall be by
registered mail or by leaving a copy of the notice at the licensed place of business at least three (3)
days prior to the date set for hearing. Such hearings shall be open to the public and written minutes
of all proceedings shall be maintained.
(d)In instances when the local liquor commissioner has reason to believe that continued operation of a
licensed establishment will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may upon
issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days during which time a hearing shall be held.
When a licensee is engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses upon the licensed
premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
(e)Licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the local liquor
commissioner for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of the Illinois liquor control act,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Conviction of the licensee of any felony.
(2) Conviction of the licensee for any violation of the law relating to the regulation of the sale of
alcoholic liquor.
(3) Conviction of the licensee for any violation of the law relating to the possession and/or sale of any
controlled substance upon the licensed premises.
(4) The wilful making of any false or fraudulent statement by the licensee in an application for any
license described herein.
(f)All proceedings for the revocation of a license shall follow the procedures described in subsection (c)
of this section.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 60/735
(g)Any violation of this chapter and/or of the Illinois liquor control act, by any licensee, manager, agent,
officer, director or employee shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee regardless of whether the
unlawful act or omission occurred without the licensee's knowledge. (Ord. 88-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. 91-
91, 8-26-1991)
Sec. 3-4. Persons Ineligible To Be Licensed:
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to:
(1) A person who is not a citizen of the United States Of America.
(2) A person who is not a resident of Rock Island County, Illinois.
(3) A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
(4) A person who has been convicted of keeping a house of ill fame, pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.
(5) A person who has been convicted of two (2) or more criminal misdemeanors, other than traffic
violations, within two (2) years proceeding the application.
(6) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to
answer charges for any such violation.
(7) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning gambling.
(8) A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not
have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
(9) A person whose license, issued under this chapter or under the Illinois liquor control act, has
been revoked for cause.
(10) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not
be eligible for such license upon a first application.
(11) A person whose place of business is supervised by a manager or agent, unless said manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee and is a citizen of the United
States Of America and of Rock Island County, Illinois.
(12) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
(13) A copartnership, unless all the persons forming a part of such copartnership shall be qualified to
obtain a license, except that only one partner shall be required to be a resident of Rock Island
County.
(14) A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation qualified
under Illinois law to do business in the state.
(15) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to
receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and/or residence within Rock Island
County.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 61/735
(16) Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any
mayor, alderman, members of the city council, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor,
except that license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not located within
the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the
state liquor control commission. (Ord. 88-14, 3-28-1988)
Sec. 3-5. Licensing Procedure:
No liquor license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter unless the applicant has completed
the following application process:
(1) Application Form: All applicants shall complete an application form which shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:
a. The applicant's name, address, telephone number, date and place of birth, social security
number, driver's license number, employment history and criminal arrest record. In the case of a
copartnership or corporation, the aforementioned information shall be provided on all officers of the
corporation, partners, and managers.
1. Any party required to register pursuant to either the Illinois liquor control act or this chapter,
shall submit their fingerprints to the Rock Island police department and submit the required,
nonrefundable processing fee for the purpose of conducting a criminal history check.
b. The name, address and telephone number of the location which is to be licensed.
c. The type of license and any options requested.
d. If the applicant is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation.
e. The length of time the business or corporation has been engaged in the sale of alcoholic liquor.
f. The name and address of the landlord if the proposed location is not owned by the applicant.
g. A statement that the applicant has no financial connections with any manufacturer, bottler,
jobber or wholesaler of alcoholic liquor.
h. A statement that the proposed location is not located within one hundred feet (100') of any
church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or
children, or any military or naval base.
(2) Application Fee: All applications for initial licensing shall be accompanied by a nine hundred dollar
($900.00) nonrefundable application fee.
(3) Affidavit, Signed: All applicants shall sign an affidavit stating that the statements made in the
application form are true and that any untruths or omissions shall be grounds for revocation of a
license. The affidavit shall further state that the applicant agrees to observe all laws of the United
States, the state and the city in the conduct of their business.
(4) Review And Investigation: All applications for licensing hereunder shall be reviewed by the local
liquor commissioner. The local liquor commissioner or his designee shall investigate all information
contained in the application; and if upon investigation the local liquor commissioner is satisfied that
the information contained therein is true and that the applicant has complied with all the requirements
of the state and the city, and the local commissioner determines the issuance of the license is in the
public's best interests and will not adversely affect or have a substantial impact upon the public's
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 62/735
health, safety or welfare he shall approve the application. However, the local liquor commissioner is
vested with the power to refuse the issuance of a license if, after investigation it is determined upon a
finding of good cause that the issuance of the license would not be in the public's best interest
because of its potential adverse effect or substantial impact upon the health, safety or welfare of the
citizens. Upon receipt by the city collector of all required license fees, the local liquor commissioner
shall then issue a license in accordance with the provisions herein.
(5) Changes In Managers Or Agents: If during any licensing period the previously designated
manager or agent is replaced, the licensee shall notify the local liquor commissioner no later than ten
(10) days following the appointment of a new manager or agent; and the manager or agent shall
provide to the local liquor commissioner the information required under subsection (1)a of this section
for the purpose of investigating their eligibility to hold such position.
(6) Proof Of Dramshop Insurance: All applicants shall show evidence of dramshop liability insurance
or other proof of financial responsibility satisfactory to the local liquor control commissioner prior to
issuance/renewal of any license.
(7) Private Clubs; Supplemental Information: All applicants for licensing under the provisions of this
chapter herein defined as a "private club" shall also submit the following application materials:
a. A list of all club officers and their addresses for the preceding three (3) years. Whenever such
officers shall change, a revised list shall be forwarded to the local liquor commissioner within ten
(10) days.
b. A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws if the applicant is a corporation, or articles of
association, or bylaws, if the applicant is an association.
(8) Right Of Entry And Inspection: The right of entry and inspection of any licensed premises by any
officer or agent of any department of the city shall be a condition upon which every license hereunder
shall be issued and the acceptance of any license hereunder shall conclusively be deemed to be the
consent of the applicant and licensee to such entry and inspection.
(9) TIPS Training: Applicants for a supplemental extended hours license, as provided in subsection
3-9(a)(1) of this chapter, or any renewal thereof, who allow on site consumption of alcohol, shall
provide proof that all on site personnel, including managers and employees, have successfully
completed a "training for intervention procedures" (TIPS) course instructed by a certified TIPS trainer
and evidenced by a currently valid TIPS certification. Applicants shall further maintain on site
evidence of current TIPS certification of all employees and as a condition of the extended hours
license, shall provide an affidavit that all new hires will be TIPS certified within thirty (30) days of
hiring.
(10) Annual Training Sessions: All licensees, owners and managers of establishments with a three
o'clock (3:00) A.M. license shall attend annual training sessions hosted by the liquor commissioner
and/or the police liaison officer. These sessions are to improve communication, provide updates on
liquor licensing laws and to offer training to encourage best practices.
(11) Recording System: Effective the 2012/2013 license year, all holders of D and E licenses located
in the "Great River Plaza" area and all holders of licenses with a three o'clock (3:00) A.M. extended
hours option located anywhere in the city will be required to install and maintain a functioning
recording system both inside and outside of the licensed premises. Said videos shall be maintained
in proper working order and be made available for viewing by all law enforcement personnel. (Ord.
88-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. 99-14, 3-15-1999; Ord. 14-00, 3-6-2000; Ord. 51-2003, 7-14-2003; Ord. 009-
2009, 2-2-2009; Ord. 024-2011, 4-4-2011; Ord. 031-2014, 4-7-2014; Ord. 006-2017, 2-13-2017)
Sec. 3-6. Locations Ineligible For License:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 63/735
(a)Generally : No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred
feet (100') of any church, school, other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged
or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or
to restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
business carried on, nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on
premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where such church or school has
been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the
premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquors.
(b)Residential Block : No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to any applicant for
any premises within the corporate limits of the city where the same is located in any block which is at
the time of application devoted exclusively to residential purposes. For the purpose of this section,
"block" shall be defined as the space from intersection to intersection on the side of the street which
the proposed location fronts.
(c)Adjacent Business : No liquor license shall be granted to any applicant or any premises not presently
being used for the sale of alcoholic liquors within the corporate limits of the city where the same is
located in any block in the city which is at the time of the application either wholly or partly devoted to
business uses, unless the applicant shall first file in the office of the mayor a petition signed by a
majority of the property owners, representing at least a majority of the frontage within three hundred
feet (300') in each direction of the proposed location shall front, signifying their willingness to have a
license issued hereunder; providing that in any case if the property owners of at least forty feet (40')
of the property immediately adjacent to or abutting on any side of the proposed location shall not
appear as signers on the petition, no license shall be issued hereunder; provided further that the
signature of any adjacent property owner who is then conducting a place of business in the block
under a license issued hereunder shall not be deemed necessary for the purpose of this section. The
approval of property owners' and/or abutting owners' requirement of this subsection can be waived
under the procedure set forth in subsection (j) of this section.
(d)Limitations : In the event any location to which a license is issued hereunder, on the petition of
property owners as above, shall become and remain vacant for a period of twelve (12) or more
months consecutively, no new license shall be issued to those premises without the necessary
petition of property holders being again presented in accordance with provisions of this section.
(e)Stores : A grocery store, drugstore, convenience store or other store where goods are sold at retail
and where the primary business of such store consists of sales of goods other than alcoholic liquor
(is ineligible for a license); provided, such stores shall not be an ineligible location if the alcoholic
liquor is separated from such other goods by way of turnstiles, fencing, chains, walls, display racks,
or other means suitable to the local liquor control commissioner. It is the intent of this subsection to
prohibit the licensing of stores in which the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the primary business unless
there are adequate controls to monitor those who enter and make purchases of alcoholic beverages.
For the purposes of this subsection, the primary business in sales of goods other than alcoholic
liquor shall be determined by more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross revenue of all goods sold
being derived from the sale of goods other than alcoholic liquor, but shall not apply to restaurants and
hotels.
(f)Plan Required : All initial applications for licensing of stores or upgrading of license classification for
stores shall be accompanied by a plan detailing the area, including cooler locations, where alcoholic
liquor is to be located and the means for separation. Such plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the local liquor commissioner and his/her designee prior to issuance of a license.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 64/735
(g)Exception : All stores licensed as of the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to provisions of
subsection (e) of this section except that permanently located coolers containing beer and wine shall
not be required to be relocated.
(h)Motor Fuel Station : A motor fuel station located within the city shall be an ineligible location for
licensing hereunder, except that such locations may obtain a class E license which shall allow the
sale of beer and wine in sealed packages only, but not for consumption on the licensed premises.
(i)Private Clubs : A "private club" as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter unless having first obtained a
valid class B liquor license. Private clubs licensed hereunder shall be subject to all of the provisions
of this chapter the same as any licensee.
(j)Waiver Of Approval : The city council may waive the approval requirements relating to property
owners and/or adjacent owners set forth in subsection (c) of this section after holding a public
hearing concerning said matter at the request of an applicant for a liquor license. In the event the city
council determines that it is in the best interest of the city that said waiver be granted then, in that
event, the city council shall take official action therefor and refer said matter to the mayor, who is the
local liquor commissioner, to determine whether a liquor license should be granted to the premises
requested by the applicant.
(k)Procedure For Waiver Of Approval: Any person that wants a waiver of approval shall submit an
appeal in writing to the city clerk who will determine the date of the public hearing in conjunction with
the city council. After said date is determined, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) A letter will be mailed to all adjacent property owners whose signatures would normally be
required for the approval of a liquor license application and said letter shall contain the name of the
person appealing the decision, the date of the public hearing, and instructions for the recipients to file
written objections, if any, and/or attend the public hearing in person. These letters will be signed and
mailed by the city clerk who will also be the designated person to receive any written responses
relating to the appeal process.
(2) The notice of appeal letters described above shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least two (2)
weeks prior to the public hearing date and a copy of said letter shall be furnished to the applicant.
(3) The city clerk shall provide the city council and the liquor commissioner with a list of persons to
whom the letters are addressed, along with a copy of the form letter which was mailed to said
persons. The clerk shall also provide a copy of the written appeal and information concerning the
type of liquor license requested and the result of compliance efforts made by the applicant to obtain
the required property owner's signature as set forth in this section. The city clerk, upon receipt of
written objection(s) to appeal, if any are received, shall furnish copies of said written objection(s) to
the city council, the liquor commissioner, the applicant, and the Rock Island police department.
(4) The public hearing, on an appeal, will be held during a regular city council meeting using the
same procedures at said meeting as followed by other public hearings held in said council.
(5) At the completion of the public hearing, the city council will then consider a motion as to whether
to make a recommendation to the liquor commissioner to consider granting a liquor license. The
liquor commissioner will take the matter under advisement and make a decision within thirty (30)
days of the hearing. The applicant will be notified of the liquor commissioner's decision. (Ord. 88-14,
3-28-1988; Ord. 95-98, 12-14-1995; Ord. 96-07, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 3-7. Licenses Generally:
(a)Generally : No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive orders for, keep or expose
for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any alcoholic liquor for sale at retail within the corporate
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 65/735
limits of the city without first having obtained a valid liquor license from the same.
(b)Shifting Devices : The giving away of any alcoholic liquor or any other shift or device to evade the
provisions of this chapter, shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as unlawful selling. The
dispensing of wine by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes shall, however,
not be subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter.
(c)Change Of Location : Any license issued hereunder shall embrace only one place of business and
shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
(d)Transfer Of License : A license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property,
nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such
license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the
death of the licensee.
(e)Licensing Period : The local liquor commissioner shall have the right to grant retail liquor licenses for
the selling at retail of alcoholic liquor for the period beginning on May 1 of any year and ending on
April 30 of the next or succeeding year.
(f)Licensing Period; Semiannual Option : Licenses issued hereunder may be granted for two (2)
consecutive six (6) month periods for the period beginning on May 1 and ending on October 31 of the
same year and subsequently, for the period beginning on November 1 of the same year and ending
on April 30 of the next or succeeding year.
(g)Renewal Of Licenses: All liquor licenses issued hereunder must be renewed annually. Applications for
renewal must be received by the liquor commissioner at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
date of the license. All requests for renewal shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the
activities of the establishment have not deviated from the original application and classification of the
license. Failure to meet the deadline for renewal may necessitate the filing of a new application by
the licensee.
(h)Semiannual Renewal Option: Liquor licenses issued hereunder on a semiannual basis shall be
subject to a fifty dollar ($50.00) handling fee to be paid with the regular license fee for the second six
(6) month period of any licensing year.
(i)Payment Of License Fees: All license fees established hereunder shall be paid to the city collector
prior to issuance of any license or the renewal of any license. License fees established hereunder
shall be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar months which have expired in the
licensing period set forth in subsection (e) or (f) of this section; however, no license shall be issued
for any term less than the balance of the unexpired license period.
(j)Frequenting Unlicensed Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent premises where
alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for sale unless there is conspicuously displayed on the premises a
liquor license issued by the city. Any person found to be frequenting unlicensed premises shall be
subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 88-14, § 1, 3-28-1988; Ord. 009-2009, § 2, 2-2-2009)
Sec. 3-8. Types Of Licenses And Fees:
(a)Hours Of Operation: All licenses issued hereunder shall allow the licensee to be open Monday
through Saturday from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and Sunday from ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Class F and G licenses may reopen one hour after
closing, but the service of alcoholic beverages may only occur during the hours herein identified. The
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 66/735
hours established herein shall be Central Standard Time, except when daylight saving time is in
effect and then those hours shall be Central Daylight Saving Time.
(b)Class A: "Class A, packaged sales only - primary business" license shall be issued when the sale of
alcoholic liquors is the primary business of the licensee. "Primary business" shall mean that twenty
five percent (25%) or more of the square footage of the store available for sales is dedicated to the
displays or promotion of alcoholic liquors. A license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on
the premises where sold, except that reasonable tasting/sampling of alcoholic liquor by patrons may
be allowed on the licensed premises of establishments.
(1) Minors are not allowed in a class A licensed premises.
(2) The sale of alcoholic liquor in packaged sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known
as "airline bottles" is prohibited.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class A license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(4) The annual fee for a class A license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(c)Class B: "Class B, packaged sales only - secondary business" license shall be issued when less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage of the store available for sales is dedicated to the
displays or promotion of alcoholic liquors. A license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on
the premises where sold, except that reasonable tasting/sampling of alcoholic liquor by patrons may
be allowed on the licensed premises of establishments over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in
size.
(1) The sale of alcoholic liquor in packaged sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known
as "airline bottles" is prohibited.
(2) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class B license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(3) The annual fee for a class B license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(d)Class C: "Class C, packaged sales only - beer and wine" license shall be issued when less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage of the store available for sales is dedicated to the
displays or promotion of alcoholic liquors and the licensee sells only beer or wine. A license shall
permit the retail sale of beer and wine on the premises where sold, except that reasonable
tasting/sampling of beer and wine by patrons may be allowed on the licensed premises of
establishments over ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size.
(1) The sale of alcoholic liquor in packaged sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known
as "airline bottles" is prohibited.
(2) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class C license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 67/735
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(3) The annual fee for a class C license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(e)Class D: "Class D, tavern with packaged sales primary" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in sealed packages for consumption off premises, as well as for consumption on the licensed
premises, if the sale of sealed alcohol for off premises consumption constitutes greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total annual sales of all alcoholic liquor.
(1) The sale of alcoholic liquor in packaged sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known
as "airline bottles" is prohibited.
(2) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class D license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(3) The annual fee for a class D license shall be one thousand four hundred thirty dollars ($1,430.00).
(f)Class E: "Class E, tavern with packaged sales secondary" license shall permit the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises, as well as other retail sales of alcoholic
liquor in sealed packages for consumption off the licensed premises.
(1) Packaged alcoholic liquor sold for off premises consumption shall not comprise greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total annual sales of all alcoholic liquor for said licensee.
(2) The sale of alcoholic liquor in packaged sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known
as "airline bottles" is prohibited.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class E license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(4) The annual fee for a class E license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(g)Class F: "Class F, restaurant" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
only on the premises where sold.
(1) Service of alcoholic liquor shall be only during the time that food is prepared on the premises and
is available to be served, a menu is in effect, and a cook or chef, whose primary duties shall not
include bartending or the service of alcoholic liquor, is in attendance.
(2) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class F license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class F license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 68/735
(4) The annual fee for a class F license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(h)Class G: "Class G, restaurant - wine and beer only" license shall permit the retail sale of wine and
beer for consumption only on the premises where sold.
(1) Service of wine and beer shall be only during the time that food is prepared on the premises and
is available to be served, a menu is in effect, and a cook or chef, whose primary duties shall not
include bartending or the service of alcoholic liquor, is in attendance.
(2) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class G license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class G license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(4) The annual fee for a class G license shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00).
(i)Class H: "Class H, theater/bowling center" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises where sold, and not for resale in any form, to be issued to
premises which conform to the definition of "restaurant" as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter.
(1) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class H license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(2) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class H license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(3) The annual fee for a class H license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(j)Class I: "Class I, hotel/motel" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises whether for private events or public consumption in a tavern, lounge area, or banquet
room only, and not for resale in any form to other portions of a premises which meet the definition of
a hotel as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter.
(1) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class I license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(2) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class I license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(3) The annual fee for a class I license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(k)Class J: "Class J, banquet facilities" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises where sold and not for resale in any form to premises which meet
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 69/735
the definition of a hotel as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter.
(1) Sales for consumption on the premises used exclusively for private functions. Hors d'oeuvres,
meals or other foods from the licensee or a licensed food establishment must be served continually
during every private function when alcohol is being served.
(2) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class J license pursuant to this section for the
purpose other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class J license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(4) The annual fee for a class J license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(l)Class K: "Class K, clubs/fraternal organizations" license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the licensed premises, as well as other retail sales of packaged alcoholic liquor
for consumption off the licensed premises.
(1) Packaged alcoholic liquor sold for off premises consumption shall not comprise greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the total annual sales of all alcoholic liquor for said licensee.
(2) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class K license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(3) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class K license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(4) The annual fee for a class K license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00).
(m)Class L: "Class L, city owned facilities" license shall permit the retail sale of beer, wine and distilled
spirits at city owned facilities and also permits the sale of beer and wine at identified facilities
operated or maintained by the park and recreation board.
(1) May include the use of fifty milliliter (50 ml) bottles (typically referred to as airline bottles) to pour
and serve mixed drinks at city owned golf courses.
(2) This license shall not allow the retail sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits for consumption off the
licensed premises of city owned property, to include golf courses and any other designated park
facilities.
(3) This license shall only be in effect during regular business hours or during authorized events.
(4) Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a class L license pursuant to this section for the
purposes other than the purchase or consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be
allowed to sit at a bar.
(5) If any premises, which initially applies for and is licensed as a class L license, later wishes to
reclassify the license to another class of license, it shall be considered by the local liquor
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 70/735
commissioner and may be treated as a new license application and all application procedures
contained in this chapter may apply, including, but not limited to, those contained in section 3-5,
"Licensing Procedure", and subsection 3-6(c), "Adjacent Business", of this chapter.
(6) The annual fee for a class L license shall be two hundred seventy five dollars ($275.00).
(n)Temporary License: Upon approval by the local liquor commissioner, and in the case of a park and
recreation operated facility or property, the prior approval of the park and recreation board must also
be obtained. A class T or temporary license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail may be granted to
organized clubs, societies, associations, fraternal organizations, duly constituted churches or other
not for profit organizations. A temporary license may be issued pursuant to this subsection for one
day, two (2) consecutive days, or three (3) consecutive days. The license shall specify on its face the
duration.
(1) No organization shall be issued more than one temporary license during any thirty (30) day
period. This restriction may be waived by the local liquor commissioner upon application by any not
for profit business association representing the Rock Island arts and entertainment district as part of
public events that are within a scheduled program of events which schedule has been approved by
the city council and, if so waived, the fee for such additional temporary license shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per day.
(2) All applications for temporary licenses must be received by the local liquor commissioner at least
thirty (30) days prior to the dates being requested.
(3) All applicants for temporary licenses shall show evidence of dramshop liability insurance or other
proof of financial responsibility prior to issuance of such license.
(4) The fee for a class T license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day.
(o)Special Use Permit Liquor License: A special use permit liquor license allowing the sale of alcohol at
an approved designated site for special events shall be available for qualified applicants. The
following special use permit liquor licenses are available for the purpose of special events on city
owned properties:
(1) Parks And Recreation Department Operated Property Or Facility: Upon the approval, first by the
park and recreation board and then by the local liquor commissioner, a "special use permit liquor
license" may be granted to an approved Rock Island license holder to sell alcohol for special events
at any property or facility operated by the parks and recreation department.
(2) City Properties Not Under The Jurisdiction Of The Park And Recreation Board: Upon the
approval, first by the city council and then the local liquor commissioner, a "special use permit liquor
license" may be granted to an approved Rock Island license holder to sell alcoholic liquor at any
designated city owned location.
(3) Rock Island Liquor License Holders With A Class D, E, F, G, H, J, K Or L License: Upon the
approval first by the appropriate policy making board and then the local liquor commissioner, a Rock
Island license holder with a class D, E, F, G, H, J, K or L liquor license may be granted a "special use
permit liquor license" to transfer a portion of its alcoholic inventory from its licensed premises to a
designated site within the city for a special event. As of April 30, 2013, the license holders in
classifications who currently have these options available will still be able to have them, even though
their classification may have changed.
The following rules apply for "special use permit liquor licenses":
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 71/735
a. A special use permit liquor license cannot exceed three (3) days in duration and days must be
consecutive.
b. The area designated where the alcohol sales are to take place must be located within a
demarcated area, with all appropriate safeguards to control the sales, age requirements, and
safety indicated.
c. For events that are to be for one day or less in duration, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per
event/location.
d. For events that are to be for two (2) or three (3) consecutive days, the fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per event/location.
e. A class L license holder may apply for a special use permit for a single themed event, which
would be characterized by an event with the same theme and at the same location, but may run
nonconsecutive days for up to fifteen (15) days in duration. The fee for a single themed event
special use permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per theme/event location. As of April 30,
2013, the license holders in classifications who currently have this option available will still be able
to retain it, even though their classification may have changed.
f. After receiving prior approval by the appropriate policy making board, all special use permit liquor
license applications must be received by the liquor commissioner's office no later than twenty one
(21) days in advance of the first day of the scheduled event.
g. Said applications shall include, but are not limited to, the following information:
1. Name and contact information of applicant/liquor license holder for the event;
2. The date(s) and time(s) that the event will be held;
3. The address and location of the event;
4. The proposed area(s) inside of the designated location where the alcohol sales are to occur;
5. The name/type of event being proposed;
6. Submission of proof of dramshop insurance to the maximum limit that has been secured for
this event, naming, where applicable, the city of Rock Island, Illinois, as an additional insured;
7. Proof of approval by the policy board that operates the property or facility. (Ord. 011-2013, 3-
18-2013)
Sec. 3-9. Supplemental License Options And Fees:
Supplemental License Options And Fees:
(a)License Options; Generally: Upon approval of the liquor commissioner, the license options set forth
below shall be available to holders of class D, E, F, G, and K liquor licenses. All supplemental license
options shall be issued on the same qualifications, terms and conditions required for the original
license. Class J and L license holders may apply for supplemental license options under subsection
(a)(4) of this section.
(1) Extended Hours Option:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 72/735
a. Extended Hours Two O'Clock A.M. Option: All class D, E, F, G, and K liquor license holders who
are eligible for a supplemental extended option license under this section may apply for an
"extended hour two o'clock (2:00) A.M. license option". As of April 30, 2013, the license holders in
classifications who currently have this option available will still be able to retain it, even though
their classification may have changed. A holder of this license may be open all days except
Sunday from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following day and on
Sundays from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following Monday. The
annual fee for the "extended hours two o'clock (2:00) A.M. option" shall be four hundred fifty
dollars ($450.00).
b. Extended Hours Three O'Clock A.M. Option: All class D, E, F, G, and K liquor license holders
who are eligible for a supplemental extended option license under this section may apply for an
"extended hour three o'clock (3:00) A.M. license option". The annual fee for the extended hour
three o'clock (3:00) A.M. option shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for the
license year.
(2) Live Entertainment - Limited: The option in this subsection (a)(2) shall permit the licensed
establishment to have live entertainment on Friday and Saturday nights of every week. The annual
fee for the live entertainment - limited option shall be two hundred twenty dollars ($220.00).
(3) Live Entertainment - Continuous: The option in this subsection (a)(3) shall permit the licensed
establishment to have live entertainment seven (7) days per week. The annual fee for the live
entertainment - continuous option shall be four hundred forty dollars ($440.00).
a. Amusement Features Permitted: The entertainment authorized in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3)
of this section shall permit any amusement feature including music, vaudeville, singing, acting,
dancing or contests, and disc jockey, whether by personal performance or instrumental device.
1. It shall be cause for revocation or suspension as herein provided if the licensee, his manager
or agent, shall allow any live person to appear or have reasonable cause to believe that any live
person shall appear in any licensed premises in a state of nudity to provide entertainment, to
provide service, to act as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any
capacity.
2. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the human
male or female genitalia, pubic area or buttocks, or the human female breast, including the
nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full opaque covering.
(4) Caterers Retail License Option:
a. A person, corporation or business entity who meets the definition of a "caterer retailer" as
defined in section 3-1 of this chapter is authorized in addition to its normal catering services to sell
or serve beer, wine, and distilled spirits at a "catering location" as defined in section 3-1 of this
chapter.
b. The hours that alcohol may be served or sold, unless a variance is granted by the liquor
commissioner, is Sunday from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the next day and
Monday through Saturday from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. the next day.
c. At least thirty (30) days prior to the private function's scheduled date, the licensee must advise in
writing the liquor commissioner of the date, times and location of the event.
d. Prior to the issuance of this license the licensee must provide verification to the liquor
commissioner that its dramshop insurance covers catering events and locations.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 73/735
e. The annual fee for this license option shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
(b)License Options; Outdoor Events: Upon approval of the local liquor commissioner and the city
council, holders of class D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K and L licenses only shall be allowed to conduct outdoor
events provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The local liquor commissioner receives a written request at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
planned event.
(2) The event is to be held on property owned by the licensee, and adequate measures are provided
to secure the outdoor area where the event will take place so as to prevent access by minors.
(3) Outdoor musical entertainment, if provided, and sound amplifying equipment See also § 8-7 of this
code.1 utilized shall be kept at a decibel level which does not unduly disturb the peace and quiet of
the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) Outdoor musical entertainment, if provided, shall cease at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless
specifically extended upon approval of the event. Such extensions shall be granted based upon
consideration of the character of the surrounding neighborhood and/or presentation of other
information showing lack of objection from surrounding property owners. (Ord. 024-2011, 4-4-2011;
Ord. 011-2013, 3-18-2013; Ord. 017-2014, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 3-9.1. Adult Cabaret License:
The local liquor commissioner is authorized to issue three (3) adult cabaret licenses which allow the
licensee to have sexually orientated live entertainment on the licensed premises. Such entertainment
does not include any live person appearing in any such licensed premises in a state of nudity to provide
entertainment; to provide service; to act as hostess, manager, or owner, or to serve as an employee in
any capacity. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks.
(1)It is the intent of the city council that the three (3) adult cabaret licenses herein authorized be issued
to the three (3) licensees in the city that are presently providing such entertainment. And further that
if any of the three (3) licensees cease business or attempt to transfer ownership or control of the
business for any reason, the maximum number of authorized adult cabaret licenses be reduced
accordingly until such time as all of the licensees cease to operate or attempt to transfer ownership
or control of their licensed business.
(2)Transfer of ownership or control of the adult cabaret license means and includes any of the following:
a. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
b. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange or similar means.
c. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control
of the business.
(3)The annual fee for the adult cabaret license option shall be five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00). (Ord.
92-144, § 1, 12-14-1992; Ord. 14-00, § 3, 3-6-2000; Ord. 009-2009, § 5, 2-2-2009)
Sec. 3-9.2. Sale At Sunset Marina Office Building:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 74/735
(a)The sale of alcoholic beverages in packages of fifty one milliliters (51 ml) or larger is hereby
authorized on that city owned property known as and called Sunset Marina office building. The sale
of alcoholic liquor in package sizes of fifty milliliters (50 ml) or less, commonly known as an airline
bottle is prohibited.
(b)The sale of alcoholic beverages at that location shall be controlled by the provisions of this chapter,
except that the Rock Island liquor commission shall have the discretion to prorate the license fee for
those premises for the period of time during the license year that the premises are open for business.
(Ord. 93-26, §§ 1, 2, 4-12-1993; Ord. 088-2005, § 2, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 3-10. Minors:
(a)Definition: As defined in section 3-1 of this chapter, a "minor" shall mean any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years.
(b)Sale To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, or any agent thereof, to give, sell, or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any minor.
(c)Purchase And Consumption By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase or
accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or to possess or consume any alcoholic liquor.
(d)Proof Of Age Required: If a licensee pursuant to this chapter or agent thereof shall believe that a sale
or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the minority of the prospective recipient, he or
she shall before making such sale or delivery demand presentation of some form of acceptable
identification containing proof of age. The acceptance must be made in reasonable reliance that the
person presenting the identification is in fact of legal age and the same person pictured on the ID.
The following types of identification are acceptable forms of identification for purposes of entering a
licensed establishment and/or purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor: vehicle operator's license;
state photo identification card for nondrivers; passport or visa.
(e)Proof Of Age; Refusal To Produce: No person when on premises licensed under this chapter shall
refuse to show proof of his or her age when asked to do so by the licensee or agent thereof. Any
person who fails to produce positive proof of age when so requested shall immediately be advised to
leave the licensed premises.
(f)Falsification Of Proof Of Age Prohibited: With respect to any identifying document containing proof of
age issued by a public officer in the performance of official duties, no person shall:
(1) Alter or deface such identifying document; or
(2) Present identifying documents belonging to another person as his or her own; or
(3) Carry or use a false or forged identification document; or
(4) Obtain any document establishing identity by means of false information.
(g)Employment Of Minors Prohibited: No minor shall be employed by a licensee, except for the purpose
of preparing or serving food, providing entertainment and/or providing maintenance or cleanup
services. At no time shall any minor tend any bar or pour, handle, mix, draw, sell or serve any
alcoholic liquor in any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
(h)Employment Of Minors; Grandfather Provision: As of the effective date of this chapter, no licensee
hereunder, or manager or agent thereof, shall hire any minor to work in any licensed establishment
where said minor's duties would include the mixing, dispensing, pouring, selling or serving of
alcoholic liquor. However, any minor who is, as of the effective date of this chapter, over the age of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 75/735
nineteen (19) and who is employed by a licensed establishment in such capacity shall be allowed to
maintain such employment.
(i)Minor On Premises Prohibited: No minor shall be allowed in any liquor licensed premises within the
city. For any violation of this section it shall be a defense if the licensee qualifies under one of the
following:
(1) A minor may be in a liquor licensed premises which is also a motor fuel station or a store which
receives fifty one percent (51%) or more of its annual gross revenue from the sale of food or other
services or commodities, for the purpose of obtaining and/or consuming food or purchasing items
other than alcoholic liquor. If the alcohol is stored or stocked in a separate section from the rest of the
store, the minor may not be in that section.
(2) A minor may be in a liquor licensed premises which is also a restaurant (with a full service
kitchen, diverse menu, and the food being prepared on premises) for the purpose of consuming food
and nonalcoholic beverages. The minor must not be seated at the "bar" of the premises. This
qualification shall be applicable only during the following time periods: six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until
two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
(3) A minor may be permitted to enter a licensed location which is also a restaurant (with a full
service kitchen, dining menu, and the food being prepared on the premises) for the purpose of
obtaining and/or consuming food and nonalcoholic beverages at other times than specified in
subsection (i)(2) of this section, provided that the minor is not in that area of the premises where
alcoholic liquors are drawn, mixed, poured, stored or stocked.
(j)Compliance Not A Defense: No licensee or any agent thereof shall raise as a defense to this section
his or her compliance with subsection (d) of this section. However, such fact shall be considered by
the local liquor control commissioner in mitigation of the finding of guilt for violation of this section.
(k)Consumption By Minor; Exclusion: Nothing in this section shall preclude the consumption by a minor
of alcoholic liquor in the performance of religious services or under direct supervision of the parents
or parent of such minor in the privacy of a home.
(l)Solicitation Of An Individual To Purchase Alcohol By A Person Under Twenty One: No person shall
solicit any individual to purchase alcohol for possession or consumption by any person under the age
of twenty one (21).
(m)Violation; Penalty: The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to
contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord. 88-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. 91-91, 8-26-1991;
Ord. 97-21, 3-17-1997; Ord. 16-2004, § 1, 2-2-2004)
Sec. 3-11. Operation:
(a)License Posted: Every holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall immediately post and
keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous location on the premises, the license so issued.
Whenever such license is lost or destroyed, a duplicate thereof shall be issued by the local liquor
commissioner upon application by the licensee, who shall also make a verified statement of loss or
destruction. A twenty five dollar ($25.00) processing fee shall be charged for issuance of any
duplicate license.
(b)Compliance With Health And Safety Codes: All premises licensed hereunder shall at all times be kept
in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and shall comply with all building and safety codes so
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 76/735
established by the city, county and state.
(c)Occupancy Load: The established occupant load of any licensed premises shall not exceed the
posted capacity at any time.
(d)Accessibility: During the hours of operation applicable to the class of license held by the licensee, the
doors to any licensed premises shall remain unlocked unless such premises is closed for business.
At no time shall entrances to a licensed premises be locked when any patrons of said establishment
are present, except that doors may be locked fifteen (15) minutes prior to closing time where exits
are arranged so as to be readily opened from the side from which egress is to be made, i.e.,
equipped with panic bar exit.
(e)View Of Premises: No licensee hereunder or agent thereof shall wilfully obscure or in any manner
obstruct any door or window of any licensed premises with any screen, blind, curtain, partition or
other object which would prevent clear view into the licensed premises. To the extent that the
construction of the licensed premises permits, licensees shall provide a clear view into the licensed
premises.
(f)Exceptions: The provisions of subsection (e) of this section shall apply to all premises upon which the
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed, provided that those provisions
shall not apply to restaurants, hotels or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the
primary business.
(g)Closing Time: At the closing time applicable to the class of license held by any licensee hereunder,
the selling, dispensing and serving of all alcoholic liquor shall cease. The licensee, or agent thereof,
shall from such closing time have a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes in which to clear
the premises of all persons other than bona fide employees of the licensed establishment who are
engaged in cleanup activities. If any law enforcement officer of the city shall believe that any person
remaining in any licensed premises after closing time is not a bona fide employee engaged in
cleanup activities, said officer may demand evidence documenting said employment. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee or any agent or employee thereof to produce proof of bona fide
employment.
(h)Telephone Required: All establishments licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have on
their premises at least one operational telephone. All licensees or agents thereof shall telephone the
police department if asked to do so or if any violation of the law occurs on the licensed premises.
(i)Gambling Devices: No gambling device or other gambling paraphernalia shall be kept or used for the
purpose of gambling in any location licensed under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
the prohibitions provided for in this chapter and any other chapter of this code that may reference or
govern gambling or gambling devices shall not preclude any activity or device permitted under the
laws of the state of Illinois, so long as the device or paraphernalia complies with all requirements
under the laws of the state of Illinois, and in addition thereto, complies with all requirements of this
and any other ordinance of the city of Rock Island, Illinois, related to such gambling device or other
gambling paraphernalia.
(j)Delivery: No licensee, or agent thereof, shall order to receive the delivery of any alcoholic liquor on
Sunday at the premises so licensed or at any other premises.
(k)Employment Of Felon: No licensee or agent thereof shall employ or permit to be employed any
person who has been convicted of a felony within fifteen (15) years prior to his or her employment as
a manager or bartender in any premises licensed under this chapter. However, any person seeking
employment as a bartender who has been convicted as a felon within the last fifteen (15) years, may,
by application submitted to the liquor commissioner, seek a hearing before the liquor commissioner
on the question as to whether the applicant has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 77/735
trust to allow said applicant to be employed as a bartender before the fifteen (15) year period since
his or her felony conviction has passed. After said application has been submitted, the liquor
commissioner may direct the police department to conduct a full investigation and then schedule a
hearing before the liquor commission on the issue. At said hearing, the applicant may appear with or
without counsel and present evidence as to why his or her request should be granted.
(l)Sale To Certain Persons Prohibited: No licensee hereunder or agent thereof shall sell, give or deliver
any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person he or she knows to be under legal
disability or in need of mental treatment. For the purposes of this section, "legally disabled" shall
mean the same as "judged incompetent".
(m)Indecency/Obscenity Prohibited: No licensee hereunder shall allow any person to engage in any act
of public indecency or obscenity upon any licensed premises. For the purpose of this section,
"indecency" shall mean the same as the definition contained in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9;
and "obscenity" shall mean the same as the definition contained in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20.
(n)Prostitution/Pandering Prohibited: No licensee hereunder shall allow any person to solicit another for
the purpose of prostitution upon any licensed premises; nor shall any licensee hereunder, or agent
thereof, arrange or offer to arrange for money or anything of value a situation in which a person may
practice prostitution.
(o)Warning Signs To Be Posted: Every licensed establishment within the city, where alcoholic liquor is
sold, shall display in a prominent place near to and clearly visible at all points of entry a printed
warning which shall read as follows:
WARNING
Persons under 21 are, by city ordinance,
subject to a fine up to $500.00 for
consuming or possessing alcohol or for
misrepresenting their age in order to
obtain or purchase alcohol. Only the
following are acceptable proof of
identification:
Current Vehicle Operator's License,
Current State Photo Identification Card,
and Current Passport.
(p) Loitering/Disorderly Conduct: No licensee hereunder shall allow any loitering, gathering of unruly
individuals or crowds or any unlawful or dangerous behavior whether in the premises or in any
parking lot or other adjacent area serving the premises; and the licensee shall have primary
responsibility for hiring such security personnel and taking other appropriate measures to observe
compliance with this subsection. In the event a violation of law has taken place, the licensee or his
agents shall immediately notify the police department.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 78/735
(q) Sales Of Glass Bottles Of Beer Over Twelve Ounces: No licensee or agent thereof shall sell at retail
"beer", as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter, in glass bottles or glass containers having a liquid
content of more than twelve (12) ounces, for consumption off the licensed premises, provided
however, a licensee or agent of a business possessing a class A liquor license whose primary sales
of alcoholic beverages are eighty five percent (85%) of their sales, may sell imported or microbrewed
beer at room temperature in glass bottles or glass containers having a liquid content of more than
twelve (12) ounces but less than thirty (30) ounces for consumption off the licensed premises. (Ord.
88-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. 91-91, 8-26-1991; Ord. 92-66, 4-13-1992; Ord. 96-78, 10-21-1996, eff. 10-31-
1996; Ord. 003-2011, 2-7-2011; Ord. 036-2012, 4-23-2012; Ord. 050-2014, 6-16-2014; Ord. 003-
2017, 2-6-2017)
Sec. 3-12. Hearing Procedures:
(a)Notice Of Hearing : Upon receipt of a complaint being made of a violation of the Illinois liquor control
act or of this chapter, the liquor commissioner shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice
upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge. Notice as herein
required shall be by registered mail or by leaving a copy of the notice at the licensed place of
business at least three (3) days prior to the date set for hearing. Such hearings shall be open to the
public, and written minutes of all proceedings shall be maintained.
(b)Witnesses : Witnesses shall be sworn; but in all respects, hearings shall be informal, and the strict
rules of evidence shall not apply.
(c)Record Of Proceedings : A complete record of all evidence, testimony and comments before the
commission shall be taken by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter.
(d)Review Of Proceedings : Review of the proceedings before the local license control commission shall
be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings. No new or additional evidence shall be
admitted or considered.
(e)Initial Cost : An hourly fee for the certified court or shorthand reporter at attendance at the formal
hearings before the local license control commission shall be paid by the city.
(f)Costs Of Preparation, Transcription Of Record : All costs of preparing and transcribing an official
record on appeal to the state license control commission shall be borne by the licensee requesting a
review of the official proceedings. (Ord. 91-91, 8-26-1991)
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 1, 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Building Codes Adopted 1:
The International Building Code, 2015 edition, International Residential Code, 2015 edition, International
Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, and
International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, which are freely viewable online at
http://publicecodes.citation.com/icod/index.htm, are hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the
Building Code of the City subject to their amendments which are made a part hereof by reference, which
amendments are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 088-2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 047-2017, 11-
20-2017)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 79/735
Sec. 4-2. House Movers:
(a)License; Bond: No person shall move any building or other structure along the streets, avenues or
alleys of the City unless he shall have first obtained a license as a house mover, under a penalty of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Any
person may obtain a license as a house mover upon the payment of a license fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per annum and the execution to the City of a bond in the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) with at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the City
Clerk, conditioned among other things that the person applying for such license will pay the City, the
owner or owners, any and all damages which may happen to any trees, pavements, streets or
sidewalks, or to any telegraph, telephone or electric light wire within the City, whether the damage or
injury shall be inflicted by such person or his agent, employees or workmen. The mover shall cut no
wires but shall give twenty four (24) hours' notice to the owner of the same to remove and adjust
them, and shall pay such owner his reasonable expense therefor, and conditioned also that the
person will save harmless and indemnify the City from all liability, judgments, costs and expenses
which may in any way accrue against the City in consequence of the granting of such license or any
permit, and will in all things comply with the ordinances of the City and all permits granted to him.
(b)Permit: Whenever such application shall have been filed as aforesaid, the chief building inspector
shall have authority to issue a permit to any of such persons applying for same to occupy such
portions of the streets so paid for, specifying in the permit all the privileges therein granted, with the
terms and conditions of the same; and the building inspector shall see that they are fully and
completely complied with. Any person licensed hereunder as a house mover shall, in addition to all
other licenses provided herein, pay to the City the fee fixed by the Council for each house to be
moved in accordance with the provisions herein and for each garage, shed or other small structure to
be moved. (1963 Code art. 6-2; Ord., 2-25-1974)
Sec. 4-3. Plumbing Codes Adopted 2 3:
The most recent edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, addition, replacement, and maintenance of plumbing systems regulated by the Illinois
Plumbing Code. The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code,
2015 edition, subject to their amendments which are made a part hereof by reference, which
amendments are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and which are freely viewable on line at
http://publicecodes.citation.com/icod/index.htm, shall apply to any and all plumbing and piping systems
not regulated by the Illinois Plumbing Code. In addition, any structure in which a building drain is
installed shall have at least one vent stack carried through the roof and increased to a minimum size of
four inches (4") at a point one foot (1') below the roof line. (Ord. 047-2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 4-4. Mechanical Codes Adopted:
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, which
are freely viewable online at http://publicecodes.citation.com/icod/index.htm, are hereby adopted by
reference and shall serve as the Mechanical Code of the City subject to their amendments which are
made a part hereof by reference, which amendments are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 088-
2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 047-2017, 11-20-2017)
Secs. 4-5-4-20. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 6
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 80/735
Sec. 4-21. Penalty:
Any person who shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions in this article shall be deemed guilty of
an offense punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense; and in case of a continuing failure or refusal, each day's continuance
thereof shall be a separate and distinct offense. (Ord., 1-13-1969; Ord., 11-27-1978)
Sec. 4-22. Definitions:
As used in this article:
Electrical Contractor: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering, by
contract, electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, not
including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including
apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers,
which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as public
utilities; nor shall the term "electrical contractor" include employees of such contractor to do or supervise
such work.
Electrical Equipment: Conductors and other equipment installed for the utilization of electricity for light,
heat or power. It does not include radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and
signals; and it does not include apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed for or by public
utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. (Ord., 1-13-1969; Ord., 11-27-1978)
Sec. 4-23. Electrical Code Adopted:
The National Fire Protection Association, National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, is hereby adopted by
reference and shall serve as the Electrical Code of the City subject to the amendments which are made
a part hereof by reference, which amendments are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 088-2011,
11-21-2011; Ord. 047-2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 4-24. Electrical Contractors Generally:
(a)Registration: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of "electrical contractor", as
defined in this article, without being registered as an electrical contractor, in the manner hereinafter
set forth; however, if such person is already registered for the current year in another city or village
within the State, such electrical contractor shall not be required to be registered or to pay a
registration fee for such year in this City.
(b)Application: Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contractor shall apply for
registration to the electrical inspector. Upon the filing of such application in proper form the applicant
shall, following reasonable advance notice, present himself for examination before the Electrical
Commission at a time and place set by it. The commission shall examine any such applicant as to his
practical knowledge of the installation and alteration of electrical equipment as set forth in this article,
and his knowledge of the rules and regulations for the installation of electrical wiring devices and
equipment as set forth in the Statutes of the State and in the ordinances of the City, including those
filed hereunder and incorporated hereby. Such examination shall be in whole or in part in writing and
shall be of a practical character as determined by the commission, but sufficiently strict to thoroughly
test the experience and qualifications of the applicant. Upon the filing of such application in proper
form, the passing of an examination and the payment of the registration fee fixed herein, the
electrical inspector (or other City official) shall register the applicant as an electrical contractor and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 81/735
shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in
such business for the year in which it is issued from May 1 to April 30.
(c)License Fee: The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per year, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the City in advance upon filing the application.
(Ord., 1-13-1969; Ord., 11-1978; Ord. 87-34, 4-6-1987; Ord. 87-52, 5-18-1987; Ord. 89-16, 4-3-1989)
Sec. 4-25. Permit:
(a)Required: All persons, before beginning any installation, alteration or change of electrical wiring or
equipment in the City, shall obtain a permit for such work. Permits for the installation, alteration and
use of electrical equipment shall be issued upon receipt of an application therefor, made out on a
printed form to be furnished by the office of the electrical inspector. Permit cards will be posted in
plain view, inside of the building, near the entrance switch or inside of the service switch when
installed.
(b)Application: The application for each such permit shall contain the name of the owner or user of the
electrical equipment to be installed, altered or changed, and the location of such work by correct
address, street and number, and also the name and address of the person making the installation.
(c)Duration; Funds: Permits shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of issue, and no refunds shall
be made on any such permits. The monies received for such permits shall be turned over to the City
Clerk, together with the list of all qualified contractors for whom such permits are issued. (Ord., 1-13-
1969; Ord., 3-15-1976; Ord., 5-17-1976; Ord., 11-27-1978; Ord., 6-29-1981; Ord. 87-33, 4-6-1987;
Ord. 94-79, 9-19-1994; Ord. 010-2009, § 7, 2-2-2009)
Sec. 4-26. Reserved:
Sec. 4-27. Radio Antennas On Water Towers:
(a)Installations of radio antennas by government bodies and public utility companies shall be allowed on
City water towers located at 37th Street and 14th Avenue and 14th Street and 42nd Avenue in the
City.
(b)Any such utility company wishing to make an installation as aforesaid shall first make application and
receive approval from the City Council. Any such applicant receiving approval shall agree to pay to
the City one hundred dollars ($100.00) a year, covering rent therefor, and shall also provide adequate
liability insurance coverage holding the City harmless from any claims as a result of the installation,
and shall comply with any further requirements requested by the City Council. (Ord., 5-27-1963; Ord.,
8-28-1967)
Secs. 4-28-4-45. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. SIGNS 3
Sec. 4-46. Purpose And Intent:
This article is hereby enacted by the city of Rock Island, Illinois, to assure compatibility of signs with
surrounding land usage, to conserve property values in all districts, to protect the public investment in
streets and highways, to promote the safety and recreational value of public travel, and to strengthen the
economy of the city. All signs hereinafter erected or maintained, except official traffic and street signs,
shall conform to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 82/735
Sec. 4-47. Definitions:
As used in this article unless the context otherwise indicates the following terms shall be defined as
indicated:
Attached Projecting Sign : Any sign that is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond
the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
Attached Signs : A sign that is bolted, nailed, painted, or in any way affixed to an outside building wall.
Attached Wall Sign : All flat signs of solid face construction that are placed against a building or other
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or side wall of any building, or other structure.
Erect : To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix signs.
Facing : The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated
on the sign.
Fascia Sign : A single faced, attached sign that is attached flat against and parallel to its supporting wall.
Flashing Sign : A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use.
Illuminated signs that indicate the time, temperature, weather or similar public service information shall
not be considered "flashing signs".
Freestanding Sign : As regulated by this article, any sign supported by uprights or braces placed into the
ground and not attached to any building or structure other than said braces or uprights.
Illuminated Sign : Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric
lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
Incombustible Material : Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
Indirectly Illuminated Sign : Any illuminated, nonflashing sign whose illumination is derived from an
external, artificial lighting source.
Marquee Sign : Any sign attached to, or an integral part of, a hood or canopy of permanent construction
projecting from the wall of a building over the entrance to that building. For the purposes of this article,
marquee signs shall be considered as attached signs when determining the allowable square foot area
and total square foot area of all permitted signs, and shall be of the fascia type. No marquee sign shall
extend more than two feet (2') above the marquee structure.
Obsolete Sign : Any on premises sign or facing that no longer advertises a bona fide business
conducted or product sold on the premises.
On Premises Sign : Any sign identifying the occupant of the property upon which it is located and/or
advertising goods or services available thereon.
Outdoor Advertising Sign (Billboard Or Poster Panel) : A primarily changeable copy sign that directs
attention to a business, product, service, or activity not necessarily intended to be sold or offered upon
the premises where such sign is located.
Person : Any human being, firm, legal entity, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 83/735
Portable Sign : Any sign designed and manufactured, or constructed to be self-supporting, selfcontained,
portable, and not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, including
signs designed to be transported, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs;
umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to, or painted on, vehicles parked and visible from the
public right of way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to day operations of the business.
Roof Sign : As regulated by this article, any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or
over the roof of any building with the principal means of support on the roof structure.
Sign : A name, identification, description, display or illumination that is affixed to, painted, or represented
directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure, or piece of land which advertises or directs attention to
an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or a business.
Sign Area : Sign area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding molding and the
supporting structure which does not form a part of the sign proper. The area of a sign composed of
characters or words attached directly to a building or wall surface shall be the smallest triangles or
parallelograms which enclose a related group of words, symbols, characters or figures. All faces of a
multiple faced sign shall be included in computing sign area, except for back to back outdoor advertising
and double face, on premises signs, the area of which shall be taken as the area of one face if the two
(2) faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces are of unequal area. See
diagrams in section 4-65 of this article. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-48. Exemptions:
The provisions and regulations of this article shall not apply to the following signs:
(1) House and business numbers identifying the address of a parcel of land.
(2) Announcement or professional signs and nameplates in residential zoning districts identifying the
occupant of a parcel of land and not exceeding one square foot in area.
(3) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of metal.
(4) Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution, or nonprofit
organization.
(5) Traffic or other municipal signs such as legal notices, railroad crossings, danger and other
emergency signs as may be approved by the city council.
(6) Community special event signs approved by the city council.
(7) Bulletin boards not over twelve (12) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious
institutions when the same are located on the premises of said institutions and set back ten feet (10')
from all property lines.
(8) Signs used exclusively for traffic direction, on private streets or in parking areas, not exceeding
ten (10) square feet in area and not illuminated. Such signs shall be placed so as not to cause traffic
or pedestrian hazards.
(9) Nonelectric or electric signs which do not require approval by the electrical inspector, inside
buildings which are visible from the outside, and all other signs inside buildings which are not visible
from the outside.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 84/735
(10) Community information signs advertising events or promotions not conducted on the premises
that are sponsored by religious, charitable, business or other associations and organizations.
(11) Credit card signs or stickers affixed to windows. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-49. License Required:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sign business within the city of Rock Island without
first having obtained a license therefor, as herein required; provided, however, that no license issued
hereunder shall be construed so as to permit the use of any thing or structure, natural or artificial,
located in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for advertising purposes.
(1) Application for said license shall be made in writing to the inspection division. All registration fees,
bonding, insurance, licensing and other construction related requirements shall be consistent with the
international building code. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-50. Permits Required:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter, or relocate, within the city of Rock Island,
any "sign" as defined in this article except temporary signs, without first obtaining an erection permit
from the inspection division and making payment of the fee as required by this section. All signs that
have electrical provisions shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the electrical code and the
permit fees required thereunder.
(1) Every applicant, before being granted an erection permit hereunder, shall pay a permit fee for
each such sign and sign structure regulated by this article. Unless otherwise specified in this article,
each sign shall be considered a separate structure requiring its own permit.
a. Permit fees shall be based on the market value of the sign at the time when said permit is
applied for.
b. The permit fee shall be as specified in the international building code, as adopted by the city of
Rock Island.
(2) The owner of any building to which a sign is to be attached, said sign to encroach or hang over
public right of way, shall, before any permit be granted for construction or installation of said sign,
furnish the city of Rock Island satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage in an amount of
not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) liability coverage on account of any one
accident, from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Illinois, with an
endorsement thereon holding the city of Rock Island harmless from any claims or causes of action
arising out of the installation or maintenance of said sign. The owner of any building to which a sign
has been attached prior to the passage date hereof, which said sign encroaches or hangs over public
right of way, shall comply with the insurance requirements of this section within thirty (30) days after
the enactment of this article.
(3) It shall be the duty of the inspection division and the planning and redevelopment division, upon
filing of an application for an erection permit, to examine such plans, specifications, and other data
relating to the proposed sign and sign structure. If it appears that the proposed sign and sign
structure is in compliance with all the requirements of the international building code, this article and
all other laws and ordinances of the city of Rock Island, he or she shall then issue an erection permit.
If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within the period specified in
the building code, said permit shall become null and void, except that if good cause is shown, the
inspection division may extend the permit.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 85/735
(4) The application for an erection permit of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to
be used shall be submitted to the inspection division. The inspection division shall examine the plans
and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with the
electrical code of the city of Rock Island and he or she shall issue an electrical permit if the said
plans and specifications comply with said code. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-51. Application For Erection Permit:
Applications for erection permits shall be made upon forms provided by the inspection division and shall
contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the person erecting the sign.
(2) Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(4) Written consent of the owner or authorized representative of the building, structure or land to
which or on which the sign is to be erected.
(5) When requested by the inspection division, blueprints or drawings of the plans and/or
specifications and method of construction, attachment to the building or in the ground, and the
position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures or other signs.
(6) When requested by the inspection division, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that
sign and sign structure are designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and other laws and ordinances of the city of Rock Island.
(7) Location and size of the proposed sign.
(8) Proof of insurance policy or bond.
(9) Such other information as the inspection division may require to show full compliance with this
and all other ordinances of the city. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-52. Revocation Of Permit:
The inspection division is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him or her
upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this article. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-
2004)
Sec. 4-53. Structural And Fabrication Regulations:
All signs shall be built, constructed and erected in accordance with the international building code and
other ordinances of the city of Rock Island.
(1) Design Of Signs : Every freestanding sign including the frames and poles or supports and
footings, and every attached projecting sign, including frames, braces and supports thereof shall be
designed by a structural or manufacturer's engineer in conformance with wind pressure and dead
load requirements established in this article and in accordance with the international building code
and other ordinances of the city of Rock Island.
(2) Erection Of Signs : Every freestanding sign shall be erected under the supervision of an
experienced construction superintendent or manufacturer's representative capable of interpreting the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 86/735
construction and erection drawings required in order to assure conformance with all provisions of this
article.
(3) Treating Required : The owner of any sign (existing or proposed) shall be required to have it
properly painted, galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and deterioration of all parts and
supports of the said sign.
(4) Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements : All signs shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind pressure and to receive dead loads as required in the international building code or
any other ordinance of the city of Rock Island.
(5) No Glass Permitted : No glass shall be permitted except in the lighting mechanism.
(6) Lights : Lights shall be permitted on signs providing they are made of corrosion resistant
materials. The lights shall be provided with proper lenses concentrating the illumination upon the
area of the sign and preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property.
(7) Electrical Connections : All electrical connections shall be weathertight.
(8) Movable Parts To Be Secure : Any movable part of any sign such as the cover of a service
opening, shall be securely fastened.
(9) Face Of Sign Shall Be Smooth : All signs or other advertising structures which are constructed at
the property line, or within five feet (5') thereof, and are less than ten feet (10') above the ground over
which they are located shall not have a surface with nails, tacks or wires that protrude therefrom,
except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising
structures.
(10) Letters To Be Secure : All letters, figures, characters or representatives in cutout or irregular
form maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and
securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with international building code
requirements.
(11) Materials Required : The support structures of all freestanding elevated and roof signs for which
a permit is required under this article, shall be constructed of incombustible material, excluding trim.
The facings of freestanding and roof signs and facings and supports of freestanding, attached
projecting, attached wall and outdoor advertising signs are allowed to be constructed of combustible
materials if it is determined that they do not increase the fire hazard of the structure.
(12) Supplementary Signs : No supplementary sign or other appendage may be hung from or
supported by an approved sign or its support if it will adversely affect the structure of the approved
sign or make the approved sign nonconforming. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-54. Signs Not To Constitute A Traffic Hazard:
No sign as regulated by this article shall be erected at the intersection of any street, alley or driveway in
such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position,
shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device; or which makes use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER", or any other word,
phrase or symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 115-
2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-55. Attached Signs:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 87/735
(a)Location And Size :
(1) Every attached sign, excluding fascia signs, shall be placed at least ten feet (10') above the
ground over which it is erected. These limits include the space necessary to allow for installation
hardware. Requirements in the international building code will be used to determine the distance of
allowable projection into the public right of way.
(2) Attached on premises signs may have an aggregate area of one square foot for each linear foot
of building frontage facing a street and not to exceed total sign area per lot as identified by zoning
district in section 4-59 of this article. Permitted signs may be placed on any facade of the building.
(3) Outdoor advertising signs shall meet the following qualifications:
a. Allowed by right in B-4, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts (maximum area of 300 square feet).
b. Outdoor advertising signs up to seventy two (72) square feet to be considered a use authorized
by the board of appeals in B-1, B-2 and B-3 zoning districts.
c. Maximum length of twenty five feet (25').
d. Maximum height of twenty five feet (25') (to include support post(s) and be measured from
grade level to top of sign).
e. Minimum one thousand foot (1,000') separation between outdoor advertising signs includes both
sides of street.
f. Minimum twenty five foot (25') front yard setback.
g. Minimum ten foot (10') side yard setback.
h. Minimum fifty foot (50') setback from residentially zoned parcel.
i. New sign locations, or locations where signs are rebuilt shall landscape along and around the
base support poles with low level shrubs and perennials and/or annual plantings.
(4) No attached sign shall extend more than four feet (4') above the facade of the building to which it
is attached. A sign that is attached parallel to any building or structure shall not project beyond the
ends of the wall to which it is attached.
(5) In the case of a lot or building facade with frontage on more than one street, attached signs may
be permitted on each street in accordance with the regulations of this article. In no case shall
allowable sign area be transferred from one street-facing facade to another street-facing facade.
(6) Attached signs identifying commercial uses in residential and conservation zoning districts
approved by the board of zoning appeals shall be of the fascia type, shall not exceed fifteen (15)
square feet in area, and shall be limited to one sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises of
said use.
(7) Attached signs identifying churches, fraternities or other similar uses in residential zoning districts
shall be of the fascia type, shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area, and shall be limited to one
sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises of said use.
(8) Attached signs for special use permits granted by the city council shall be allowed only when
authorized by said council, and shall conform to the requirements of subsection 4-60(a)(4) of this
article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 88/735
(9) If the projecting attached sign is illuminated, the reflectors shall be provided with the proper glass
lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign and preventing glare upon the street
or adjacent property.
(10) The distance measured between the principal faces of any attached projecting sign shall not
exceed eighteen inches (18").
(11) No attached projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails, nor shall any
projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
(12) All attached wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of
metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter,
embedded in said wall at least five inches (5"); provided, however, that such signs may rest in, or be
bolted to strong, heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet (6') apart, each of which shall
be securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore provided. In no case shall any attached wall sign be
secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-56. Freestanding Signs:
(a)Location And Size :
(1) Outdoor advertising signs shall be no nearer the street than the building line established by law.
(2) No freestanding signs shall be nearer than two feet (2') to any other sign, building or structure;
providing, however that a sign of continuous panels shall be considered as one sign for this
provision.
(3) Freestanding on premises signs may have an aggregate area not exceeding one square foot for
each linear foot of lot frontage and not to exceed total sign area per lot as identified by zoning district
in section 4-59 of this article.
(4) Outdoor advertising signs shall meet the following qualifications:
a. Allowed by right in B-4, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts (maximum area of 300 square feet).
b. Outdoor advertising signs up to seventy two (72) square feet to be considered a use authorized
by the board of appeals in B-1, B-2 and B-3 zoning districts.
c. Maximum length of twenty five feet (25').
d. Maximum height of twenty five feet (25') (to include support post(s) and be measured from
grade level to top of sign).
e. Minimum one thousand foot (1,000') separation between outdoor advertising signs includes both
sides of street.
f. Minimum twenty five foot (25') front yard setback.
g. Minimum ten foot (10') side yard setback.
h. Minimum fifty foot (50') setback from residentially zoned parcel.
i. New sign locations, or locations where signs are rebuilt shall landscape along and around the
base support poles with low level shrubs and perennials and/or annual plantings.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 89/735
(5) In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one street, freestanding signs in accordance with
subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3) of this section may be permitted on each street. In no case shall
allowable sign area be transferred from one street frontage to another street frontage.
(6) Freestanding signs identifying churches, fraternities or other similar uses in residential zoning
districts shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area nor six feet (6') in height from the top of the
sign to the ground, shall be limited to one sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises of said
use, and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
(7) Freestanding sign identifying commercial uses in residential and conservation zoning districts
approved by the board of zoning appeals shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area nor six feet
(6') in height from the top of the sign to the ground, shall be limited to one sign (attached or
freestanding) on the premises of said use, and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all lot
lines.
(8) Freestanding signs for special use permits granted by the city council shall be allowed only when
authorized by said council, and shall conform to the requirements of subsection 4-60(a)(4) of this
article.
(9) No part of a freestanding sign shall be located over the public right of way. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1,
12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-57. Roof Signs:
(a) Location And Size :
(1) For the purposes of this article, roof signs shall be considered as attached signs when
determining the allowable square foot area and total square foot area of all permitted signs.
(b)Erection : Requirements for erection of a roof sign are as follows:
(1) No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof nearer than five feet (5') to the
outside wall toward which the sign faces; however, if the sign is under twenty (20) square feet, it shall
not be erected with the face thereof nearer than one foot (1') to the outside wall toward which the
sign faces.
(2) All roof signs shall have a space at least five feet (5') in height between the base of the sign and
roof level, and have at least five feet (5') of clearance between the vertical supports thereof.
(3) Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron, or other metal anchors, bolts,
supports, rods, or braces. When erected upon buildings that are not constructed of entirely fireproof
material, the bearing plates of said sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and intermediate steel
columns in the building. No roof sign shall be supported or anchored to the wooden framework of a
building.
(c)Inspection Of Roof : No sign shall be placed upon a roof unless said roof has been determined by an
architectural or structural engineer to have sufficient strength to safely carry the proposed sign
together with the signature and seal of the architectural or structural engineer making said inspection
shall be placed upon or attached to all plans for proposed roof signs before a permit will be issued.
(Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-58. Temporary Signs:
(a)Location And Size :
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 90/735
(1) Temporary signs which advertise real estate for sale, rent or lease, or advertise a subdivision
being developed, shall be restricted to six (6) square feet in area when located on residentially zoned
property of less than two (2) acres, and shall be removed upon completion of the sale, rent or lease
of the property or sale of all lots in the subdivision. Such signs shall be located on the property, and
shall be located not less than ten feet (10') from any street right of way.
(2) Temporary signs, which advertise real estate for sale, rent or lease, or advertise a subdivision
being developed shall be restricted to ninety six (96) square feet in area, when located on property of
two (2) or more acres. Said signs shall be located on the property not less than ten feet (10') from
any street right of way lines, and shall be removed upon completion of the sale, rent, or lease of the
property or sale of all lots in the subdivision.
(3) Temporary signs which advertise contractors, engineers, developers, architects, etc., for a site
being developed shall be restricted to a total area of ninety six (96) square feet in area and located
not less than ten feet (10') from any street right of way line or in conformance with the setback
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, whichever is least restrictive. Such signs shall
be removed upon completion of the development and issuance of an occupancy permit by the
building official.
(4) Nonelectric, temporary signs placed in windows of buildings with commercial or industrial uses
which advertise sales, specials, or closeouts shall be restricted to illumination by normal lighting of
the building. Such signs shall be removed upon termination of the sale, special or closeout.
(5) Every temporary sign shall be attached to a wall or pole with steel cables, bolts or other suitable
fastenings or firmly affixed into the ground so as to prevent movement. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-
2004)
Sec. 4-59. Signs Allowed By Zoning District:
(a)Office District (O-1) : Attached signs allowed up to thirty two (32) square feet in area, or twenty
percent (20%) of building frontage, whichever is less. Freestanding sign (only 1 freestanding sign per
street frontage) allowed up to thirty two (32) square feet in area. Ten foot (10') setback from all lot
lines and six foot (6') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total sign area allowed per property
is sixty four (64) square feet.
(b)Office Research And Technology District (ORT) : Attached signs allowed up to thirty two (32) square
feet in area, or twenty percent (20%) of building frontage, whichever is less. Freestanding sign (only
1 freestanding sign per street frontage) allowed up to thirty two (32) square feet in area. Ten foot (10')
setback from all lot lines and six foot (6') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total sign area
allowed per property is sixty four (64) square feet.
(c)Neighborhood Business District (B-1) : Attached signs allowed up to eighty percent (80%) of building
frontage. Freestanding sign (only 1 freestanding sign per street frontage) setback ten feet (10') from
all property lines and a fifteen foot (15') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total sign area
allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area allowed per
property is two hundred fifty (250) square feet, with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(d)Central Business District (B-2) : Attached signs allowed up to eighty percent (80%) of building
frontage. Freestanding sign setback one foot (1') for signs of one hundred (100) square feet or less.
For each ten (10) square feet over one hundred (100) square feet in area there is an additional one
foot setback from property lines. Fifteen foot (15') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total
sign area allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 91/735
allowed per property is five hundred (500) square feet, with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(e)Community Business District (B-3) : Attached signs allowed up to eighty percent (80%) of building
frontage. Freestanding sign setback one foot (1') for signs of one hundred (100) square feet or less.
For each ten (10) square feet over one hundred (100) square feet in area there is an additional one
foot (1') setback from property lines. Twenty foot (20') maximum height from grade to top of sign.
Total sign area allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area
allowed per property is five hundred (500) square feet, with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred sixty (160) square feet.
(f)Highway Business District (B-4) : Attached signs allowed up to eighty percent (80%) of building
frontage. Freestanding sign setback one foot (1') for signs of one hundred (100) square feet or less.
For each ten (10) square feet over one hundred (100) square feet in area there is an additional one
foot (1') setback from property lines. Twenty five foot (25') maximum height from grade to top of sign.
Total sign area allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area
allowed per property is five hundred (500) square feet with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred sixty (160) square feet.
(g)Light Industrial District (I-1) : Attached signs allowed up to eighty percent (80%) of building frontage.
Freestanding sign setback one foot (1') for signs of one hundred (100) square feet or less. For each
ten (10) square feet over one hundred (100) square feet in area there is an additional one foot (1')
setback from property lines. Twenty five foot (25') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total
sign area allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area
allowed per property is five hundred (500) square feet, with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred sixty (160) square feet.
(h)General Industrial District (I-2) : Attached signs allowed up to eight percent (80%) of building frontage.
Freestanding sign setback one foot (1') for signs of one hundred (100) square feet or less. For each
ten (10) square feet over one hundred (100) square feet in area there is an additional one foot (1')
setback from property lines. Twenty five foot (25') maximum height from grade to top of sign. Total
sign area allowed based on one square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage. Total sign area
allowed per property is five hundred (500) square feet with a maximum freestanding sign area of one
hundred sixty (160) square feet.
(i)University/College District (U-1) : Attached signs identifying uses affiliated with a college, university or
seminary, shall be a fascia type and shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area. Freestanding
signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area, nor six feet (6') in height from the top of sign to
the ground and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines. The property's use must
meet the thirty foot (30') separation requirement from any residentially zoned or one- and two-family
used lot, as specified in the U-1 district. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-60. Permitted Signs For Nonconforming Uses:
(a)Signs Permitted Upon Approval : A sign or signs pertaining to a nonconforming use on the premises
may be permitted upon approval by the board of zoning appeals only after all of the following
conditions are satisfied, and only if a sign would be allowed on the premises if said use were properly
zoned:
(1) It is the intent of this section to allow nonconforming uses to have one sign for the purpose of
identification but because of the nature of nonconforming uses, they shall be more restricted than
those allowed for permitted uses. All signs under this section shall comply with all other applicable
sections of this article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 92/735
(2) Signs on nonconforming uses may be replaced only with signs of the same size or smaller, at the
same location on the building or premises (or in a less conspicuous location) and of the same lighting
(or less), but shall not be in violation of any other section of this article.
(3) Only one sign shall be permitted on the premises of a nonconforming use except signs regulatory
for parking areas.
(4) If no sign existed on the premises during the six (6) months immediately preceding application for
a sign permit under this section, the following regulations shall apply:
a. A freestanding or attached sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area.
b. A freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height from the top of the sign to the ground,
and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
c. An attached sign shall be of the fascia type only.
d. No flashing lights or rotating signs shall be allowed.
e. No roof signs shall be allowed. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-61. Prohibited Signs:
(a)Signs Not Permitted : The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any zoning
district:
(1) Except for traffic warning devices and signs giving public service information, such as, but not
limited to, time, date, temperature, weather, or similar information, signs which incorporate in any
manner moving, scintillating, or revolving lights, or signs with flashing lights that have a change
frequency of less than five (5) seconds.
(2) Any revolving sign with a rotation frequency more than eight (8) revolutions per minute.
(3) String lights other than holiday decorations.
(4) Any sign which obstructs free passage from one part of a roof to any other part and free ingress
or egress from a required door, window, fire escape, roof opening or other required exitway.
(5) Portable signs.
(6) Freestanding banners or spinners, except as the city council may authorize temporarily for civic or
nonprofit organizations.
(b)Removal : All signs prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be removed within seven (7) days
of owner receiving notice from the city. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-62. Nonconforming, Illegal And Obsolete Signs:
(a)Nonconforming Signs : A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good
condition, but it shall not be:
(1) Changed to another nonconforming sign.
(2) Structurally altered, except for normal maintenance and copy changes as long as maintenance
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the sign at any one time and not to
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 93/735
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the outdoor advertising signs.
(3) Expanded.
(4) Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official.
(5) Moved to another location unless brought into conformance.
(b)Unsafe And Unlawful Signs : If community and economic development department staff find that any
sign regulated herein is structurally unsafe; constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment, defined as having no active copy on an
outdoor advertising sign within the past ninety (90) days or the advertisement of a business, concern
or use which has been closed for greater than ninety (90) days; is not kept in good repair; is capable
of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it; or is unlawfully installed,
erected or maintained; he or she shall give written notice to the permittee and/or owner thereof. If the
permittee and/or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards
herein set forth within ten (10) days after such notice, said sign shall be removed or altered to comply
by the community and economic development department at the expense of the permittee or owner
of the property upon which it is located.
(c)Removal Of Signs (Obsolete Signs) : The property owner shall remove all obsolete signs within ninety
(90) days after termination of business. Removal of obsolete signs shall include the supporting
structure, exclusive of any building.
(d)Maintenance Provision : The owner of any sign requiring a permit shall be required to maintain an
exterior which is properly painted, galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and deterioration of
all parts, including lighting and supports. All signs, and landscaping around the sign base, shall be
required to be adequately maintained and shall not become tattered, torn, frayed, ragged, shredded,
unkempt or the like. The sign shall be repaired within sixty (60) days following notice from the city of
a violation. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-63. Administration And Appeal:
(a)Administration : This article shall be administered by the inspection division and the planning and
redevelopment division, each according to its obvious responsibilities according to the meaning of
the language contained herein. Upon presentation of proper credentials, these persons or their duly
authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the
city of Rock Island to perform any duty imposed upon them by this article.
(b)Right Of Appeal : Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any person charged with the administration
of this article may take an appeal to the appropriate appeal board: building code board of appeals,
electrical code board or the board of zoning appeals.
(c)Jurisdiction :
(1) Appeals taken from requests relating to construction shall be filed with the building official or the
electrical inspector, as the case may be, shall be subject to the procedures established by those
respective commissions, and are not subject to the provisions of this section.
(2) In addition to the jurisdiction authorized in section 5.9 of the Rock Island zoning ordinance, the
board of zoning appeals, hereinafter referred to as "the board", is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 94/735
a. To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by any person charged with the administration of this article, except appeals relating to the
construction as identified under subsection (c)(1) of this section. The Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from to the extent and in the manner that the Board may decide to be fitting and proper
on the premises, and to that end, the Board shall also have all the power of the officer from whom
the appeals are taken.
b. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this
article.
c. To hear and pass upon applications for variances from a strict application of the terms of this
article, in the manner and subject to the standards set out in subsection (f) of this section.
(d) Provision Of Regulation: The creation, membership and meeting rules, application process and fee,
and stay of proceedings provisions for the Board, as established under article V of the Rock Island
zoning ordinance shall apply to all appeals and variances from this article.
(e)Hearing Of Appeals:
(1) An appeal of a decision shall be taken within thirty five (35) days after such decision is made.
(2) All final administrative decisions of the Board under this section shall be subject to judicial review
pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Review Act" of the State of Illinois, approved May 8,
1945, and all amendments and modifications thereto. The term "administrative decision" is defined
as in the "Administrative Review Act".
(f)Variances:
(1) The Board may vary the application of this article in harmony with its general purpose and intent,
in accordance with the procedure set forth herein, where there are practical hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this article. Any such variance shall be granted only
after a public hearing before the Board. The Board shall make final decisions on all variances except
for variances for business zoned properties on parcels twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or
larger in total area. In those circumstances, the Board will conduct the public hearing and then make
a recommendation to the City Council for final action.
(2) A variance may be granted only when special circumstances involving size, shape, topography,
location or surroundings affect the property referred to in the application, when denial of said
application would cause unreasonable or unnecessary hardship, and when said sign will not cause
substantial injury to the value of other property in the vicinity nor be detrimental to the public safety or
welfare and the neighborhood in which it is located.
(g)Decisions Of The Board: All decisions and findings of the Board, on appeal or upon application for a
variance, after a hearing, shall in all instances be final administrative determinations and shall be
subject to review by court as may be provided by law. (Ord. 115-2004, 12-6-2004; Ord. 015-2018, 4-
23-2018)
Sec. 4-64. Penalties:
The City may file an ordinance complaint with the Rock Island County Code Enforcement Service
(RICCES) in order to enforce regulations within this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 95/735
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder. (Ord. 115-2004, 12-6-2004)
Sec. 4-65. Diagrams:
Diagrams referred to in this article are on file in the city. (Ord. 115-2004, § 1, 12-6-2004)
Secs. 4-66-4-110. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 4
Sec. 4-111. Title And Scope:
(a)Title: This article shall be known as the ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE , may be
cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this Code".
(b)Purpose: It is the purpose of this Code to provide a just, equitable and practical method to be
cumulative with, and in addition to, any other remedy provided by the Building Code or otherwise
available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb,
health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to
be repaired, vacated or demolished.
(c)Scope: The following provisions shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are
now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction. The building official
may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent
necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and
order; or if the notice and order require demolition, to cause the building to be demolished, and the
materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such demolition work shall
be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner provided in section 4-122 of
this article. (Ord. 82-66, 1-17-1983)
Sec. 4-112. Definitions:
For the purpose of the code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as
specified in either this section or as specified in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they
shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. "Webster's Third
New International Dictionary of the English Language", unabridged, copyright 1961, shall be considered
as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the
singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
Abandoned Building: Any building or part of a building which is unoccupied and is deemed hazardous
due to the fact that the building is unsecured and open to trespass, or was open to trespass and is now
boarded.
Accessory Building: Any building which is not a dwelling and is constructed for use accessory to a
principal building.
Building Code: The Uniform Building Code, promulgated by the International Conference of Building
Officials, as approved and adopted, as amended by the City.
Building Official: The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Code, or his duly authorized representative.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 96/735
Dangerous Building: Any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the provisions of section
4-116 of this article.
Owner: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
(1) Has legal title to any structure or building, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or
(2) Has charge, care or control of the dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as
executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Person: Any one or more natural persons, legal entities, governmental bodies or any combination
thereof.
Principal Building: Any building constructed for or used as a principal building on a piece of property.
(Ord. 82-66, 1-17-1983; Ord. 88-40, 7-11-1988)
Sec. 4-113. Penalties:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor; and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed,
continued, or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 82-66, § 1101, 1-17-1983)
Sec. 4-114. Enforcement:
(a)Generally :
(1) Authority : The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of
this code. For such purpose, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
(2) Right Of Entry : Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of
this code, of whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which
makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his
authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the
same or to perform any duty imposed on the building official by this code, provided that if such
building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if
such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry
is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy
provided by law to secure entry.
(3) Responsibilities Defined : Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by
this code even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even
though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required
equipment or of complying with this code.
Every owner or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound
structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he
occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a
building containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 97/735
(b)Dangerous Buildings To Be Abated as Nuisances. All buildings or portions thereof which are
determined to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures
specified in sections 4-117--4-121.
(c)Role of Building Code Board of Appeals. Final interpretation of the provisions of this code and
appeals provided for hereunder shall be heard and decided upon by the building code board of
appeals. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in
section 4-119(a)--(c).
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 201--203, 1-17-83)
Cross reference--Building code board of appeals, §§ 2-286, 2-286.1.
Sec. 4-115. Permits and inspections.
(a)Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure regulated by this code
without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the building official in the
manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in chapter 3 of the building code.
(b)Fees. Whenever a building permit is required by subsection (a) above, the appropriate fees shall be
paid to the city as specified in the revised appendix of the building code.
(1) Inspection. All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for
which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with
and in the manner provided by this code and sections 305 and 306 of the building code.
(2) The building official may request, and shall receive so far as is required, in the discharge of his
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials in this jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 301--303, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-116. What constitutes a dangerous building.
For the purpose of this code, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or
defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered:
(1) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width
or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
(2) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so
warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in
case of fire or panic.
(3) Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads,
is more than one and one half (1 1/2) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(4) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other
cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 98/735
(5) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or to become detached
or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(6) Whenever any portion of the building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the
exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half that specified in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses
permitted in the building code for such buildings.
(7) Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is
required in the case of similar new construction.
(8) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of faulty construction;
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
(9) Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe
for the purpose for which it is being used.
(10) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third
of the base.
(11) Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or
more damage or deterioration of its supporting member(s), or fifty (50) percent damage or
deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(12) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or
has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor
for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose
of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
(13) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of
any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
building regulations of this city, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or
ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
(14) Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all
applicable laws and ordinances, has any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50)
percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the strength,
fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by
law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same
location.
(15) Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement,
inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the city's public health
sanitarian to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that it is likely to cause
sickness or disease.
(16) Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 99/735
wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire chief or his
representative to be a fire hazard.
(17) Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance
known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
(18) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
(Ord. No. 82-66, § 501, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-117. Notices and orders of building official--Generally.
(a)Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be
inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, he
shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or demolition of the building.
(b)Notice and Order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of
the building. The notice and order shall contain:
(1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
(2) A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and
concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of
section 4-122.
(3) A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official.
a. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order
shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced
within such time (not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order) and completed within
such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
b. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order
shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of the
order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.
c. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order
shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine
reasonable (not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of the order); that all required permits be
secured therefor within sixty (60) days from the date of the order, and that the demolition be
completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.
(4) Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being
required) is not commenced within the time specified, the building official may order the building
vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed.
(5) Statements advising:
a. That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the
notice and order or any action of the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of service
of such notice and order; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 100/735
b. That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of, all right to an administrative hearing and
determination of the matter.
(c)Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one (1) copy thereof
shall be served on each of the following, if known to the building official or disclosed from official
public records: The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record;
the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of
record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the building official to
serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to
any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him
by the provisions of this section.
(d)Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto
either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized
assessment roll of the county or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so
appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed,
addressed to such person at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of
any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under
this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
(e)Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by
a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the
time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card
returned in acknowledgment of receipt of certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and
order retained by the building official.
(f)Repair, Vacation and Demolition Standards To Be Followed. The following standards shall be followed
by the building (and by the building code board of appeals if an appeal is taken) in ordering the
repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure:
(1) Any building declared a dangerous building under this article shall either be repaired in
accordance with the current building code or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner.
(2) If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life,
limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 601, 602, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-118. Same--Notice to vacate.
(a)Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 4-117(c), be
posted at or upon each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Rock Island
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 101/735
(b)Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in
the notice and order issued by him under subsection (b) of section 4-117, reciting the emergency and
specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any
building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove
such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until
the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 82-66, § 603, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-119. Appeal.
(a)Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under section 4-117(c) may appeal from any notice
and order or any action of the building official under this code by filing at the office of the building
official a written appeal containing:
(1) A heading in the words: "Before the Building Code Board of Appeals of the City of Rock Island."
(2) A caption reading: "Appeal of ," giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
(3) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the
land involved in the notice and order.
(4) A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific order or action protested,
together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
(5) A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is
claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
(6) The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.
(7) The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one (1) appellant as to the
truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of such order or action of
the building official; however, if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately
dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated
and is posted in accordance with section 4-118, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from
the date of the service of the notice and order of the building official.
(b)Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the building official
shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the building code board of appeals.
(c)Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal,
the building code board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by
the board. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date
the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of
the board, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by
mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the
appeal.
(d)Effect of Failure To Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions
of section 4-117(a)--(e) and subsections (a)--(c) of this section shall constitute a waiver of his right to
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 102/735
an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or to any portion thereof.
(e)Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be
considered in the hearing of the appeal.
(f)Staying of Order Under Appeal. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to section, enforcement of
any notice and order of the building official issued under this code shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 701-704, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-120. Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals.
(a)Generally.
(1) Building code board of appeals. The board hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating to
the conduct of hearings and shall render the final decision.
(2) Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other
means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the board.
(3) Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing shall also be reported by a phonographic reporter if
requested by any party thereto. The party requesting the services of a phonographic reporter shall
pay the fee prescribed therefor. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties
upon request and upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor. Such fees may be established by the
board but shall in no event be greater than the cost involved.
(4) Oaths; certification. In any proceedings under this section, the board or any board member has
the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
(5) Reasonable dispatch. The board and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch
to conclude any matter before it. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of
any parties or their representatives.
(b)Form of Notice of Hearing. The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the building code board of appeals at on
the day of , 19 , at the hour , upon the notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the
hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant
evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You
may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefor with the building code board of
appeals."
(c)Subpoenas.
(1) Filing of affidavit. The board may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the
attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of a
member of the board or upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such
subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefor which states the name and address
of the proposed witness; specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof
in detail to the issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired things in his possession
or under his control. A subpoena need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 103/735
(2) Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing, or to produce
material evidence in his possession or under his control, as required by any subpoena served upon
such person as provided for herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(d)Conduct of Hearing.
(1) Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses.
(2) Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
(3) Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or
explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would
be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
(4) Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on
which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such
evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
(5) Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
(6) Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
a. To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.
b. To introduce documentary and physical evidence.
c. To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.
d. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify.
e. To rebut the evidence against him.
f. To represent himself or to be represented by anyone of his choice who is lawfully permitted to do
so.
(7) Official notice.
a. What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after
submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this
state or of official records of the board or department and ordinances of the city or rules and
regulations of the board.
b. Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be
noticed, and these matters shall be noted in the record, referred to therein or appended thereto.
c. Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on
request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of
authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the board.
d. Inspection of the premises. The board may inspect any building or premises involved in the
appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that:
1. Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 104/735
2. The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and
3. The board shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts
observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom.
Each party shall then have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the board.
(e)Method and Form of Decision.
(1) Hearing before board. Where a case is heard before the board, no member thereof who did not
hear the evidence or has not read the entire record of the proceedings shall vote on or take part in
the decision.
(2) Form of decision. Any decision by the board shall comply with the provisions of this section. The
decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented,
and the requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant
personally or sent to him by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
(3) Effective date of decision. The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein.
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 801--805, 1-17-83)
Sec. 4-121. Enforcement of the order of the building official or the board of
appeals.
(a)Compliance.
(1) General. After any order of the building official or the building code board of appeals made
pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall
fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such
order is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2) Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the building official or the building code board of
appeals made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed
shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may:
a. Cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (1) of this paragraph (a); or
b. Institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance.
(3) Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within
thirty (30) days after any final notice and order issued under this code becomes effective:
a. The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by
posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Rock Island
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 105/735
b. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No
person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal
ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued
pursuant to the provisions of the building code.
c. The building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to
be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building substandard
as set forth in the notice and order or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the
building to be demolished, and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot
cleaned. Any such demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner hereinafter provided in this code under section 4-122.
(b)Extension of Time To Perform Work. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to
conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he will comply with the order if allowed
additional time, the building official may, in his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed
an additional one hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete the demolition, if the building
official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently
dangerous to life or property. The building official's authority to extend time is limited to the demolition
of the premises and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal his notice and order.
(c)Interference With Demolition Work Prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or
holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered boarded, vacated or demolished
under the provisions of this code or other ordinances; or with any person to whom such building has
been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representatives of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in
such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of boarding, vacating or demolishing
any such building pursuant to the provisions of this code or any other law or ordinance, or in
performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed.
(d)Emergency Action. Whenever a condition exists in a principal building or accessory building which
places occupants, property or the public in imminent peril, the chief building inspector or his designee
along with the concurrence of the city attorney and the city manager or their designees may take any
such necessary action to abate any such condition forthwith, without prior notification to the person or
persons responsible when reasonable notice cannot be achieved or would unnecessarily perpetuate
a dangerous condition. Further, the city shall at all times have the right to enter upon property to
remove any condition which is a definite danger to the property and/or the surrounding
neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 82-66, §§ 901--903, 1-17-88; Ord. No. 88-40, § 2, 3, 7-11-88)
Sec. 4-122. Legal procedure to acquire demolition and recover cost of demolition.
(a)The building official may cause the demolition or repair of dangerous and substandard, principal or
accessory, buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings within the territory of the city.
(b)The building official shall, in actions involving principal buildings, apply to the circuit court of the
county in which such building is located for an order authorizing such action to be taken with respect
to any such building, if the owner or owners thereof, including the lien holders of record, after at least
thirty (30) days' written notice by mail to do so, have failed to put such building in a safe condition or
demolish it. In actions involving accessory buildings the chief building inspector or his designee shall
cause the building to be demolished and the site cleared and cleaned if the owner or owners thereof,
including the lien holders of record, after at least thirty (30) days' written notice by mail to do so have
failed to put such building in a safe condition or demolish it. Costs for any such accessory building
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 106/735
demolition shall be billed to the owner or owners and if unpaid after thirty (30) days the chief building
inspector, or his designee, may file a lien for the cost of demolition against the property; and the city
attorney is authorized and directed to initiate appropriate legal action to recover the costs of said
demolition.
(c)Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of any such building,
including the lien holders of record, are not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in
whose name such real estate was last assessed is sufficient notice under this section.
(d)The hearing upon such application to the circuit court shall be expedited by the court and shall be
given precedence over all other suits. The cost of such demolition or repair shall be a personal
obligation of the property owner. Any cost incurred by the municipality or lien holder of record, in
execution of the demolition or repair, is recoverable from the owner or owners of such real estate and
is a lien thereon, which lien is superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances except taxes,
provided that within seven (7) months after such repair or demolition, the municipality or the lien
holder of record who incurred such cost and expense shall file notice of lien of such cost and
expense incurred in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is
located.
(e)The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred; and
(3) The date or dates when the cost and expense were incurred by the municipality or by the lien
holder of record.
(f)Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in the property, after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the municipality or person in whose name
the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics'
liens.
(g)Suit to foreclose the lien shall be commenced no later than two (2) years, eleven (11) months after the
date of filing notice of lien.
(h)In addition to the foregoing, the building official may cause appropriate legal action to be taken by the
city to acquire a judgment for the costs of demolition against the owner or owners of the premises.
(Ord. No. 82-66, § 1001, 1-17-83; Ord. No. 88-40, §§ 4--6, 7-11-88; Ord. No. 92-95, § 1, 6-22-92)
Secs. 4-123--4-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ABANDONED BUILDINGS 1
Sec. 4-136. Definitions.
For purposes of enforcement of this article the following definitions of unoccupied buildings shall apply:
(a)Dangerous building is any building or structure abandoned or boarded or otherwise deemed to be
dangerous as defined under the provisions of section 4-116.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 107/735
(b)Boarded building is any vacant or abandoned building on which any of the doors, windows, or other
openings into such building are boarded up or otherwise closed by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building.
(c)Abandoned building is any structure or part of a structure which is unoccupied and is deemed
hazardous due to the fact that the building is unsecured and open to trespass.
(d)Vacant building is any building or structure which is unoccupied and remains secure by conventional
methods used in the design of the building.
(e)Secure building may be a vacant or boarded structure which is not open to trespass.
(Ord. No. 87-90.1, § 1, 10-19-87)
Sec. 4-137. Penalties.
Any person, form or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of
not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 87-90.1, § 2, 10-19-87)
Sec. 4-138. Authority.
The chief building inspector or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 87-90.1, § 3, 10-19-87)
Sec. 4-139. Unoccupied buildings to remain secure.
Whenever any building or structure in the city is or hereafter becomes unoccupied and any of the doors,
windows or other openings into such building are or become open to trespass and/or the elements, such
building or structure shall be deemed a hazard and a nuisance to the public and shall be secured by
boarding or through the replacement of the conventional barriers used in the design of the building.
(Ord. No. 87-90.1, § 4, 10-19-87)
Sec. 4-140. Specific restrictions.
(a)No unauthorized person shall remove, tamper with or otherwise alter any conventional or
unconventional barriers which are used to secure a building from trespass and damage from the
elements.
(b)No person shall occupy or permit to be occupied by another any boarded or abandoned dwelling,
building or structure when it is not in reasonable compliance with the provisions of the housing code,
and a certificate of compliance/occupancy issued.
(c)No person shall enter any unoccupied dwelling, building or structure without permission in writing from
the chief building inspector or his designee; however entry may be made by the owner or the owner's
authorized representative and entry may be made by the chief building inspector or his designee with
the consent of the owner or through any remedy provided by law to secure entry.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 108/735
(d)The chief building inspector or his designee may enter upon the exterior or the premises for the
purposes of determining whether an unoccupied dwelling, building or structure is secure, abandoned,
vacant, or boarded.
(e)The chief building inspector or his designee may enter upon the premises to complete work required
by this article after the identified responsible persons have been notified of violations as provided in
section 4-141 of this article and the order to correct those violations has become final without
compliance.
(f)Entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building or structure under permit.
(g)Entry may be made by employees of or contractors for the city for the purposes of removing trash and
debris, weed and brush cutting, and the installation, removal, and reading of water meters under the
authority granted by ordinances covering those functions.
(Ord. No. 87-90.1, § 5, 10-19-87)
Sec. 4-141. Notices and compliance orders.
(a)Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the chief building inspector or his designee has inspected
or caused to be inspected any building or structure or premises upon which same is located and has
found and determined that the building is abandoned, he shall commence proceedings to cause the
building to be secured.
(b)Notice And Order: The Chief Building Inspector or his designee shall issue a notice and order directed
to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
(1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
(2) A statement that the Chief Building Inspector or his designee has found the building to be
unsecured.
(3) A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the Chief Building Inspector or
his designee.
a. If the Chief Building Inspector or his designee has determined that the building or structure must
be secured, the order shall require that the work be commenced immediately and completed within
such time not to exceed ten (10) days from the date of the notice and order.
b. If the Chief Building Inspector or his designee has determined that an interior inspection must be
conducted in the building or structure, the order shall require such inspection and state a date and
time for said inspection to take place.
(4) A statement advising that the building or structure, whether abandoned or boarded, must remain
unoccupied and shall be posted until such time as inspections are completed and reasonable
compliance with the Housing Code substantiated and a certificate of occupancy issued.
(5) Statements advising that the building or structure if open and unsecure or boarded, shall have no
active utilities and that those utilities shall be discontinued as soon as practical after the order has
become final and that the responsibility to protect the plumbing from freezing shall be the owner(s).
(6) Statements advising:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 109/735
a. That service by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and regular delivery,
shall be complete upon mailing;
b. That the order shall become final at ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on the tenth day from the date of
the notice and order and that legal action or other action as the Chief Building Inspector or his
designee shall determine necessary to secure the building shall be commenced; that failure to
complete any required action within the time frame specified may result in such required action to
be completed at the owner's expense, a bill presented for such services and payment for said
services to secure shall be made within thirty (30) days after billing for such services;
c. That any bill for such services if delinquent shall become a lien thereof and be charged against
the property and judgment may also be sought in Small Claims Court.
(c)Service Of Notice And Order: The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be served upon the record owner or posted on the property as specified in the Abatement
of Dangerous Buildings Code. (Ord. 87-90.1, 10-19-1987)
Sec. 4-142. Enforcement Of The Order Of The Building Official:
Failure To Commence Work: Whenever the required securing is not commenced by the date of any final
notice and order issued under this Article becomes effective, the Chief Building Inspector or his
designee may make necessary arrangements for authorization to bring such building or structure into
compliance with the regulations in this Article and upon completion bill all identified owner(s) for costs
incurred. These costs shall reflect materials and labor at a rate to be determined by the Chief Building
Inspector or his designee, who may also file any such required action through the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings Code to cause the repair or demolition of the building and any materials, rubble or
debris removed and the lot cleaned. The cost thereof shall be paid and recovered in the manner
provided in the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code adopted by the City. (Ord. 87-90.1, 10-19-
1987)
Sec. 4-143. Methods Of Securing; Standards To Be Followed:
(a)Securing: All windows and doors which are accessible from the grade, porches, decks or exterior
stairways and which allow the elements and weather to enter shall be secured. At the option of the
owner, an abandoned building or structure may be secured through the repair and/or replacement of
the conventional equipment used for such purposes in the design of the building. Other methods of
securing a building or structure will be subject to the approval of the Chief Building Inspector or his
designee and will be in accordance with standards on file in the Inspection Division office. Once a
building or structure is secured following a notice and order directing such action, the building or
structure shall not be reoccupied without a certificate of compliance/occupancy issued. If keys or
working locks cannot be located, the building shall be secured at one door only with a padlock and
hasp. The owner may obtain a key upon presentation of proper identification to the Chief Building
Inspector or his designee during normal office hours. Costs incurred for lock and hasp shall be
recovered as specified in Section 4-144 of this Article.
(b)Utilities To Be Discontinued: Whenever any building or structure is abandoned or boarded, the active
utilities of gas and electricity shall be discontinued, the water meter shall be removed and pipes
drained and protected from freezing. Should a City-authorized contractor or department be requested
to perform any required action because of failure to comply with any required action on the part of the
owner, such action will be completed at the owner's expense and risk. The City will do no more
toward the winterization of a building which it boards than to remove the water meter and open
interior plumbing shutoff valves to allow natural draining of pipes. "Damages from freezing" is not
warranted. (Ord. 87-90.1, 10-19-1987; Ord. 89-72, 12-4-1989)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 110/735
Sec. 4-144. Recovery Of Costs Incurred By City:
Any costs incurred by the City and billed to the owner(s) of the property identified in the notice and order
shall be due and payable without extension within thirty (30) days of the issuance of such billing.
Nonpayment of any such demand for payment shall become a lien thereof and be charged against the
property. (Ord. 87-90.1, 10-19-1987)
Sec. 4-145. Refusal Of Application For Building Permits:
The Chief Building Inspector or his designee may refuse application for building permits for the repair or
demolition of a building or structure when any liens for unpaid charges for work accomplished by the City
in the performance of the requirements of this Article are yet unpaid. A building permit may be issued
when all requirements for said permit are met and proof of payment of liens filed under this Article are
presented. (Ord. 87-90.1, 10-19-1987)
ARTICLE VI. CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT
Sec. 4-146. Identification And Treatment Of Chronic Nuisance Property:
Sec. 4-146.1. Chronic Nuisance Property Prohibited:
(a)Chronic nuisance property is any kind of structure, edifice, building, unit(s) thereof, or land upon
which the aforementioned is affixed, where activity involving:
(1) The commission of one of the behaviors listed below has occurred:
a. Possession of controlled substance as defined in the Illinois controlled substances act 1;
b. Possession of cannabis as defined in the cannabis control act 720 ILCS 550.2 or section 10-60 of
this code;
c. Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 or section 10-61 of this code;
d. Keeping a place of prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-17 or section
10-63 of this code;
e. Gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1; or
f. Keeping a gambling place as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3; and
g. Any felony offense not prohibited from being considered in determination of a nuisance property
under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.5.
(2) The commission of three (3) or more of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any sixty
(60) day period, as a result of any three (3) separate factual events not stemming from the same
incident that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency.
a. Public indecency as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 or section 10-66 of this
code;
b. Assault as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 or section 10-20 of this code;
c. Battery as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3 or section 10-20 of this code;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 111/735
d. Repealed.
e. Reckless conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5;
f. Criminal housing management as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5.1;
g. Theft as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-1 or section 10-67 of this code;
h. Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 or section 10-30 of
this code;
i. Unlawful possession of firearms or firearms ammunition as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-3.1;
j. Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1;
k. Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 or section 10-26 of this
code;
l. Resisting or obstructing a police officer as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/31-1 or
section 10-32 of this code;
m. Attempted obstruction of justice as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/31-4;
n. Aiding escape as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/31-7;
o. Maintaining a public nuisance as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/37-1;
p. Hazing as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/5;
q. Prohibited sales and possession of alcohol as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16 or
subsection 3-10(c) of this code;
r. Cruelty to animals as defined in section 7-115 of this code;
s. Vicious animal as defined in section 7-117 of this code;
t. Youth dance license as defined in section 8-86 of this code;
u. Disturbing the peace as defined in section 10-21 of this code;
v. Loitering for drug activities as defined in section 10-23.1 of this code.
(b)In no event shall any police contact that was made by, or on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an
individual with a disability be used in the determination that a property is a chronic nuisance property
when the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability.
(c)It is unlawful for any person to employ, use, or maintain, or make available or allow the employment,
use, or maintenance of any structure, or land upon which the aforementioned is affixed, as chronic
nuisance property within the city. Any person who fails to voluntarily cease the use or occupancy of a
structure, or land upon which the aforementioned is affixed, as required by this article may be
removed pursuant to a court order after notice and an opportunity to be heard by the court having
jurisdiction of an action brought pursuant to this article. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-
1998; Ord. 056-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 4-146.2. Definitions:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 112/735
As used in this article, the following terms or phrases shall have the following meanings:
Agent: If applicable, either a resident manager or a property manager.
Chief Of Police: Includes any person designated by the Rock Island police chief as his or her
delegate in the enforcement of this article.
Felony Offense: An offense for which a sentence to death or to a term of imprisonment in a
penitentiary for one year or more is provided.
Owner: Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association, or partnership including:
(1) Any part owner, joint owner, tenants in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or of a part of the property; or
(2) A mortgagee in whom is vested:
a. All or part of the legal title to property; or
b. All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises.
Person: Any natural person, association, partnership, or corporation capable of owning or using
property in the city.
Structure: Any type of building, dwelling, edifice, enclosure, garage, house, room, shed, shop, store,
warehouse, or unit(s) thereof. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 96-90, 11-11-1996, eff. retroactive to 10-
31-1996; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-1998)
Sec. 4-146.3. Procedure:
(a)When the Chief of Police has reasonable suspicion that a structure, or land upon which the
aforementioned is affixed, is being employed, used, or maintained in violation of Section 4-146.1 of
this Article, the Chief of Police may commence proceedings to cause the closure of the structure.
Except in cases brought pursuant to Section 4-146.6 of this Article, in the event the Chief of Police
wishes to commence proceedings:
(1) The Chief of Police shall notify the owner(s) of record in writing by certified mail that the structure
has been determined to be chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
a. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises on which the
structure is located;
b. A statement that the Chief of Police has found the structure to be in violation of this Chapter with
the concise description of the conditions leading to his/her findings.
c. Notice directing the owner(s) of record to respond to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days of
receipt of the written notice to discuss the violation and possible remedies.
(2) In the event judicial action is commenced, a copy of the notice shall also be served on the owner
or their agent at least ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any judicial action by the City.
Serving shall be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, postage
prepaid, with return receipt requested, to the person at their address as it appears on the last tax
assessment or as may be otherwise known to the Chief of Police.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 113/735
(3) In the event judicial action is commenced, a copy of the notice shall also be served on the
occupant of the structure not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any judicial
proceeding and be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail,
postage prepaid, with return receipt requested, to them at the structure.
(4) In the event judicial action is commenced, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon the
property not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of any judicial proceedings.
(5) The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination by the Chief of
Police shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this Article.
(b)If the subject property continues as a chronic nuisance property in spite of the giving of the notices
described above, or the owner(s) of record fails to respond to the Chief of Police within ten (10) days
of receipt of the written notice to discuss this violation, the City Attorney's office is authorized to
commence civil proceedings in court seeking the closure of the structure as well as the imposition of
civil penalties against any or all the owners thereof, and any such other relief as may be deemed
appropriate. No fees shall be assessed for filing pleadings in connection with the enforcement of this
Article. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-1998)
Sec. 4-146.4. Enforcement Of Closure Order; Costs; Civil Penalty:
(a)In the event that a court finds that a structure constitutes "chronic nuisance property" as defined in
this Article, the court may order that it shall be closed for any period of up to one year and that the
owner(s) pay to the City a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day the owner had
knowledge of activities or conditions at the structure constituting a violation of this Article.
(b)The court may also authorize the City to physically secure the structure against use or occupancy in
the event that the owner(s) fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event the City is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure shall be
made an assessment lien upon the property. As used in this subsection, "costs" means those costs
actually incurred by the City for the physical securing of the structure.
(1) The Inspection Department shall prepare a statement of costs to be used for the labor and
materials.
(2) Liens imposed by this Article shall be collected in all respects as property taxes.
(3) Any person who is assessed the costs of closure and/or a civil penalty by the court shall be
personally liable for the payment thereof to the City. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-
1998)
Sec. 4-146.5. Commencement Of Actions; Burdens Of Proof; Defenses; Mitigation
Of Civil Penalty:
(a)Except in a proceeding under Section 4-146.6 of this Article, if after the commencement, but prior to
the trial, of an action brought by the City pursuant to this Article, an owner specifically stipulates with
the City that they will pursue a course of action as the parties agree will necessarily abate the
conditions giving rise to the violation(s), the City may agree to stay the proceedings. However, in the
event that the City reasonably believes the owner is not diligently pursuing the action(s)
contemplated by the stipulation, it may then apply to the court for a release from the stay seeking
relief as is deemed appropriate.
(b)In an action seeking the closure of a structure as chronic nuisance property, the City shall have the
initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the structure is a chronic
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 114/735
nuisance property.
(c)In an action seeking civil penalties from an owner, the City shall have the initial burden of proof to
show by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions at
the structure constituting a violation of this Article.
(d)In an action brought to enforce the terms of Section 4-146.1 of this Article, evidence of a structure's
general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting it shall be admissible.
(e)In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following
factors, as they may be appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable:
(1) The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the problem at the structure;
(2) The financial condition of the owner;
(3) Whether the problem at the structure was repeated or continuous;
(4) The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
(5) The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the owner(s) as a result of the
conditions at the structure;
(6) The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the City;
(7) The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition; and
(8) Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-
1998)
Sec. 4-146.6. Closure During Pendency Of Action; Emergency Closures:
In the event that it is determined that the structure is an immediate threat to the public safety and
welfare, the City may apply to the court for such immediate ex parte interim relief that is deemed by the
Chief of Police and/or City Attorney to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification procedures set
forth in subsection 4-146.3(a) of this Article and the limitation of subsection 4-146.5(a) of this Article
need not be complied with. The court shall order the forthwith service of the normal pleadings together
with a copy of emergency order. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-1998)
Sec. 4-146.7. Relief From Closure Order:
(a)An owner of a structure determined to be chronic nuisance property may obtain relief from the court's
judgment if:
(1) They appear and pay all costs associated with the proceedings under this Chapter; and
(2) They file a bond in such a place and on such form as the court may by order direct in an amount
not less than the tax-assessed value of the structure; and keep said bond in force for a period of not
less than one year or for such longer period as the court directs; and
(3) They enter into a stipulation with the City that they will immediately abate the conditions giving
rise to the chronic nuisance property and prevent the same from being established or maintained
thereafter. The stipulation will then be made part of the court's file.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 115/735
(b)In the event that the owner violates the terms of the stipulation, the City may thereafter apply to the
court for an order awarding up to the entire amount of the aforementioned bond to the City as a
penalty as well as such other relief, including closure for an additional period of up to one year, that is
deemed by the court to be appropriate. (Ord. 95-40, 6-5-1995; Ord. 98-37, § 1, 5-4-1998)
ARTICLE VII. CODE HEARING DIVISION
Sec. 4-147. Definitions:
As used in this Article, unless the context requires otherwise:
Building Inspector : A full-time, City of Rock Island employee whose duties include the inspection or
examination of structures in the City to determine if code violations exist.
Building Owner : The legal or beneficial owner of a structure.
Code : Any City of Rock Island ordinance, law, housing or building code that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety
standards that are applicable to structures in the City.
Hearing Officer : A City of Rock Island employee or an officer or agent of the City, other than a
building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
(1) Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists.
(2) Hear testimony and accept evidence presented relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(3) Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and
evidence introduced at the hearing.
(4) Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code or ordinance
violation exists.
(5) The Hearing Officer is authorized to conduct hearings relative to building code violations as well
as violations of any other ordinance of the City that provides that the Code Hearing Officer shall
have a hearing relative to the violation of each particular ordinance. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994; Ord.
97-04, 2-10-1997)
Sec. 4-148. Code Hearing Division Established:
The City hereby adopts division 31.1, "Building Code Violations", 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1,
and all amendments and modifications thereto, and establishes a Code Hearing Division within the
Inspection Division. The function of the Code Hearing Division is to expedite the prosecution and
correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this Article. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-149. Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive:
This Article does not preclude the City from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-150. Instituting Code Hearing Proceedings:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 116/735
When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a structure, he shall note the violation
on a multiple-copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the structure
owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the violation was observed, the names of
witnesses to the violation, and the address of the structure where the violation is observed.
The violation report form shall be forwarded by the Building Inspector to the Code Hearing Division
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the
blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30)
nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported by the Building Inspector.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the Code Hearing Division and
shall be part of the record of hearing; one copy of the report form shall be returned to the Building
Inspector so that he may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated; and one copy of the report form shall be served by first-class mail on the owner of the
structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the
owner of the structure cannot be ascertained, or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service
may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of
the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-151. Subpoenas; Default:
At any time prior to the hearing date the Hearing Officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of
the Building Inspector or the attorney for the City, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing the owner or his
attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-152. Continuances; Representation At Code Hearings:
No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing Officer in proceedings under this Article except in
cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer
under this Article shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for the city may be presented by the
building inspector, by any other city employee, or by an attorney designated by the city. However, in no
event shall the case for the city be presented by an employee of the code hearing division. The case for
the dwelling owner may be presented by the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative.
(Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-153. Hearing; Evidence:
At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant
to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article. (Ord.
94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-154. Eviction; Rights Of The Occupants:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding
shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees
to testify or testifies at a code hearing violation. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-155. Defenses To Code Violations:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 117/735
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this article if the owner, his attorney, or any other
agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
(1) The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the
violation has been remedied or removed.
(2) The code violation has been caused by the current building occupants and that in spite of
reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violation, the current
occupants continue to cause the violations.
(3) An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part
of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code violation. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-156. Findings, Decision, Order:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings and order shall include the
hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, in the
event a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions
that are provided in the code for the violation proved, including, but not limited to, the imposition of a
monetary fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be
served on the owner within five (5) days after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as
the report form and summons are served pursuant to section 4-150 of this article. Payment of any
penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this code. In
addition to the fine, the appealing party in the event the appeal is lost shall pay the sum of one hundred
twenty dollars ($120.00) to cover the costs of the appeal. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994; Ord. 068-2008, § 1, 10-
20-2008)
Sec. 4-157. Review Under Administrative Review Law:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of the
county, and the provisions of the administrative review law, and all amendments and modifications
thereto; and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action
for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article. (Ord.
94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-158. Judgment On Findings, Decision, Order:
(a)Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed
remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under
the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected
in accordance with applicable law.
(b)After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be
sought for a final determination of the code violation, the city may commence a proceeding in the
circuit court of the county for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order.
The city may consolidate multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a
proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the city shall file a certified copy of the findings,
decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show
that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with this article and the applicable
state laws. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 118/735
section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided
that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order
does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the
findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements of this article and the
applicable state law and that the building owner had an opportunity for a hearing under this article
and for judicial review as provided in this article:
(1) The court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against the building owner for the amount
indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs; such judgment shall have the same effect
and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
(2) The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are requested by the city to
enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a violation.
(3) The chief building official shall have the authority to fully or partially vacate and/or release
administrative judgments. In deciding whether to fully or partially vacate and/or release a judgment,
the chief building official may consider any facts he determines to be relevant in making that
determination including, but not limited to, written guidelines and policies developed by the chief
building official. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994; Ord. 008-2017, 3-6-2017)
Sec. 4-159. Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the city as the result of a finding of a
code violation under this article shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so
that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the
property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a hearing officer under this article. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-160. Repealer:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed insofar as they do so
conflict. (Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994)
Sec. 4-161. Effective Date:
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval, as required by law.
(Ord. 94-37, 5-2-1994; Ord. 95-35, 5-1-1995)
Secs. 4-162-4-174. Reserved:
ARTICLE VIII. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
Sec. 4-175. Purpose:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the licensing and inspection of residential rental property so
as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City including:
(1) To protect the public health and safety by ensuring rental units comply with minimum housing
standards as established by City ordinances.
(2) To protect the character and stability of residential areas.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 119/735
(3) To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the
life, safety, general welfare and health of persons occupying dwellings.
(4) To facilitate the enforcement of minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential
rental property and thus to prevent slums and blight.
(5) To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord.
050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-176. Definitions:
Approved: Approved by the Code official.
Bed And Breakfast Inn: A single-family dwelling or portion thereof where rooms without cooking facilities
for the occupancy of temporary guests are provided at a daily rate of compensation for a maximum of
seven (7) consecutive days, and where meals are provided for compensation in contradistinction to a
"hotel", a "motel", a "dormitory" or a "rooming house" which are separately defined within this article.
Code Official: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or any
duly authorized representative.
Compliance Inspection: An inspection subsequent to the identification of a Code violation the primary
purpose of which is to determine whether the violation has been corrected.
Dormitory: A building used as a group living quarters for a student body operated by a college or
university or other such institution of higher education, subject to relevant codes and regulations for
behavior of students and others in effect as such educational facility which are enforced by resident
personnel at such institution.
Dwelling: A building, or portion thereof, used exclusively for human habitation.
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Hotel: A building in which lodging with accompanying bathrooms is provided and offered to temporary
guests for compensation and in which ingress and egress to all rooms is provided through an interior
lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. Maid service, linen laundering, telephone
and secretarial or desk service are also provided for lodgers in contradistinction to a "motel", a "rooming
house", a "dormitory" or a "bed and breakfast inn" which are separately defined in this article.
Immediate Family: Spouse or direct lineal relative which shall include great grandparents, parents,
children and grandchildren but which excludes cousins, aunts, and uncles.
Initial Inspection: An interior and exterior inspection performed subsequent to the submission of a
residential rental property license application.
Motel: A building or group of buildings in which lodging rooms with accompanying bathrooms are
provided and offered primarily to temporary guests for compensation in contradistinction to a "hotel", a
"rooming house", a "dormitory" or a "bed and breakfast inn" which are separately defined within this
article. A motel also furnishes services such as maid service and linen laundering and provides
secretarial and desk service.
Occupancy: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized.
Occupant: Any tenant living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 120/735
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the
property; or recorded in the official records of the State, County or Municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of such person
if ordered to take possession of real property.
Person: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures.
Property Agent: A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity designated in
writing by the property owner to the Code official to manage a residential rental property including the
authority to receive notices or citations.
Renewal Inspection: An inspection performed on a property which has been previously licensed as a
residential rental property.
Residential Rental Property: Dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses and rooming units let or intended
to be let for rent or lease.
Residential Rental Property License: A license issued authorizing the occupancy of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming houses, and rooming units let or intended to be let for rent or lease.
Rooming House: A building containing rooming units in which meals may or may not be served in
contradistinction to a "hotel", a "motel", a "dormitory" or a "bed and breakfast inn" which are separately
defined within this article.
Rooming Unit: A room rented or leased as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and
with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which
provides sleeping facilities shall be counted as one rooming unit for purposes of this article.
Structure: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
Temporary License: A license issued subsequent to the submission of an application for a residential
rental property but prior to an initial inspection.
Tenant: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying
a building or portion thereof as a unit. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. 057-2005, 7-11-2005; Ord. 050-
2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-177. License Required:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to operate, maintain or
offer for rent within the City a residential rental property whether vacant or not without first obtaining a
license as provided in this article.
It is unlawful for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a residential rental property,
which is not licensed as provided in this article.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to offer for rent or occupy
any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a residential rental property for
which a license is under suspension.
This article shall not apply to the following structures:
(1) Single-family owner occupied dwellings.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 121/735
(2) Single-family dwellings occupied by a member of the owner's immediate family.
(3) Single-family dwellings which are vacant but not intended to be let for rent.
(4) Townhouse and condominium owner occupied dwellings.
(5) Hotels, motels and bed and breakfast inns.
(6) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by the State or Federal
government, including, but not limited to, nursing homes, retirement centers, rest homes, etc.
(7) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned by other governmental agencies and public
housing authorities.
(8) Dormitories.
A license for a residential rental property cannot be transferred to another residential rental property.
Further, it shall be unlawful for the owner of a residential rental property who has received a compliance
order upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of such residential rental property until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Code
official and shall furnish to the Code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such order or notice of violation. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-178. License Application:
Each applicant for a license or renewal license to maintain a residential rental property for the purpose of
renting it to others or for the purpose of allowing others to occupy it as a dwelling unit shall file a written
application with the Code official stating:
(1) The full legal name, address, and home, work, cellular and facsimile telephone numbers and the
electronic mailing address of each and every owner of the residential rental property.
(2) The full legal name, address and home, work, cellular and facsimile telephone numbers and the
electronic mailing address of the building manager or property agent.
(3) The full legal name, address and home, work, cellular and facsimile telephone numbers and
electronic mailing address of any buyer on a contract for deed.
(4) The address of the residential rental property for which the application for license is requested.
(5) In the case of a residential rental property owner who is not a resident of the City, the name,
address and home, work, cellular and facsimile telephone numbers and electronic mailing address of
his/her agent with the authority for receipt of service or notice of a violation of the provisions of this
article.
(6) The number of dwelling units within the residential rental property.
The Code official may, at any time, require additional relevant information of the owner or property
manager to clarify items on the application for license.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 122/735
Whenever there is a change in ownership of a residential rental property or the owner's property agent,
the owner shall, within thirty (30) days of such changes, file an updated written notice with the Code
official indicating such changes.
Each residential rental property license and renewal license shall require the payment of a fee which
amount shall be in accordance with section 4-183 of this article. In addition thereto, an inspection fee
shall be charged and billed after each inspection as required by this article.
A residential rental property license shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months from its
date of the initial inspection by the Code official. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-179. Inspections:
Upon receipt of a completed application form and payment of the license fee for a residential rental
property license, the Code official shall issue a temporary license and schedule an initial inspection of
the property as soon as is practicable after submittal of the license application. The initial inspection
shall determine whether the residential rental property is in conformance with the City's ordinances and
all other applicable provisions of this article and/or other applicable codes.
All residential rental property required to be licensed and subject to an initial inspection shall be
classified by the Code official and subject to further renewal inspections as follows:
Class A - Residential rental property with minimal Code violations; inspected four (4) years thereafter.
Class B - Residential rental property with minor Code violations; inspected two (2) years thereafter.
Class C - Residential rental property with major Code violations; inspected one year thereafter.
Class N - Residential rental property newly constructed; inspected four (4) years from the date of
initial licensing.
When the initial or renewal inspection of a residential rental property reveals any violations of applicable
codes, a notice shall be provided to the owner or his agent as specified in section 107 of the
International Property Maintenance Code. The notice shall contain a time frame set by the Code official
necessary to correct the violations based on the number and severity of the violations.
A compliance inspection will be conducted at the end of the time frame set to correct violations. If the
Code official finds that the requirements of applicable City codes have not been met, or that any
information provided in the license application is false, the license shall be suspended, revoked or not
issued in accordance with section 4-182 of this article. Each licensee shall be entitled to one compliance
inspection at no charge. Compliance inspections subsequent to the first compliance inspection shall be
charged in accordance with the provisions of section 4-183 of this article. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004;
Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-180. Inspection Access:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the property agent to be present at the residential rental
property on the date and time of the initial, renewal and enforcement inspections to provide access for
the inspection.
If any owner, property agent, tenant, occupant or other person in control of a residential rental property
or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to consent to free access and entry to the property or
dwelling unit under his/her control for any inspection pursuant to this article, the Code official or his
designee may apply to the Circuit Court for administrative warrant or other appropriate court order
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 123/735
authorizing such inspections. Refusal by an owner or property agent to allow an inspection shall be
grounds for revocation or suspension of the residential rental property license. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-
2004; Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-181. Penalty For Violation:
See section 10-107.11, "Schedule Of Penalties For Ordinance Violations", of this Code. (Ord. 050-2017,
12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-182. License Suspension And Revocation:
A license may be suspended when violations of applicable codes have been identified by the Code
official and the property owner has been properly notified of the violations and given a reasonable period
of time in which to correct violations, but has failed to do so. A license may also be suspended when any
information provided in the license application is determined by the Code official to be false.
When a license is suspended, the Code official shall send notice to the property owner or property agent
at the last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be in accordance
with the provisions of section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code.
If the property owner changes his address or changes the property agent and fails to notify the Code
official, such notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the owner or the property agent's last
address provided on the last license application.
A property owner whose license has been suspended may request a compliance inspection prior to
revocation of the license. If, upon completion of the compliance inspection, the Code official finds that
the licensed residential rental property in connection with which the notice was issued is now in
compliance with this article, the Code official may reinstate the license. The request for a compliance
inspection shall not stay the revocation of the license unless the Code official grants such request
pursuant to a showing of good cause by the property owner.
Any person whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to appeal the suspension by filing a
petition as set forth in section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code. Such an appeal shall
operate as a stay of the revocation until such time as the Appeals Board renders a decision on the Code
and appeal.
A license may be revoked when a petition for appeal has not been filed within fourteen (14) days
following the date of issuance of an order of suspension, or, if the suspension is sustained after the
appeal. A license may also be revoked when in the opinion of the Code official emergency conditions
exist in a residential rental property that require the immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the
International Property Maintenance Code.
A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided, shall not be reinstated. The property
owner may, however, obtain a new license after all violations have been corrected and by following the
procedures for obtaining a new license as set forth in this article, including the payment of all applicable
fees.
Whenever a license is revoked, the Code official shall send notice to the property owner or listed
property agent at the last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be
in accordance with the provisions of section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code. (Ord.
95-2004, 10-4-2004; Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-183. Fees:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 124/735
(a)The following fees shall be assessed for licensing and inspection of residential rental property subject
to this article:
(1) Compliance inspection: No charge for first; fifty five dollars ($55.00) per visit thereafter.
(2) Initial inspection: Sixteen dollars ($16.00) per dwelling unit/rooming unit.
(3) Rental inspection: Sixteen dollars ($16.00) per dwelling unit/rooming unit.
(4) Residential rental property license (4 or less buildings on the property): Thirty five dollars ($35.00)
per year, plus an additional twelve dollars ($12.00) per unit, per year.
(5) Residential rental property license (5 or more buildings on the property): One hundred ten dollars
($110.00) per year, plus an additional twelve dollars ($12.00) per unit, per year.
(6) Temporary residential rental property license (4 or less buildings on the property): Thirty five
dollars ($35.00) per year, plus an additional twelve dollars ($12.00) per unit, per year.
(7) Temporary residential rental property license (5 or more buildings on the property): One hundred
ten dollars ($110.00) per year, plus an additional twelve dollars ($12.00) per unit, per year.
(b)When rental license fees are not paid on or before the due date, a penalty of five percent (5%) shall
be added. Failure to receive an annual renewal notice does not entitle the owner to a remission of
penalty. (Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 4-184. Severability:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or word of this article shall be held invalid, either
on its face or as applies, the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the other sections, subsections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or words of this article, and the application thereof; and to that end the
sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and words of this article shall be deemed
severable. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004)
Sec. 4-185. Other Remedies:
Nothing in this article shall prevent the City from taking action under any applicable City Code or
ordinance for any violation thereof or limit the right or authority of the City to perform inspections based
on a tenant complaint or to seek injunctive relief or other appropriate legal remedy for any violation of
such Code or ordinance. (Ord. 95-2004, 10-4-2004)
Sec. 4-186. Review:
(Rep. by Ord. 050-2017, 12-11-2017)
Chapter 5
EMERGENCIES 1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 5-1--5-15. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 125/735
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Sec. 5-16. Definition:
As used in this article, the term "principal executive officer" shall mean the mayor of the city or, in his
absence or disability, the interim successor as established pursuant to the "emergency interim executive
succession act" 1, as now or hereafter amended. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 5-17. Established:
There is hereby created the city of Rock Island emergency services and disaster agency, referred to in
this article as the "ESDA", to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster,
in accordance with the "Illinois emergency services and disaster agency act of 1988". This ESDA shall
consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. (1963
Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 6-23-1980; Ord. 90-15, § 1, 3-27-1990)
Sec. 5-18. Coordinator:
The coordinator of the ESDA shall be appointed by the principal executive officer and shall serve until
removed by same. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration,
training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the principal executive officer
as provided by statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
coordinator, the city manager or any person designated by him shall be and act as coordinator until a
new appointment is made as provided in this article. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 2, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-19. Duties; Operations Plan:
The ESDA shall perform such emergency services and disaster functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in the state emergency services and disaster plan and program prepared by the governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall
perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by the Illinois ESDA act of 1988. The ESDA shall prepare and distribute to all appropriate
officials, in written form, a clear and complete plan of the emergency operating responsibilities of all local
departments and officials and of the disaster chain of command. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 3, 6-
23-1980; Ord. 90-15, § 1, 3-27-1990)
Sec. 5-20. Mobile Support Team:
All or any members of the ESDA may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by
the director of the state ESDA as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be
selected by the director of the state ESDA. Any member of a mobile support team who is a city
employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor or the state director shall receive the
compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities incident to such
employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the city, while so
serving, shall be entitled to one dollar ($1.00) per year compensation from the city as provided by law.
(Ord., § 4, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-21. Mutual Aid Generally:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 126/735
The coordinator of the ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal, county, federal
or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved
by the city council and the director of the state ESDA. (Ord., § 5, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-22. Emergency Action:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the
United States or the occurrence within the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or
other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the ESDA to cooperate
fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Ord., § 6, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-23. Compensation:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the state
director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to
the position held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the city council. (Ord., § 7, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-24. Reimbursement By State:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to
the city for expenses incident to training members of the ESDA prescribed by the director of the state
ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the city, in response to a call by the governor or state director of ESDA, as provided by law, and
any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord., § 8, 6-
23-1980)
Sec. 5-25. Purchases And Expenditures:
The city council may, on recommendation of the city coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase or
contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or
natural disaster. In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the city coordinator of ESDA is
authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be
necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by
the Illinois ESDA act of 1988; provided that if the city council meets at such time, he shall act subject to
the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord., § 9, 6-23-1980; Ord. 90-15, § 1, 3-27-1990)
Sec. 5-26. Oath:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the ESDA shall, before entering upon his duties,
subscribe the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will
well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 127/735
force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the City of Rock Island ESDA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence.
(Ord., § 10, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-27. Office:
The city manager is authorized to designate space in a city building, or elsewhere as may be provided
for by the city council, for the ESDA as its office. (Ord., § 11, 6-23-1980)
Sec. 5-28. Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes:
The city council may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law, and may
levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars
($100.00) of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the
Illinois ESDA act of 1988; however, the amount collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed
twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord., § 12, 6-23-1980; Ord. 90-15, § 1, 3-27-1990)
Sec. 5-29. Declaration Of Local Disaster Emergencies:
The principal executive officer, as defined in this article, may declare a local disaster emergency when
conditions justify same. In the event he is unable to make a declaration as aforesaid because of
disability or absence from the city, then the mayor pro tem, if one has been appointed, may make such a
declaration. In the event no mayor pro tem has been appointed, then the city manager shall be
authorized to make such a declaration. In the event the city manager is unable to make such a
declaration because of disability or absence from the city, then members of the city council shall be so
authorized in order of their seniority on said council. In the event two (2) or more council persons have
the same seniority, then the authorization shall be by alphabetical order. (Ord., § 1, 6-16-1980)
Secs. 5-30-5-40. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. POWERS OF MAYOR IN EMERGENCIES
Sec. 5-41. Authority To Declare Emergency, Exercise Powers:
The mayor of the city is hereby granted authority to declare a state of emergency and to exercise
emergency powers as herein provided. (Ord. 83-35, § 1, 8-22-1983)
Sec. 5-42. What Constitutes State Of Emergency:
A state of emergency shall exist when there is an imminent threat to the safety of the citizens of Rock
Island; when harm may come to the lives, rights and property of its residents if immediate action is not
taken and when there exists or may be forthcoming a significant breach of the public peace. (Ord. 83-35,
§ 2, 8-22-1983)
Sec. 5-43. Statement Describing Emergency:
In order to declare a state of emergency, the mayor shall sign, under oath, a statement describing the
nature of the emergency, setting forth the facts to substantiate the finding that a state of emergency
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 128/735
exists and declaring that the standards of section 5-42 of this article have been met. (Ord. 83-35, § 3, 8-
22-1983)
Sec. 5-44. Powers Described:
After declaring a state of emergency, the mayor may take such steps as are necessary to protect the
public safety, maintain peace and order and protect the lives, property and rights of the citizens of Rock
Island. (Ord. 83-35, § 5, 8-22-1983)
Sec. 5-45. Duration Of Emergency:
A state of emergency, as declared herein, shall expire upon declaration by the mayor, but not later than
the adjournment of the first regular or special meeting of the city council after the state of emergency is
declared. (Ord. 83-35, § 4, 8-22-1983)
Sec. 5-46. Penalty:
Any person violating the provisions of this article or the restrictions of any order of the mayor made
under the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-35, § 8, 8-22-1983)
Chapter 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Penalty:
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any
section, clause or provision of any section of this chapter, or who shall neglect or fail to comply with any
of the requirements hereof, or any person hindering or attempting to hinder or in any way interfere with
the Fire Chief or his designee or any fireman of the City when in the discharge of their legitimate duties,
or who shall refuse to obey the lawful commands of the Chief or his designee or who shall conduct
himself in a noisy and disorderly manner while in the vicinity of a fire, shall, on conviction thereof, be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(1963 Code, ch. VIII, art. I; Ord. 82-2002, § 1, 9-23-2002)
Secs. 6-2-6-4. Reserved:
(Ord. 91-94, § 1, 8-26-1991)
Secs. 6-5-6-15. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 6-16. Fire Code Adopted 1:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 129/735
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion that certain Code known as the International Fire
Code, being particularly the 2015 edition, with its appendices, in its entirety, with its amendments which
are made a part hereof by reference, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set
out at length herein; and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provision thereof shall
be controlling within the limits of the City. (Ord. 089-2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 048-2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 6-17. Definitions:
Corporate Counsel: The Attorney for the City.
Jurisdiction: The corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 89-45, 8-28-1989)
Sec. 6-18. Penalties:
(a)Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code hereby adopted or fail to comply
therewith; or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or
any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall
fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a court of
competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein shall, severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more
than one hundred eighty (180) days. The imposition of one penalty for any violations shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions. (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 89-45, 8-28-1989)
Sec. 6-19. Enforcement:
(a)Establishment And Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention: The International Fire Code, 2015 edition,
shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City which is hereby
established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(b)Fire Marshal: The Fire Marshal in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications.
(c)Inspectors: The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire Department as
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 85-52, 12-23-1985;
Ord. 89-45, 8-28-1989; Ord. 82-2002, 9-23-2002; Ord. 78-2004, 7-26-2004; Ord. 089-2011, 11-21-
2011; Ord. 048-2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 6-20. Establishment Of Limits In Which Storage Of Flammable Or Combustible
Liquids In Outside Aboveground Tanks Prohibited:
(a)The limits referred to in section 5704.2.9.6 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, in which
storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby
established as follows: "everywhere within the corporate limits of the City of Rock Island, Illinois".
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 130/735
(b)The limits in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby
established as follows: "must comply with the City of Rock Island, Illinois, zoning ordinance". (Ord.
089-2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 048-2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 6-21. Establishment Of Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases Restricted:
The limits referred to in section 6104 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, in which bulk storage
of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as follows: "must comply with the City of
Rock Island zoning ordinance". (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 89-45, 8-28-1989; Ord. 92-01, 1-6-1992;
Ord. 82-2002, 9-23-2002; Ord. 78-2004, 7-26-2004; Ord. 089-2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 048-2017, 11-20-
2017)
Sec. 6-22. Establishment Of Limits In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting
Agents Prohibited:
The provisions referred to in section 5604.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, in which the
storage of explosives and explosive materials, other than division 1.4G fireworks, small arms
ammunition, small arms primers, propellant actuated cartridges and smokeless propellants in
magazines, shall hereby be prohibited and are hereby established as follows: "not allowable within the
corporate limits of the City of Rock Island". (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 89-45, 8-28-1989; Ord. 92-01,
1-6-1992; Ord. 82-2002, 9-23-2002; Ord. 78-2004, 7-26-2004; Ord. 089-2011, 11-21-2011; Ord. 048-
2017, 11-20-2017)
Sec. 6-23. Amendments:
(Rep. by Ord. 82-2002, 9-23-2002)
Sec. 6-24. Appeal:
Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application, refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the Chief to the Fire Code Board of Appeals within ten (10) days from
the date of the decision. The appeal is to be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 83-36, 9-12-1983; Ord. 89-45,
8-28-1989)
Sec. 6-25. System Inspection Records:
Contractors who perform installation, inspection, testing, and/or maintenance services on fire and life
safety systems within the City of Rock Island, Illinois, are required to electronically submit all installation
reports, as well as compliant and noncompliant inspection reports, to the Fire Department, via a method
approved by the Fire Chief, within thirty (30) calendar days of the service performed. (Ord. 004-2017, 2-
6-2017)
Secs. 6-26 - 6-35. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. FIRE DEPARTMENT 1
Sec. 6-36. Created:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 131/735
There is hereby created a Fire Department in the City. The department shall be supervised by a Fire
Chief, who shall be subject to the direction and control of the City Manager 1. (1963 Code art. 2-3)
Sec. 6-37. Personnel:
The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other personnel as the Council may from
time to time direct. (1963 Code art. 8-1; Ord., 1-28-1965)
Sec. 6-38. Appointments:
(a)Other than the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall be appointed and dismissed by the City
Manager with the approval and consent of a majority of the members of the City Council, the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the full power of appointment and dismissal of all
officers and personnel of the Fire Department as provided by Statutes of the State. No Chief shall be
dismissed without a public hearing before the City Council if he requests same.
(b)The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may from time to time designate duly appointed firemen
the Assistant Chiefs, Fire Captains and Fire Lieutenants. The Assistant Chiefs, Fire Marshal, Fire
Captains and Fire Lieutenants shall perform such additional duties as may be designated by the Fire
Chief. (1963 Code arts. 2-3, 8-1; Ord., 8-12-1963; Ord., 1-28-1965; Ord., 7-12-1976; Ord. 85-52, 12-
23-1985)
Sec. 6-38.1. Participation In State Training And Certification Programs:
(a)The City elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act.
(b)Before an individual may commence regular full time employment as a firefighter, he must have been
certified by the State Fire Marshal as a firefighter II as having successfully completed an approved
training course as provided in that Act.
(c)The firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his probationary period of fourteen
(14) months, except for volunteers, part time and paid on call personnel.
(d)The class specification for firefighter is hereby amended to require that any person appointed to the
Fire Department of the City shall not become a regular member of the Fire Department unless and
until he shall complete, pursuant to the Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training
course within fourteen (14) months of the date of his initial employment. The Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners is also directed to incorporate those requirements into the rules and regulations of
the Fire Department. (Ord. 82-58, 12-20-1982)
Sec. 6-39. Razing Buildings, Etc. - During Fire:
The Fire Chief or Assistant Chiefs in command during a fire or, in the absence of both, the officer in
charge may direct the removal, tearing down or partial destruction of any frame building, erection or
fence, for the purpose of checking the progress of the fire; and the officer in command shall have power
to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any building or erection during the
progress of the fire, for the purpose of extinguishing or checking the same. (1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-40. Razing Buildings, Etc. - By Request:
Any person who requests the Fire Department to burn a structure on privately owned property which
request is accepted by the Fire Department, shall pay the following fee to the City Clerk:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 132/735
(1) For a 1-story or 1 1/2-story
structure $150.00
(2) For a 2-story or larger
structure 300.00
(Ord., 10-10-1977)
Sec. 6-41. Entering Scene Of Fire:
The Fire Chief and in his absence the Assistant Chiefs may prescribe limits in the vicinity of a fire which
no person, except persons residing or owning property therein, members of the Council or of the Fire or
Police Department, shall be permitted to enter except on the order of the officer in command. The police
officers shall aid in carrying into effect the provisions of this section. (1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-42. Arrests:
During the progress of a fire and for twenty four (24) hours after its extinction, the Chief and his
assistants shall have the power to arrest any person whom they may have reasonable cause to suspect
of having wilfully caused such fire or having carried away during such fire any property belonging to
another and hidden or converted the same to his use and turn such person over to the police authorities,
who shall cause him to be securely held until the charges can be investigated before some court having
jurisdiction. (1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-43. Injury To Property:
No person shall wilfully injure any property belonging to the City pertaining to the Fire Department. (1963
Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-43a. The Burning Of Garbage Or Rubbish:
(Rep. by Ord. 042-2009, 6-15-2009)
Sec. 6-44. Removal Of Fireworks:
The Chief of the Fire Department or his assistants may remove or have removed, at the owner's
expense, all stocks of fireworks possessed, exposed for sale or held in stock in violation of the
ordinances of the City and the laws of the State; and he may take such action as is necessary under the
laws of the State to seize, confiscate and destroy any fireworks illegally held, possessed or exposed for
sale. (1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-45. Obstructing View Of Fire Hydrant - Prohibited:
No person shall obstruct the view of any fire hydrant located in the City from at least two hundred feet
(200') in all directions by planting shrubbery, flowers, trees or in any other manner obstructing said view.
(1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-46. Obstructing View Of Fire Hydrant - Fine:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 6-45 of this article shall be thirty five dollars
($35.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 6-45 of this article and does not wish
to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then such person so
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 133/735
accused may pay to the City at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for
and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 6-47. Buildings Of Fire Department; Fire Apparatus:
No building belonging to the City and used for the purpose of the Fire Department shall be used for any
other purpose except by permission of the Council or the Fire Chief, nor shall any person or member of
the Fire Department having in charge any engine or other fire apparatus belonging to the City suffer or
permit the same to be applied to any private use, or shall take the same beyond the City limits, except in
the immediate vicinity of the City during the time of a fire, or in accordance with written mutual aid
agreements with other municipalities; and it shall be the duty of the Chief and his assistants to see that
the engines and other apparatus committed to their care, and the building or buildings in which the same
are deposited, and all things in and belonging to the same, are kept neat and clean and in order for
immediate use. And it shall be their duty to preserve order and discipline at all times among the persons
under their charge and to require and enforce strict compliance with the City ordinances and the rules
and regulations of the Fire Department. (1963 Code art. 8-1)
Sec. 6-48. Pension Fund Board - Created:
There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund See also section 2-201 et seq.,
boards, commissions and committees, of this Code.2, which shall consist of the Fire Chief, the Mayor, the City
Treasurer, the City Clerk, three (3) persons who shall be chosen from the active firemen of the City and
one person who shall be chosen from the retired firemen. The members of the Board selected from the
active and retired firemen shall be elected at the time and in the manner provided by State Statute 40
ILCS 5/4-121.3. (1963 Code art. 2-3)
Sec. 6-49. Pension Fund Board - Duties:
The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund shall have control of the management of all funds
belonging to or designated by law as part of the Firemen's Pension Fund and of the administration of
such funds as provided by statute 40 ILCS 5/4-121 et seq.4. (1963 Code art. 2-3)
Secs. 6-50-6-59. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE
Sec. 6-60. Created:
There is hereby created in the City through its Fire Department an emergency ambulance service solely
within the corporate limits of the City, within an area specially designated by the City Council, and within
any area designated for such service by an intergovernmental service or mutual aid agreement;
however, the Fire Chief may authorize response to requests for aid outside of the service area in cases
of major disaster. (Ord. 85-50, 12-16-1985)
Sec. 6-61. Permissible Points Of Transportation:
The ambulance service shall transport persons to: Unity Point Health - Trinity Rock Island, Rock Island,
Illinois; Unity Point Health - Trinity Moline, Moline, Illinois; Unity Point Health - Trinity Bettendorf,
Bettendorf, Iowa; Genesis Medical Center - Illini Campus, Silvis, Illinois; Genesis Medical Center - East
Campus, Davenport, Iowa; or Genesis Medical Center - West Campus, Davenport, Iowa, depending on
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 134/735
the transported person's preference. The ambulance service may be required to transport a person to
the most appropriate facility in accordance with the Trinity Emergency Medical System Standard
Operating Guidelines, or by order of online Medical Control. (Ord. 054-2017, 12-18-2017)
Sec. 6-62. Definitions:
For the purposes of this article:
Ambulance Area: The ambulance run territory which includes the City of Rock Island.
Loaded Mile: Any mile or portion thereof which is incurred by an ambulance vehicle with a patient in
transit.
Resident: Any person who normally resides within the defined ambulance area or any person who pays
Property Taxes to the City of Rock Island. (Ord. 85-50, 12-16-1985; Ord. 68-2001, 8-27-2001)
Sec. 6-63. Fees:
(a)For any person transported from a point within the ambulance area to a receiving medical facility, the
base rate for ambulance transport shall be as follows effective January 1, 2018:
Resident Non-Resident
Basic life support (BLS) $ 775.00 $ 975.00
Advanced life support (ALS) 975.00 1,175.00
Advanced life support 2 (ALS2) 1,375.00 1,575.00
Advanced life support intercept (ALS intercept) 225.00 225.00
(b)For any person receiving medical treatment by the Fire Department within the ambulance area who is
not transported by the ambulance, the rates for non-transport shall be as follows effective January 1,
2018:
Resident Non-Resident
Treat/no transport $275.00 $475.00
(c)In addition to the base rates listed in subsection (a) of this section, there shall be an additional fee of
seventeen dollars fifty cents ($17.50) for each loaded mile in which any person is transported from a
point within the ambulance area to a receiving medical facility.
(d)Fees shall also be charged for disposable supplies. The fees for supplies shall be in accordance with
the schedule attached to the ordinance codified herein, and designated as appendix A, but are not
set out at length in this Code and are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 054-2017, 12-18-
2017)
Chapter 7
HEALTH GENERALLY 3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 135/735
Sec. 7-1. Title And Application:
This Chapter and Article II of Chapter 13 shall be known as the Health Code of the City of Rock Island
and shall be applicable to all residential, business and commercial properties within the corporate limits
of the City. The requirements imposed by this Health Code shall be in addition to any and all other
applicable requirements imposed by other ordinances and regulations of the City. In any case where a
provision of this Health Code is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance of the
City, the provision establishing the higher standard shall prevail. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-82)
Sec. 7-2. Purpose:
The purpose of this Health Code is to provide for the public health through establishment of minimum
standards to the end that properties, mobile home parks and recreational areas within the City shall be
free from health hazards and shall not cause a blighting or deteriorating influence upon the City; to
regulate the disposal of garbage and refuse; and to ensure that foods served to the consuming public
are safe, wholesome and prepared in and served under sanitary conditions. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-82)
Secs. 7-3-7-20. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 7-21. Chief Building Inspector To Enforce Laws And Ordinances:
The Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative shall be responsible for enforcing all
provisions of the Health Code. For the purpose of carrying out responsibilities, the Chief Building
Inspector or his designated representative is hereby empowered to enter onto a premises for the
purpose of conducting an inspection where there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of the
Health Code exists. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-82; Ord. 87-22 3-23-87)
Sec. 7-22. Health Code Board Of Appeals 1:
(a)Creation, Membership And Procedure:
(1) A Health Code Board of Appeals consisting of five (5) members shall be appointed by the Mayor
and approved by the Council. Members shall serve for a period of three (3) years. One member shall
be engaged in the restaurant business, one member shall be engaged in the tavern business and
three (3) members shall not be engaged in either of the two (2) aforementioned occupations. The
City physician shall be an ex officio member. The Chief Building Inspector or his designated
representative shall be an ex officio member and shall serve as secretary of the Health Code Board
of Appeals.
(2) The Board shall elect its own chairman and have the power to adopt rules and regulations for its
own government, not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this Health Code or any other
ordinance of the City. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as
the Board may determine. The chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman may administer oaths
and compel attendance of witnesses.
(3) Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public; minutes shall be kept of the proceedings,
showing the action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent and
failing to vote, indicating that fact; and records shall be made of the Board's examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the Board.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 136/735
(4) A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recordings. A transcript of the
proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fees
prescribed therefor. Such fees may be established by the Board but shall in no event be greater than
the cost involved.
(5) Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board shall act by resolution, and
the concurring vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the public health sanitarian, or to decide in favor of an applicant as to
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Health Code, or to affect any violation in the
requirements of said Code. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-82)
(b)Applications And Appeals:
(1) An application to the Board, in cases in which it has original jurisdiction under the provisions of
this Health Code, may be taken by any property owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental
officer, department, board or bureau. Such application shall be filed with the Inspection Division,
which shall transmit the same, together with all the plans, specifications and other papers pertaining
to the application, to the Board.
(2) An appeal to the Board may be taken by any property owner, including a tenant, or by any
governmental officer, department, board or bureau affected by any ruling of the Chief Building
Inspector or his designated representative. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the
service of such order or action of the Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative with
the Inspection Division. The Inspection Division shall forthwith transmit to the Board such notice of
appeal, together with all the plans and papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(3) As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Health Code Board of Appeals shall
fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the Board. Due regard shall be shown for
the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives.
(c)Powers Of The Board: The Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide all appeals from enforcement decisions made by the Chief Building Inspector
or his designated representative in enforcing the Health Code.
(2) To determine from a public health standpoint revocation of any license issued to any person
engaged in the handling, distribution or serving of food within the corporate limits of the City.
(3) To hear and decide appeals on the interpretations of the provisions of this Code.
(d)Actions Of The Board: In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of this Health Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as, in the Board's opinion, ought to be made, and to that end
the Board has all the officer's power from whom the appeal is taken.
(e)Judicial Review: All final administrative decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to judicial
review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (See the code of civil procedure 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes) (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982)
Secs. 7-23-7-35. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 137/735
ARTICLE III. FOOD AND BEVERAGES
Sec. 7-36. Scope:
(a)This article shall regulate food service establishments and retail food stores, the operation of such
facilities, and the licensing of food service establishments and retail food stores within the city.
(b)The mayor and city council has deemed it necessary and desirable to regulate food sanitation for
health purposes, and accordingly recommended the adoption of the following provisions. (Ord. 90-
39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-37. License:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment, or retail food store within the
city who does not possess a valid license issued to such person by the health authority. Only a person
who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. A
license is not transferable from one person to another person; nor shall a license be applicable to any
locations, buildings or places other than that for which it is issued. A valid license shall be posted in each
food service establishment or retail food store. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-38. Issuance Of Licenses:
(a)(1) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail food store or to renew an
expired license shall make a written application for a license on forms provided by the health
authority of the city. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the
location and type of proposed operation, and the signature of each applicant, whether such applicant
is an individual, firm or corporation; and if a partnership, the names of the partners, together with
their addresses, shall be included. Payment for the license shall accompany the application form.
(2) If the application is for a temporary food service establishment or a temporary retail food store, it
shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operations.
(b)Licenses for food service establishments and retail food stores are valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance. Licenses for temporary food service establishments or temporary retail food
stores shall not exceed fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-39. Adoption By Reference:
This article shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with provisions set forth in the unabridged
form of the current "Illinois Food Service Sanitation Rules And Regulations" and the "Illinois Retail Food
Store Sanitation Rules And Regulations", and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, three
(3) copies of each which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk which publications are incorporated
herein and adopted by reference as part of this article. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-40. Definitions:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Adulteration: The condition of any food:
(1) If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a quantity which may render it
injurious to health.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 138/735
(2) If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for which no safe
tolerance has been established by regulation or in excess of such tolerances if one has been
established.
(3) If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance or if it is
otherwise unfit for human consumption.
(4) If it has been processed, prepared, packaged or held under unsanitary conditions whereby it
may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health.
(5) If it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or animal which has died otherwise
than by slaughter.
(6) If its containers are composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or deleterious substance
which may render the contents injurious to health.
Health Authority: The chief building inspector of the city of Rock Island or his delegated
representative. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-41. Provisions For Licensing:
(a)License Fee Schedule:
(1) Annual Fee: Determined by the square footage of floor space in the establishment including
dining areas, retail sales area and storage areas. Licenses for food service establishments and retail
food stores are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Establishments that fail to
apply for renewal within fifteen (15) days after expiration date will cease food service operations.
2,000 square feet or less $200.00
2,001 square feet to 3,000 square feet
250.00
3,001 square feet and over 300.00
Mobile food units and retail sales units
80.00
Temporary food services establishment (5 day maximum)
Temporary permit obtained 2 working days prior to event
35.00
Less than 2 working days before event
60.00
Seasonal concession stands (potentially hazardous food)
70.00
Valid for 180 days (non- potentially hazardous food)
40.00
Schools and recognized churches
50.00
Schools serving food no more than once each week and not open to the general public will be
exempt from annual fee.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 139/735
(2) Inspection Required: Prior to approval of an application for a license, the health authority shall
inspect the food service establishment or retail food store to determine compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(3) Issuance Of License: The health authority shall issue a license to the applicant if its inspection
reveals that the applicable requirements of this article have been met, and upon payment of the
required fee.
(b)Renewal Of License:
(1) Whenever the inspection for renewal of a license reveals serious or repeated violations of this
article, the license shall not be issued and the health authority shall notify the applicant immediately
thereof. Such notice shall also state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for the
applicant at a time and place designated by the health authority. Such hearing shall be scheduled not
later than ten (10) days from the date of notice. A license which has expired shall be removed from
the establishment by the health authority.
(2) Operators of food service establishments who fail to apply for renewal within fifteen (15) days
after the expiration of their current license, will have to submit a food service establishment review
application and a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee, in addition to their regular license fee. Until the food service
review application has been evaluated and accepted by the health authority, the food service
establishment will cease food service operations.
(c)Reinstatement Of Suspended License: Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any
time make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within the ten
(10) days following receipt of the written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that,
in his opinion, the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the health
authority shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is found to be in compliance with the
requirements of this article, the license shall be reinstated.
(d)Revocation Of License:
(1) For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with
the health authority in the performance of his/her duties, the license may be permanently revoked
after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided before the health code board of appeals.
(2) Prior to such action, the health authority shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the
reasons for which the license is subject to revocation, and advising that the license shall be
permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a request for
a hearing is filed with the health authority by the license holder, within such five (5) day period. A
license may be suspended for a cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. (Ord. 90-
39, 6-6-1990; Ord. 95-43, 6-5-1995; Ord. 02-2004, § 1, 1-5-2004; Ord. 011-2009, § 1, 2-2-2009)
Sec. 7-42. Notices:
A notice provided for in this Article is properly serviced when it is delivered to the holder of the license or
the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the holder of the license. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the
Health Authority. A completed inspection report form or a letter are considered proper forms of notice.
(Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-43. Inspections:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 140/735
(a)Inspection Schedule: The health authority shall inspect each establishment every six (6) months or as
often as he deems necessary for the enforcement of this article.
(b)Access To Establishments: The health authority, after showing proper identification shall be permitted
to enter, at any reasonable time, any food service establishment or retail food store within the city for
the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Article. The health authority
shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to
food and supplies purchased, received or used, and information concerning persons employed.
(c)Report Of Inspections: Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store is
made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form. The inspection report form shall
summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspection remarks shall be written to reference, by item number, the item violated and
shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the
weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the
conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report is a public document that shall be
made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-
1990)
Sec. 7-44. Suspension Of License:
(a)Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the health authority for failure of the license holder to
comply with the requirements of this Article. Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to
comply with any notice issued under the provisions of this article, the license holder or operator shall
be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of a notice, immediately suspended and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health
authority by a license holder. Upon suspension of the license, all operations as a food service
establishment or retail food store are to be discontinued at the direction of the health authority. The
license shall be removed from the establishment by the health authority.
(b)Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the health authority finds unsanitary or
other conditions in the operation of a food service establishment or retail food store which in his/her
judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he/she may without warning, notice or
hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the
corrective action to be taken, and if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is
immediately suspended, and all operations as a food service establishment or retail food store are to
be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately
therewith, but upon written petition to the health authority shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-1990)
Sec. 7-45. Correction Of Violation:
(a)The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of
the violations found. Correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) If an imminent health hazard exists, including, but not limited to, complete lack of refrigeration or
sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service or
sales operations.
(2) All violations of four (4) or five (5) point weighted item shall be corrected as soon as possible, but
in any event within ten (10) days following inspection. Within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, the
holder of the license shall notify the health authority stating that four (4) or five (5) point weighted
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 141/735
violations have been corrected. A follow up inspection, as deemed necessary by the health authority
shall be conducted to confirm correction.
(3) All one or two (2) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event,
by the time of next routine inspection.
(4) When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60) the establishment shall initiate
corrective action on all identified violations within forty eight (48) hours. One or more reinspections
will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
(5) In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within
twenty four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty four (24) hours, the establishment
shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by health authority.
(b)Failure of the license holder or operator to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in
cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time
limitations, or both, will be provided if a written request is filed with the Health Authority within ten
(10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be
held within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request.
(c)Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is required under the provisions of Section
7-44 to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that
conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection
shall be offered within a reasonable time. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-46. Examination And Condemnation Of Food And/Or Equipment:
(a)Food: Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Authority as may be necessary to determine
freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The Health Authority may, upon written notice to the
owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable
cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or misbranded. Under a hold order,
food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter a
hold order notice or tag placed on food by the Health Authority. Neither such food nor the containers
thereof shall be relabeled, repackaged or reprocessed, altered, disposed of, or destroyed without
permission of the Health Authority, except on an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. After the
owner or person in charge has had a hearing as provided in this Article, and on the basis of evidence
produced at such hearing, or on the basis of examination in the event of written request for a hearing
is not received within ten (10) days, the Health Authority may vacate the hold order or may, by written
notice, direct the owner or person in charge of food which was placed under the hold order to
denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Article. Such
order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three (3)
days.
(b)Equipment: Where equipment used in the preparation of food products is found to be in a state of
disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, such equipment shall be taken out of use and
hold order placed on said items by the Health Authority. Such equipment may not be put back into
service until written permission is obtained from the Health Authority. It shall be unlawful for any
person to move or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on equipment by the Health Authority. Such
equipment shall not be altered, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the Health Authority
except on an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had
a hearing as provided in this Article, and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing or on the
basis of examination in the event a written request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days,
the Health Authority may vacate the hold order or may, by written notice, direct the owner or person
in charge of the equipment which was placed under the hold order to remove such equipment or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 142/735
bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Article. Such order shall be stayed if the order is
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three (3) days. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-47. Procedure When Infection Is Suspected:
When the Health Authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an
employee of a food service establishment or retail food store, it may secure a morbidity history of the
suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and take appropriate action.
The Health Authority may require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in a food service establishment or
retail food store;
(2) The immediate closing of the food service establishment or retail food store concerned until, in
the opinion of the Health Authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there will be no
danger of transmitting disease;
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee or other employees and of his or
their body discharges. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-48. Food Handlers' Classes:
The Health Authority may order any food handler to attend an immediate food handler training course
when, in the judgment of the Health Authority, the work habits of said food handler constitute a hazard to
public health. Fees may be charged by the Health Authority to offset any costs incurred by the Health
Authority. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-49. Plan Review Of Future Construction:
(a)Plans Submitted: Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is constructed or
extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service
establishment or retail food store, properly prepared plans and specifications for construction,
remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Health Authority for review and approval before
construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the
type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. All applicable food service equipment
shall be of a quality as approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) or equivalent. New
equipment which is approved for a certain use by NFS shall be automatically approved by the Health
Authority. Other applicable equipment or used equipment shall be evaluated or otherwise approved
by the Health Authority. The Health Authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet
the requirements of this Article. No food service establishment or retail food store shall be
constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Health Authority.
(b)Pre-Operational Inspection: Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (a) of this
Section to be submitted to the Health Authority, the Health Authority shall inspect the food service
establishment or retail food store prior to the start of operations, to determine compliance with the
approved plans and specifications with the requirements of this Article. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Sec. 7-50. Penalties:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 143/735
Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 90-39, 6-6-90)
Secs. 7-51-7-55. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE PARKS 1
Sec. 7-56. Definitions; Rules Of Construction:
The provisions of this Article shall be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. When this article imposes greater
restrictions upon the development and operation of recreational vehicle parks than are imposed or
required by other provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall prevail. The following
definitions shall apply herein:
Awning: A shade structure supported by either; 1) posts or columns and a recreational vehicle; 2)
only posts or columns not attached to or supported by the recreational vehicle; or 3) only the
recreational vehicle to which it is attached.
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of people,
animals, chattels or property of any kind. Any structures with interior areas not normally accessible
for human use shall not be considered as buildings.
License: A certificate required by the City of Rock Island to operate and maintain a recreational
vehicle park.
Permit: A certificate required by the City of Rock Island to construct, alter or expand a recreational
vehicle park.
Person: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.
Recreational Activities: Those activities which may be available at a recreational vehicle park,
including but not limited to fishing, swimming, boating, camping, picnicking, hiking, festivals, public
gatherings and visiting historical, archeological, scenic or scientific sites, for any purpose, including
but not limited to educational, vocational and religious activities and assemblies.
Recreational Campsite: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park intended for the
accommodation of either a recreational vehicle, tent or other individual camping unit on a temporary
basis. Campsites shall be of the independent (having no sanitary facilities) or dependent (having all
sanitary facilities) type.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular type of unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn
by another vehicle, including but not limited to travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor
home. Recreational vehicles may be of the independent (with holding tank and sanitary facilities) or
dependent (lacking some or all sanitary facilities) type.
Recreational Vehicle Park: A parcel of land upon which two (2) or more recreational campsites are
located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles, tents or other individual
camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreational purposes.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 144/735
Sanitary Dumping Station: A facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from recreational
vehicle holding tanks.
Service Building: A building in a recreational vehicle park, including but not limited to a manager's
office or residence, laundry facilities, equipment storage, toilets and showers or other services which
may be provided for the use and benefit of those persons occupying a recreational campsite or
employed at the recreational vehicle park.
Water Station: A facility used for filling recreational vehicle water storage tanks. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-
1982)
Sec. 7-57. Penalties:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982)
Sec. 7-58. Administration; Appeals:
(a)General: This article shall be administered by the City's chief building inspector or his designated
representative except for those provisions dealing with the construction of the recreational vehicle
park roadways, walkways, parking areas, service buildings and water, sewer and electrical systems.
During construction of a recreational vehicle park, those City officials established as having
jurisdiction shall assure that said park is constructed to meet all requirements of this article and all
other codes and ordinances which may apply.
(b)Right Of Inspection: Upon a presentation of proper credentials, City officials or their duly authorized
representatives may enter at reasonable times any recreational vehicle park or building therein in the
City to perform any duty imposed upon them by this article.
(c)Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any City official charged with the
administration of this article may take any appeal to the appropriate Appeal Board as provided in
other City codes and ordinances.
(d)Jurisdiction:
(1) Construction: Appeals taken from requests relating to construction of the recreational vehicle park
shall be filed with the appropriate Appeal Board subject to the procedures established under other
codes and ordinances.
(2) Operation: Appeals taken from requests relating to operation of the recreational vehicle park shall
be filed with the Health Code Board of Appeals, subject to the procedures established under article II
of this chapter.
(3) Expansion: Expansion of a recreational vehicle park and its facilities shall be subject to
authorization by the Health Code Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established
under section 7-60 of this article, even if said expansion does not increase the total area of nor
change the boundaries of the recreational vehicle park. Construction of additional systems, facilities
and campsites not shown on the approved plot plan of the recreational vehicle park shall be
considered as expansions of said park. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-59. Establishment Of Park:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 145/735
(a)Authorization: Any person wishing to establish a recreational vehicle park shall submit to the Rock
Island Board of Zoning Appeals a request for authorization in accordance with appendix A, article V
of this Code. Said parks are allowed only in B-4 (Highway Business) and C-1 (Conservation) Zoning
Districts.
(1) Plan Approval: Plans, specifications and/or construction drawings for water and sewer facilities,
roadways and buildings shall be prepared by a registered Illinois engineer or architect, and shall be
approved by the appropriate City authorities prior to the authorization of the recreational vehicle park
by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) Contents: A plat plan of the recreational vehicle park shall be approved by the Public Works and
Fire Department, and the chief building inspector prior to the authorization by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Said plat plan shall include the following information:
a. The area and dimensions of the park site and surrounding zoning.
b. The number, type, size and location of all campsites and parking areas.
c. The location, right-of-way and surfaced roadway width, the surfacing material of roadways and
walkways and the interior vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
d. The location of all service buildings and sanitary stations.
e. The location of all water and sewer lines, riser pumps, all lighting, electric and gas systems and
all drainage easements.
(b)Permits Required: Upon receiving authorization from the Board of Zoning Appeals, all permits
required by the City shall be secured from the appropriate authorities for construction of the
recreational vehicle park.
(c)As-Built Drawings: If the construction of the recreational vehicle park varies from the approved plans,
specifications and/or construction drawings, as-built drawings shall be filed with the City Engineer. If
said construction does not vary from said plans, an affidavit so certifying shall be filed with the
Director of Public Works or his designated representative. The as-built drawings or affidavit shall be
accepted by the appropriate authorities prior to the issuance of a license for the operation of the
recreational vehicle park. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-60. Operation Of Park:
(a)License Required: The operator of a recreational vehicle park shall secure from the City a license
prior to the operation of the park. Said license shall be issued by the City's chief building official or his
designated representative following the approval of the recreational vehicle park by the Board of
Zoning Appeals and the acceptance of the as-built drawings or affidavit.
(1) Application: The application for said license shall be made with the chief building official or his
designated representative on forms provided by his/her office.
(2) Fee: The annual fee for said license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus five dollars
($5.00) per recreational campsite, payable at the City Finance Department prior to May 1 of each
year. The licensing year shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the next
succeeding calendar year. All licenses shall expire on said April 30 in each calendar year.
(b)Park Occupancy: There shall be no permanent year-round occupancy of any recreational campsite in
a recreational vehicle park. Storage of recreational vehicles at a recreational vehicle park shall be
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 146/735
allowed. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987; Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991; Ord. 042-2017, 11-
6-2017)
Sec. 7-61. Standards For Parks:
(a)Water Supply: All recreational vehicle parks shall be adequately served by City water in accordance
with chapter 16, article II of this Code.
(1) Water Distribution System: All components of the water system of a recreational vehicle park,
including plumbing, shall be installed and maintained to meet or exceed City specifications.
(2) Drinking Fountains: All outlets established for the provision of drinking water, except for the filling
of recreational vehicle water storage tanks, shall consist of drinking fountains. Common drinking cups
shall be prohibited.
(3) Water Stations: There shall be at least one water station for each one hundred (100) independent
recreational vehicle campsites or portion thereof. The fill hose shall be suspended so that no part of
said hose or appurtenances shall come in contact with the ground. A sign shall be posted at each
water station indicating that said water is potable and not to be used for flushing wastes from
recreational vehicle holding tanks.
(b)Sewage Disposal: All sewage disposal for recreational vehicle parks shall be through the City sanitary
sewer system in accordance with chapter 16, article III of this Code.
(1) Sewage System: All components of the sewage system of a recreational vehicle park, including
plumbing, shall be installed and maintained to meet or exceed City specifications.
(2) Sanitary Dumping Stations: There shall be at least one sanitary dumping station with a hose for
each one hundred (100) independent recreational vehicle campsites or portion thereof. A sign shall
be posted at each sanitary dumping station indicating that the water is not potable and is to be used
only for flushing wastes from recreational vehicle holding tanks.
(c)Bathhouses: Bathhouses to be used by both sexes simultaneously shall be divided into two (2) parts,
separated by a tight partition and designated for men and women. The entrances and exits shall be
screened to break the line of sight. Floors, drains, walls, partitions, fixtures, lighting and ventilation
shall be installed to conform with all City requirements. All walls, floors and partitions shall be
constructed of nonabsorbent materials. Bathhouses shall provide both cold and hot (90 degrees
Fahrenheit) water at a rate of three (3) gallons per minute.
(1) Toilets: One toilet for each sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) dependent recreational
campsites or portion thereof.
(2) Lavatories: Two (2) lavatories for each sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) dependent
recreational campsites or portion thereof.
(3) Showers: One shower for each sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) dependent recreational
campsites or portion thereof.
(4) Cleanliness: All bathhouses shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(d)Laundry Facilities: When provided for the occupants of a recreational vehicle park, all laundry facilities
shall be properly installed and connected to the water, sewer and electrical or gas systems of the
recreational vehicle park. For each one washing machine provided, there shall be provided at least
one dryer. Commercial dryers having capacities of greater than one washing machine load may be
substituted for the number of single-load dryers needed to equal the capacity of the multi-load dryer.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 147/735
(e)Refuse Disposal: The storage, collection and disposal of refuse produced in a recreational vehicle
park shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 13, article II of this Code. The recreational
vehicle park shall be kept free of litter and accumulations of rubbish, and shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition at all times.
(f)Food Service: Food service, when provided, shall be conducted in accordance with article III of this
chapter.
(g)Buildings: All buildings in recreational vehicle parks shall be constructed to meet or exceed all City
requirements.
(h)Roadways And Parking Areas: All roadways and parking areas in a recreational vehicle park shall be
of a dustless surface.
(1) One-Way Roads: One-way roads with no parking shall have a surface width of at least twelve feet
(12'), and those with parking on one side shall have a surface width of at least eighteen (18) feet.
One-way streets with parking on both sides shall not be allowed.
(2) Two-way roads. Two-way roads with no parking shall have a surface width of at least eighteen
(18) feet, those with parking on one side shall have a surface width of at least twenty-five (25) feet
and those with parking on both sides shall have a surface width of at least thirty-one (31) feet.
(3) Parking areas. There shall be provided within the recreational vehicle park at least one parking
space for each two (2) recreational campsites in addition to the required parking pads. Parking lots,
spaces and access drives shall comply with the size requirements for parking areas in the Rock
Island zoning ordinance.
(i)Campsites. Each recreational campsite shall contain at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250)
square feet.
(1) Density. Each campsite shall be occupied by no more than one recreational vehicle or two (2)
tents at any one time.
(2) Setbacks. No part of any recreational vehicle (including awnings), tent or other vehicle shall be
placed on a recreational campsite closer than two (2) feet to any campsite line.
(3) Parking pad. Each recreational campsite shall contain a stabilized vehicular parking pad of shell,
marl or other suitable, dustless material.
(4) Vehicle restriction. At no time shall a dependent recreational vehicle be allowed to occupy an
independent recreational campsite.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 4), 9-27-82)
Cross reference--Zoning, App. A.
Sec. 7-62. Safety.
(a)Building and fire codes. The grounds, buildings, utilities, roadways, parking areas and other facilities
shall be constructed, maintained and used in accordance with applicable city building codes and fire
prevention regulations.
(b)Flammable liquids. Liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, gasoline and other flammable liquids shall be
handled and used in a safe manner and shall not be stored inside or beneath any recreational
vehicle.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 148/735
(c)Play areas. Play equipment, when provided for children, shall be designed for safety, maintained in
good repair and placed in play areas which are free from hazards.
(d)First aid. All recreational vehicle parks shall have at least one first aid kit as recommended by the
American Red Cross, one stretcher and one blanket for each two hundred (200) recreational
campsites or portion thereof.
(e)Communications. One telephone for each two hundred (200) recreational campsites or portion thereof
shall be reasonably available for emergency use. The telephone numbers of the city police, state
police, city fire department, ambulance service and the closest hospital shall be posted near each
telephone.
(f)Fires. Fires shall be allowed only in facilities such as fireplaces, fire pits or charcoal braziers which
have been provided for such purposes. No fire shall be left unattended, left unextinguished upon
vacation of a recreational campsite or fueled by materials which emit dense smoke or objectionable
odors.
(g)Park location. Recreational vehicle parks shall not be located in areas which may create health
hazards for occupants of the park. Surface water within two hundred (200) feet of park buildings shall
be drained, filled, constructed or treated to prevent mosquito breeding.
(h)Vector control. Implementation of preventive and control measures for use against flies, ticks,
mosquitoes, rats and other potential vectors of disease in and around recreational areas shall be in
accordance with city health codes.
(i)Occupant list. A register containing the names, addresses and recreational vehicle license plate
numbers of all recreational vehicle park occupants shall be maintained at all times.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 5), 9-27-82)
Cross references--Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6.
Sec. 7-63. Recreational activities.
(a)Setbacks. All buildings used for recreational activities provided at recreational vehicle parks shall
meet the setback requirements for such uses identified in the Rock Island zoning ordinance.
(b)Swimming facilities. All swimming areas and related facilities for use by recreational vehicle park
occupants shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state regulations.
(c)Boating facilities. All boating facilities for use by recreational vehicle park occupants shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with state regulations.
(d)Fish cleaning facilities. All fish-cleaning facilities for use by recreational vehicle park occupants shall
provide for the storage and safe disposal of fish offal and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(e)Stables. All stables for use by recreational vehicle park occupants shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Rock
Island zoning ordinance.
(f)Commercial establishments. No commercial establishments shall be operated in any recreational
vehicle park except those operated by the owner of said park for recreational vehicle park occupants.
Such establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the recreational
vehicle park of their commercial character which would attract customers other than recreational
vehicle park occupants.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 149/735
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 6), 9-27-82)
Cross reference--Zoning, App. A.
Secs. 7-64--7-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MOBILE HOME PARKS 1
Sec. 7-81. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in this article:
Accessory structure: A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal building or mobile home, that
contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile
home.
Chief building inspector: The legally designated health authority or his authorized representative of the
City of Rock Island, Illinois.
Dependent mobile home: A dependent mobile home means a trailer home which does not have a toilet
or bath or shower facilities, and its use is prohibited in the mobile home park.
Independent mobile home: A transportable non-permanent single-family dwelling unit suitable for yearround
occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, heating and air conditioning
and electrical conveniences as conventional housing, meeting "American Standard Association"
construction requirements of 1974, and subsequent revisions. This definition is not intended to include
travel trailers or camper buses.
Mobile home: Any transportable nonpermanent single-family dwelling unit suitable for year-round
occupancy.
Mobile home lot: A parcel of land designed for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile
home, also termed mobile home space.
Mobile home park: An area of land upon which two (2) or more occupied mobile homes are harbored
either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and this shall include any building used or intended for
use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home parks. This does not include travel trailers, tents or
camper buses.
Mobile home stand: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the
mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions.
Permit: A written permit issued by the chief building inspector or his designated representative permitting
the mobile home park to operate under this health code and regulations promulgated hereunder.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 1(A--L)), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 87-22, § 22, 3-23-87)
Sec. 7-82. Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 150/735
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 13), 9-27-82)
Sec. 7-83. License--Required.
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home park without first obtaining a
license from the chief building inspector or his designated representative. Such license shall be issued
for one (1) year and shall expire April 30th of each year, and the license shall be renewed from year to
year upon payment of the annual license fee provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 2), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 87-22, § 22, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 4-3-89)
Cross reference--Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 8.
Sec. 7-84. Same--Application.
In order to obtain a permit to construct, or an original license to operate a mobile home park, the
applicant shall file with the chief building inspector or his designated representative a written application
containing the following information:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names and addresses of the partners
if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a
corporation.
(2) Location and legal description of the tract of land drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet, or larger.
(3) The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply, sewage, garbage and waste
disposal.
(4) The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the park is to be located.
(5) All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or
steel bars at least eighteen (18) inches in length and not less than one-half inch in diameter. The top
of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the ground.
(6) The plat plans of the park drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to an inch, building plans
and specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and the plans and specifications for new
buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all showing compliance with
the provisions of this article. The plat plans shall contain, among other things, the following:
a. The date on which such plat plans were prepared.
b. An arrow indicating north.
c. All mobile home sites properly numbered on the plat plans.
d. Complete information regarding storm sewers.
e. Storm water runoff.
(7) A copy of the soil and water conservation district report prepared in accordance with 70 ILCS
405/22.02a.
(8) Where a permit to construct as well as an original license to operate is sought by the applicant,
request therefor shall be made in the same application. Each application for a permit to construct or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 151/735
for an original license shall be accompanied by an application fee amounting to twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a park. Each
application fee shall be paid to the city clerk, and said application fee, once so paid, shall not be
refunded.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 3), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 87-22, § 22, 3-23-87)
Sec. 7-85. Inspections.
(a)Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct a park or an application for a license to
operate and maintain the same, the chief building inspector or his designated representative shall, if
the park is or the proposed park will be, in conformity with this health code, issue a permit to
construct or an original license, as the case may be.
(b)If the application for a permit to construct or a license is declined, the chief building inspector or his
designated representative of the city shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant, and if
the objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it for
approval.
(c)If a permit to construct a park has been issued, the applicant shall, upon completion thereof, notify the
chief building inspector or his designated representative, who shall then inspect the park and, if
completed in accordance with the accepted application, shall issue the license. The chief building
inspector, the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector and the director of public works or his
designated representative must approve any new park or additions before the inspection division will
issue a permit to construct or a license for occupancy of the mobile home park.
(d)No change in any methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage, or waste disposal, and no
change in the plat plan, shall be made without first making a written application to the chief building
inspector or his designated representative and receiving a permit therefrom. Such application shall
be made in the way and manner hereinbefore set forth, except that a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for
each ten (10) acres or fraction thereof used to harbor mobile homes thereon shall accompany each
application for a permit to alter such mobile home park. No application fee shall be required to
accompany an application for a permit to alter a park where such alternative involves only a
reduction in the number of trailer spaces to a smaller number than the license for such park currently
authorizes. Such change or changes shall comply with such safety and sanitary code, building code,
rules and regulations as are applicable thereto.
(e)Such permit does not relieve the applicant from securing any other permit required or from complying
with any other ordinance of the city. No license to operate and maintain a park shall be issued if such
a park is, at such time, in violation of any other ordinance or regulation of the city.
(f)The annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each mobile
home lot. All fees shall be made payable to the city.
(g)Applications for license shall be made to the chief building inspector or his designated representative,
who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this health code
and of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and for any other applicable legal requirements. No
license or permit shall be transferable.
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 4), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 87-22, §§ 22, 25, 2-23-87; Ord. No. 91-14, § 9, 2-11-
91)
Sec. 7-86. Notices; hearings; orders.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 152/735
(a)Whenever the chief building inspector or his designated representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article or of any
regulation adopted pursuant hereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to
whom the permit was issued, as provided in this section. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided that a notice or order
shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice
by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of
this health code and with regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
(b)Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provisions of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant hereto, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the health code board of appeals, provided that such person
shall file in the office of the chief building inspector or his designated representative a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days
after the day the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of
the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under subsection (e). Upon
receipt of such petition, the chief building inspector or his designated representative shall set a time
and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to speak and to explain why such notice should be modified
or withdrawn.
(c)After such hearing, the health code board of appeals shall make findings as to compliance with the
provisions of this article and regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order in writing
sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided by subsection (a)
(4). Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile
home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
(d)The proceedings at such hearing including the findings and decision of the health code board of
appeals, together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter
of public record in the office of the chief building inspector or his designated representative, but the
transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision in any
court of competent jurisdiction as provided by laws of this state is undertaken.
(e)Whenever the chief building inspector or his designated representative finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue
an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may
deem necessary to meet the emergency, including suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the chief building
inspector or his designated representative, shall be afforded a hearing before the health code board
of appeals as soon as is possible.
(f)Any person operating or constructing a mobile home park may petition the health code board of
appeals of the city for a variance from any of the provisions of this article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 153/735
(Ord. No. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 5), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 87-22, § 22, 3-23-87)
Sec. 7-87. Environmental, open space and access requirements.
(a)Existing parks generally. Mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this article which
have less than the minimum prescribed requirements, other than the minimum area requirements
specified in subsection (b), may continue to operate.
(b)Minimum area. Present existing mobile home parks shall not be required to comply with the minimum
area requirements of this article, but may continue to operate with their present minimum area of not
less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each mobile home.
(c)Expansion of size. Any presently existing mobile home park that expands the size of its park shall be
required to comply with all provisions of this article in its expanded area.
(d)Nonresidential uses. No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for
the maintenance of the park. No commercial establishments shall be operated in any mobile home
park except those operated by the owner of said park for mobile home park occupants. Such
establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the mobile home park of
their commercial character which would attract customers other than mobile home park occupants.
(e)Setbacks on lot. Mobile homes shall be located not less than six (6) feet from the side or rear lot lines
of the lot upon which they are located, except that every mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of
three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet. All roofed-over patios and carports shall be
considered part of the mobile home.
(f)Accessory structures. Any accessory structure, such as storage facilities, shall be located no closer
than three (3) feet from the side and rear lot lines and three (3) feet from the mobile home and shall
be located on the rear half of said lot.
(g)Setbacks, buffer strips and screening generally.
(1) All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from any park property boundary
line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least ten (10) feet from any other park property
boundary lines. There shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between an individual mobile
home, including accessory structures attached thereto, and adjoining pavement of park street or
sidewalk, or common parking area, or other common areas accessible to park residents.
(2) All mobile home parks shall be provided with a screening buffer strip at least five (5) feet wide
along all property boundary lines. Where effective visual barriers do not already exist along such
property boundary lines, the buffer strip shall be furnished with screening at least five (5) feet high
and consisting of fences, free-standing walls or natural growth. Such growth shall consist of a
compact growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other suitable plantings sufficient to serve as an
effective visual screen. Fences or walls shall not contain electrical charges, barbed wire, broken
glass or other material designed to do bodily harm.
(h)Park street system.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home parks shall provide safe, continuous and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home space. For purposes of
this article, all streets or roads providing such vehicular access hereinafter shall be referred to as the
"park street system" and shall be maintained by the owner or owners.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 154/735
(2) Primary entrance road. The primary entrance road connecting the park street system with a public
street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of forty-one (41) feet, where guest parking
is permitted at both sides; or a minimum road pavement width of twenty-five (25) feet, where guest
parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one hundred (100') feet
long and does not provide access to abutting property within such distance, the minimum road width
may be twenty-five (25) feet, provided parking is prohibited at both sides.
(3) Secondary entrance road. In addition to the required primary entrance road, all parks containing
twenty-five (25) or more acres in total area and/or providing for the accommodation of two hundred
(200) or more mobile homes, shall have at least one secondary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road. Such a secondary road or roads shall have a minimum
pavement width of twenty-five (25) feet. Where primary and secondary entrance roads connect to the
same public street or road, there shall be a minimum separation of one hundred-fifty (150) feet
between such access points. Where this is not feasible or possible, there shall be clearly marked
one-way entrance and exit lanes with a pavement width of each one-way road to be at least twentytwo
(22) feet.
(4) Interior streets. All interior streets in the park street system shall have a minimum pavement width
of twenty-five (25) feet on a twenty-five-foot right-of-way with parking prohibited on one side. Deadend
streets shall be limited in length to one thousand (1,000) feet and shall be provided at the closed
end with a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of at least sixty-five (65) feet.
(5) Street construction standards shall meet the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the
city, as amended.
(i)Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in all parks for the use of park occupants. Such areas
shall be furnished at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home. Parking bays shall
be located so as to provide convenient access to mobile home spaces.
(j)Sidewalks: All mobile home parks shall provide safe, convenient, four foot (4') wide, four inch (4")
Portland cement concrete sidewalks on both sides of the park street system between each mobile
home space and all open areas, community structures and facilities.
(k)Electricity; Lighting: All mobile home parks shall be furnished with sufficient electrical systems and
lighting units at the owner's expense, so spaced and equipped with luminaires placed at such
mounting heights as will provide the average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement
of pedestrians and vehicles at night, as required for city streets by the city engineer, with guidance
from Iowa-Illinois Gas and Electric Company. (Ord. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 6), 9-27-1982)
Sec. 7-88. Water Supply:
Each mobile home park shall be provided with a complete water distribution system adequate to serve
the entire park. The water system must be designed in conformance with the requirements of the
subdivision regulations of the city and meet the approval of the director of public works or his designated
representative. (Ord. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 7), 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-89. Storm Water Sewers:
Each mobile home park shall be provided with a storm water sewer adequate to serve the entire park.
The storm water sewer system must be designed in conformance with the requirements of the
subdivision regulations of the city and meet the approval of the director of public works or his designated
representative. (Ord. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 8), 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-90. Sanitary Sewers:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 155/735
Each mobile home park shall provide for the satisfactory disposal of sanitary sewage. The sanitary
sewer system shall be designed in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations of
the city and meet the approval of the director of public works or his designated representative. (Ord. 82-
28, § 1(Art. V, § 9) 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-91. Refuse Disposal:
Disposal of refuse shall follow the standards set in chapter 13, article II of this code. (Ord. 82-28, § 1(Art.
V, § 10), 9-27-1982)
Sec. 7-92. Electrical Distribution System:
The electrical system of each mobile home park shall be adequate to serve the entire park. The
electrical system shall be designed in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations
of the city and approved by the director of public works or his designated representative. (Ord. 82-28, §
1(Art. V, § 11), 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-93. Safety:
Liquid petroleum gas, fuel oil, gasoline and other flammable liquids shall be handled and used in a safe
manner and shall not be stored inside or beneath any mobile home. (Ord. 82-28, § 1(Art. V, § 12), 9-27-
1982)
Secs. 7-94-7-110. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ANIMALS 1, 2
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 7-111. Definitions:
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section:
Animal: Any animal, poultry, bird, reptile or any other dumb creature.
Animal Control Officer: Any person employed by the department for the purpose of enforcing the animal
control ordinances or having custody and control of the city animal shelter and of animals therein.
Cat: Except where specifically distinguished means all animals of the feline species of the age of four (4)
months or older.
Dangerous Animal:
(1) Any animal that while off the property of the owner or custodian of the animal unreasonably and
without provocation causes injury to a person.
(2) Any animal that while off the property of the owner or custodian of the animal unreasonably
attacks another domestic animal and causes serious physical injury or death to the other
domesticated animal.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 156/735
(3) Any animal that while on the property of the owner or custodian of the animal unreasonably
attacks and causes injury to any person lawfully on the property of the owner.
(4) Any animal that has been declared a "potentially dangerous animal" on one prior occasion and is
found upon investigation of a new incident to meet the definition of "potentially dangerous animal".
Department: The department of police, unless otherwise specifically designated.
Distemper And Hepatitis Injection: Any serum approved by the Illinois department of agriculture for
temporary use.
Dog: Except where specifically distinguished means all animals of the canine species of the age of four
(4) months or older.
Impounded: Taken into the custody of the public pound in the city or county where the animal is found.
Inoculation: The injection, subcutaneously or in such other manner as may be approved by the
department of agriculture of the state of Illinois pursuant to the rabies control law of the state, of antirabic
vaccine meeting standards approved by the department of agriculture of the state and by the United
States department of agriculture.
Licensed Veterinarian: Any veterinarian duly licensed as such under the laws of the state of Illinois or of
any other state which by law provides for the licensing of veterinarians.
Owner Or Keeper: Any person who shall harbor, suffer or permit any dog or cat to remain on any
premises within the city of Rock Island under his charge.
Potentially Dangerous Animal:
(1) Any individual animal while off the premises of the owner and when unmuzzled, unleashed, or not
under the control of its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person
or domesticated companion animal.
(2) Any animal that has been declared a "dangerous animal" on a prior occasion and that is not
properly confined as required by subsection 7-117.1(g) of this division.
(3) Any animal that while off the property of the owner or custodian of the animal unreasonably
attacks and causes injury to another domesticated animal.
Serious Physical Injury: Shall include, but not be limited by, those instances where the animal causes
serious or permanent disfigurement or impairment to health or bodily function of the person.
Unreasonably Attacks: An unprovoked and unjustified direct action on the part of the animal.
Vicious Animal:
(1) Any animal that unreasonably attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death.
(2) Any animal that has been declared a "dangerous animal" on one prior occasion and is found upon
investigation of a new incident to meet the definition of "dangerous animal". (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973;
Ord. 82-25, § 1, 9-13-1982; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§§ 1-3), 10-25-1982; Ord. 86-56, § 1, 11-3-1986; Ord.
87-81, § 1, 10-5-1987; Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 7-112. Penalty:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 157/735
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this article shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). In
the event a person is accused of a violation of this article and does not wish to contest said allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to the city, at
police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full satisfaction of
said violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 7-113. Animal Shelter:
The city shall provide and maintain an animal shelter suitable for the impounding and maintenance of
dogs and other small animals and shall provide and furnish all other equipment and supplies required in
the application of this article. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-114. Animal Control Officer:
(a)The animal control officer shall be a staff member of the department of police and shall be directly
responsible to the chief of police in the application of this article and the proper operation of the
animal shelter.
(b)The animal control officer shall have the care, custody, control and supervision of the animal shelter
of the city and of all dogs and other animals confined and impounded therein, and shall have the
care, custody and control of all trucks and other paraphernalia used by him or his assistants in and
about the impounding of such animals.
(c)All assistants assigned to the animal control program shall be responsible to the chief of police in the
performance of their duties.
(d)While on duty, the animal control officer shall wear a star engraved "Animal Control Officer" as an
emblem of this authority.
(e)The animal control officer shall deliver to the city collector, at least once a month, all fees and monies
collected by him.
(f)Any animal kept or found under the conditions which may constitute a violation of this article may be
impounded by the animal control officer. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 86-56, 11-3-
1986)
Sec. 7-115. Cruelty To Animals 3:
No person or owner shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, starve, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal.
Each owner shall provide for each of his animals:
(1) Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and water, served in clean containers with
water available at all times;
(2) Adequate shelter and protection from the weather; and
(3) Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
No owner shall abandon any animal where it shall become a public charge or shall suffer injury, hunger,
or exposure. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 86-56, 11-3-1986)
Sec. 7-116. Running At Large Generally:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 158/735
(a)No domestic animal, including horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine or domestic fowl of the species of
geese, ducks, turkeys, chickens, or barn fowl shall be suffered, allowed or permitted to run at large
within the corporate limits of the city.
(b)Any dog shall be considered to be running at large if it leaves the premises of its owner or keeper
when not under control by leash and a person who is willing and able to prevent the dog from
violating any city ordinance.
(c)Every animal running at large within the city shall be liable for impoundment at any time by the animal
control officer or other member of the police department. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982;
Ord. 54-2003, § 1, 7-14-2003)
Sec. 7-117. Vicious Animal:
(a)Vicious Animals Prohibited: No person shall own, keep, harbor, sell, abandon or give away any
animal found to be vicious within the city, whether or not owned by such person, except to relinquish
the animal for impoundment. Such animals are hereby declared nuisances and are subject to
impoundment and disposal.
(b)Declaration Of Animal As Vicious; Procedure:
(1) The Rock Island animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall classify an animal as
vicious if probable cause is established to believe that the animal falls within the definition set forth
for "vicious animal" in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division.
The finding must be based upon: a) the written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the
animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of "vicious animal" as set
forth in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division; or b) the reports filed with the police department;
or c) actions of the animal witnessed by any animal control officer, law enforcement officer or citizen
who is willing to sign a complaint; or d) other substantial evidence.
(2) Once the police department becomes aware of an animal that may fall within the definition of
"vicious animal" as set forth in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division, an animal control officer or
law enforcement officer shall complete an investigation within five (5) days with a recommendation as
to whether or not the animal should be declared a vicious animal. During this investigation, the
animal shall be impounded at the animal control facility utilized by the city.
This recommendation shall be reviewed with the animal's owner and the victim, or the victim's
parent/guardian if the victim is a minor. If either of these persons should choose to dispute this
recommendation, the investigating animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall consult: a) a
board certified veterinarian who deals with this type of animal or b) an animal behavior specialist who
has completed a certification or formal program of education in a related field or has at least three (3)
years of work experience in a related field. The opinion of the veterinarian or animal behavior
specialist shall then be used as the basis for the final recommendation on the declaration of the
animal as vicious. The results of this consultation shall also be shared with the animal's owner and
the victim, or the victim's parent/guardian if the victim is a minor.
(3) The declaration of vicious animal shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner in one of
the following methods: a) certified mail to the owner's last known address; or b) personally; or c) if
the owner cannot be located by one of the first two (2) methods, by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in this community.
(4) The declaration shall state at least: a) the description of the animal; b) the name and address of
the owner of the animal, if known; c) the whereabouts of the animal, if it is not in the custody of the
owner; d) the facts upon which the declaration of vicious animal is based; e) the availability of a
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 159/735
hearing in case the person objects to the declaration, if a request is made within ten (10) days; f) the
fact that the animal shall be euthanized after ten (10) days unless a request for a hearing has been
received.
(c)Owner Objection To Declaration Of Vicious Animal: If the owner of the animal wishes to object to the
declaration of the animal as vicious:
(1) The owner may request a hearing before the code hearing officer, by submitting a written request
and payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) administrative review fee to the city within ten (10) days
of receipt of the declaration, or within ten (10) days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to
subsection (b)(3) of this section.
(2) If the code hearing officer finds that there is insufficient evidence to support the declaration, it
shall be rescinded, and the penalty to be imposed thereby annulled.
(3) If the code hearing officer finds sufficient evidence to support the declaration, the owner may
appeal such decision to the circuit court, pursuant to the administrative review act.
(4) During the entire appeal process, the animal shall be held at the animal control facility utilized by
the city.
(d)Disposal Of Vicious Animal: Following a declaration of an animal as vicious and the exhaustion of any
appeal therefrom, the animal shall be euthanized. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-25, 9-13-1982; Ord. 82-
41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 86-56, 11-3-1986; Ord. 87-81, 10-5-1987; Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 7-117.1. Dangerous Animal:
(a)Directing Animal With Malicious Intent Prohibited: No person having control or custody of any animal
shall, without legal cause or justification, direct, encourage, cause, allow, or otherwise aid or assist
any animal to threaten, charge at, intimidate, bite, harass, menace, or attack any person within the
city.
(b)Use Of Animal In Illegal Activity Prohibited: No person shall keep, maintain, control, or retain custody
of any animal in conjunction with or for the purpose, whether in whole or in part, of aiding, abetting, or
conducting any illegal activity or committing any crime within the city.
(c)Directing Animal With Malicious Intent Toward Public Safety Officer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person having control or custody of any animal to allow, direct, encourage, cause, or otherwise
aid or assist any animal to threaten, charge, intimidate, bite, harass, menace, or attack any public
safety officer engaged in the conduct of his/her duties.
(d)Probable Cause To Impound: Any law enforcement officer having probable cause to believe that any
person has violated the restrictions against dangerous animals hereof may impound or cause to be
impounded any animal. Such impoundment shall be subject to all other sections of this article and all
other municipal laws, including, but not limited to, this code dealing with animals.
(e)Declaration Of Animal As Dangerous; Procedure:
(1) The Rock Island animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall classify an animal as
dangerous if probable cause is established to believe that the animal falls within the definition set
forth for "dangerous animal" in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division.
The finding must be based upon: a) the written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the
animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of "dangerous animal"; or b)
reports filed with the police department; or c) actions of the animal witnessed by any animal control
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 160/735
officer, law enforcement officer or citizen who is willing to sign a complaint; or d) other substantial
evidence.
(2) Once the police department becomes aware of an animal that may fall within the definition of
"dangerous animal" set forth in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division, an animal control officer
or law enforcement officer shall complete an investigation within five (5) days with a recommendation
as to whether or not the animal should be declared a dangerous animal. During this investigation, the
animal shall be impounded at the animal control facility utilized by the city.
This recommendation shall be reviewed with the animal's owner and the victim, or the victim's
parent/guardian if the victim is a minor. If either of these persons should choose to dispute this
recommendation, the investigating animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall consult: a) a
board certified veterinarian who deals with this type of animal or b) an animal behavior specialist who
has completed a certification or formal program of education in a related field or has at least three (3)
years of work experience in a related field. The opinion of the veterinarian or animal behavior
specialist shall then be used as the basis for the final recommendation on the declaration of the
animal as a dangerous animal. The results of this consultation shall also be shared with the animal's
owner and the victim, or the victim's parent/guardian if the victim is a minor.
(3) The declaration of dangerous animal shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner in one
of the following methods: a) certified mail to the owner's last known address; or b) personally; or c) if
the owner cannot be located by one of the first two (2) methods, by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in this community.
(4) The declaration shall state at least: a) the description of the animal; b) the name and address of
the owner of the animal, if known; c) the whereabouts of the animal, if it is not in the custody of the
owner; d) the facts upon which the declaration of dangerous animal is based; e) the availability of a
hearing in case the person objects to the declaration, if a request is made within ten (10) days; f) the
restrictions placed on the animal as a result of the declaration of dangerous animal; g) the penalties
for violation of the restrictions, including the possibility of destruction of the animal, and/or fining of
the owner.
(f)Owner Objection To Declaration Of Dangerous Animal: If the owner of the animal wishes to object to
the declaration of dangerous animal:
(1) The owner may request a hearing before the code hearing officer, by submitting a written request
and payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) administrative review fee to the city within ten (10) days
of receipt of the declaration, or within ten (10) days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to
subsection (e)(3) of this section.
(2) If the code hearing officer finds that there is insufficient evidence to support the declaration, it
shall be rescinded, and the restrictions imposed thereby annulled.
(3) If the code hearing officer finds sufficient evidence to support the declaration, the owner may
appeal such decision to the circuit court, pursuant to the administrative review act.
(g)Confinement Of Dangerous Animal: Following a declaration of dangerous animal and during the
entire appeal process or after the exhaustion of any appeal therefrom, it shall be unlawful for the
person owning or having care of such dangerous animal to allow or permit such animal to: 1) be
unconfined on the premises of such person; or 2) go beyond the premises of such person unless
such animal is securely leashed and muzzled. The leash shall be no longer than six feet (6') in
length. The muzzle shall be made in such a manner that it will not cause injury to the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting or causing injury to any person or
animal. Being confined on the premises shall consist of the animal being kept: 1) within the residence
or other building, or 2) within an enclosure from which the animal cannot escape and with openings
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 161/735
no more than two and one-half inches (21/2") in width, or 3) on a run line or chain within an area
enclosed by a fence that the animal is unable to reach and that prevents the entry of small children.
Additionally, signs indicating the presence of a dangerous animal on the property shall be posted on
any enclosure and at the most conspicuous points of entry to the property. The dangerous or
potentially dangerous animal shall not be returned to the person owning or having care of such
animal until these conditions are met to the satisfaction of the animal control officer.
(h)Notification Of Status Of Dangerous Animal: The owner of an animal which has been classified as
dangerous shall immediately notify the police department when the animal: 1) is loose or unconfined;
2) has bitten a human being or attacked another animal; 3) is sold or given away, or dies; 4) is moved
to another address.
(i)Sale Of Dangerous Animal: Prior to selling or giving away an animal that has been classified as
dangerous, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner to
the police department and shall certify to the police department that the new owner has been notified
of such classification. The new owner shall comply with all of the requirements of this section.
(j)Custodial Liability: In the event the owner or keeper of the dangerous animal is a minor, the custodian,
parent, or guardian, legally responsible for such minor shall be liable for all injuries and property
damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by said
dangerous animal.
(k)Penalty For Violation: Any person who violates a provision of this section, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In
addition, any person found guilty of violating this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter,
food, veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and
veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any animal for the protection of the public, and
such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such animal. Any dangerous
animal that is in violation of the restrictions contained in subsection (g) of this section or restrictions
imposed as part of a declaration as a dangerous animal shall be seized and impounded. (Ord. 98-09,
1-19-1998; Ord. 54-2003, § 2, 7-14-2003; Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 7-117.2. Potentially Dangerous Animal:
(a)Declaration Of Animal As Potentially Dangerous; Procedure:
(1) The Rock Island animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall classify an animal as
potentially dangerous if probable cause is established to believe that the animal falls within the
definitions set forth for "potentially dangerous animal" in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division.
The finding must be based upon: a) the written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the
animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of "potentially dangerous
animal"; or b) reports filed with the police department; or c) actions of the animal witnessed by any
animal control officer, law enforcement officer or citizen who is willing to sign a complaint; or d) other
substantial evidence.
(2) Once the police department becomes aware of an animal that may fall within the definition of
"potentially dangerous animal" set forth in section 7-111, "Definitions", of this division, an animal
control officer or law enforcement officer shall complete an investigation within five (5) days with a
recommendation as to whether or not the animal should be declared a potentially dangerous animal.
During this investigation, the animal shall be impounded at the animal control facility utilized by the
city.
This recommendation shall be reviewed with the animal's owner and the victim, or the victim's
parent/guardian if the victim is a minor. If either of these persons should choose to dispute this
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 162/735
recommendation, the investigating animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall consult: a) a
board certified veterinarian who deals with this type of animal or b) an animal behavior specialist who
has completed a certification or formal program of education in a related field or has at least three (3)
years of work experience in a related field. The opinion of the veterinarian or animal behavior
specialist shall then be used as the basis for the final recommendation on the declaration of the
animal as a potentially dangerous animal. The results of this consultation shall also be shared with
the animal's owner and the victim, or the victim's parent/guardian if the victim is a minor.
(3) The declaration of potentially dangerous animal shall be in writing and shall be served on the
owner in one of the following methods: a) certified mail to the owner's last known address; or b)
personally; or c) if the owner cannot be located by one of the first two (2) methods, by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in this community.
(4) The declaration shall state at least: a) the description of the animal; b) the name and address of
the owner of the animal, if known; c) the whereabouts of the animal, if it is not in the custody of the
owner; d) the facts upon which the declaration of potentially dangerous animal is based; e) the
availability of a hearing in case the person objects to the declaration, if a request is made within ten
(10) days; f) the restrictions placed on the animal as a result of the declaration of potentially
dangerous animal; g) the penalties for violation of the restrictions, including the possibility of
destruction of the animal, and/or fining of the owner.
(b)Owner Objection To Declaration Of Potentially Dangerous Animal: If the owner of the animal wishes
to object to the declaration of potentially dangerous animal:
(1) The owner may request a hearing before the code hearing officer, by submitting a written request
and payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) administrative review fee to the city within ten (10) days
of receipt of the declaration, or within ten (10) days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to
subsection (a)(3) of this section.
(2) If the code hearing officer finds that there is insufficient evidence to support the declaration, it
shall be rescinded, and the restrictions imposed thereby annulled.
(3) If the code hearing officer finds sufficient evidence to support the declaration, the owner may
appeal such decision to the circuit court, pursuant to the administrative review act.
(c)Restriction Of Potentially Dangerous Animal: Following a declaration of potentially dangerous animal
and during the entire appeal process or after the exhaustion of any appeal therefrom, it shall be
unlawful for the person owning or having care of such potentially dangerous animal to allow or permit
such animal to go beyond the premises of such person unless such animal is securely leashed and
muzzled. The leash shall be no longer than six feet (6') in length. The muzzle shall be made in such
a manner that it will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but will
prevent it from biting or causing injury to any person or animal.
(d)Notification Of Status Of Potentially Dangerous Animal: The owner of an animal which has been
classified as potentially dangerous shall immediately notify the police department when the animal: 1)
is loose; 2) has bitten a human being or attacked another animal; 3) is sold or given away, or dies; 4)
is moved to another address.
(e)Sale Of Potentially Dangerous Animal: Prior to selling or giving away an animal that has been
classified as potentially dangerous, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner to the police department and shall certify to the police department that the
new owner has been notified of such classification. The new owner shall comply with all of the
requirements of this section.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 163/735
(f)Custodial Liability: In the event the owner or keeper of the potentially dangerous animal is a minor, the
custodian, parent, or guardian, legally responsible for such minor shall be liable for all injuries and
property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by
said potentially dangerous animal.
(g)Penalty For Violation: Any person who violates a provision of this section, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In
addition, any person found guilty of violating this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter,
food, veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and
veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any animal for the protection of the public, and
such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such animal. Any potentially
dangerous animal that is in violation of the restrictions contained in subsection (c) of this section or
restrictions imposed as part of a declaration as a potentially dangerous animal shall be seized and
impounded. (Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 7-118. Surrender Of Unclaimed Impounded Animals For The Purposes Of
Medical Research:
(a)Whenever any reputable institutions of learning, hospitals, research laboratories or their allied
institutes within a reasonable distance of the city shall make application to the chief of police or his
authorized agent for permission to use humanely unclaimed impounded animals for the good of
mankind and the increase of knowledge relating to the cause, prevention, control and cure of
disease, the chief of police or his authorized agent, upon being satisfied that the animals are to be so
used, shall, from time to time, release such acceptable unclaimed impounded animals for medical
research or otherwise as above specified.
(b)In order to give the owners of impounded animals time within which to reclaim the same, no animal
shall be surrendered for such uses until it has been impounded for a period of at least seven (7)
days.
(c)No impounded animal wearing an unexpired county tag may be released for purposes of medical
research. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 7-119. Authority To Enter Premises:
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article upon the department, the animal
control officer, any sworn police officer or any member of the department is hereby authorized and
directed to enter upon any premises upon which any dog or cat is kept or harbored and to demand the
exhibition by the person owning or having charge or control of such dog or cat, of the license tag for
such dog or cat. Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation,
each member of the department or any sworn police officer is hereby authorized and directed to enter
upon any such premises for the purpose of inspecting the same to ascertain if any provision of this
article or of any law of the state relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals or for the
prevention of cruelty thereto is being violated. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-120. Animal Bites:
All bites or attacks on human beings by any animal within the city shall be immediately reported to the
chief of police. In the event of a bite by an animal, a detailed report shall be completed by the receiving
officer including the complainant's name, address and phone number, the name and address of the
owner of such animal, if known, and the doctor treating the wound. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-
1982)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 164/735
Sec. 7-121. Public Nuisance:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by leash or other
recognized control methods.
Professionally trained guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically
handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack
or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption
under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the animal
control officer of this city of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall
keep the animal control officer advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal
control officer shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs,
and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him. (Ord. 87-81, 10-5-
1987; Ord. 54-2003, § 3, 7-14-2003; Ord. 082-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Secs. 7-122-7-135. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY
Sec. 7-136. Inoculation Required 1:
Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat within the limits of the city shall have a valid rabies inoculation
certificate issued by the state department of agriculture. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-137. Rabies:
Any animal which comes under the Illinois rabies control law will be handled as provided by this law.
(Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-138. Certificate Of Veterinarian Prerequisite To Registration:
No dog or cat shall be registered or licensed under this article unless a certificate of a licensed
veterinarian certifying to the fact and date of inoculation of such dog or cat shall have been filed with or
exhibited to the authorized agent of the city in the city collector's office, showing inoculation to have
been made as required by section 7-136 of this division. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-139. Nonresident Owners:
The provisions of this article relating to the licensing of dogs and cats shall not apply to dogs or cats of
nonresidents remaining temporarily in or passing through the city, provided that such dogs or cats have
a license from some other jurisdiction. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-140. License-Required; Amount Of Fee:
(a)Any person who owns a dog or cat six (6) months or older shall pay the annual fee as set forth below.
The license will be in full force and effect until the anniversary date of the rabies vaccination of the
animal and thereafter shall be renewable annually.
(1) Pet license for unaltered dog or cat $30.00
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 165/735
(2) Pet license for altered dog or cat 6.00
(3) Senior citizen (age 65 or older) or handicapped person, unaltered dog or cat 15.00
(4) Senior citizen (age 65 or older) or handicapped person, altered dog or cat 3.00
(5) All replacement tags 3.00
Upon issuance of a license as aforesaid, the city shall issue a voucher in the amount of twenty
dollars ($20.00) to a person who has paid for a pet license for an unaltered dog or cat. A voucher for
ten dollars ($10.00) shall be issued by the city to senior citizens who have paid for such a license.
(b)Persons making a license renewal application received after thirty (30) calendar days of license
expiration date shall pay as a penalty an additional sum of ten dollars ($10.00). No late penalties
shall be charged on new applications if:
(1) The owner submits proof of purchase or acquisition of the animal within the preceding thirty (30)
calendar days; or
(2) The owner has moved into the city within the preceding thirty (30) calendar days; or
(3) The animal is currently or has been within the preceding thirty (30) calendar days under the age
which requires a license.
(c)The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats in the custody of a veterinarian or animal
shelter or animal rescuer or breeder or whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city for
a period not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days.
(d)It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly issue a check for which funds are
insufficient or to stop payment on any check written in payment of fees contained in this Section. Any
license(s) or penalties paid for with such checks are, in the case of the license, invalid, and in the
case of the penalty, still outstanding. (Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991; Ord. 92-149,
12-21-1992; Ord. 93-31, 4-19-1993; Ord. 97-30, 4-14-1997)
Sec. 7-141. License-Tag:
Upon payment to the city collector of the fee provided for in this article and upon producing a certificate
of inoculation, the city collector shall furnish to the person paying such fee a license tag and
memorandum or registry for each dog or cat for which such fee has been paid. It shall be a violation of
this section for any person to sell or transfer ownership of any dog or cat over six (6) months without a
dog or cat license. (Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982; Ord. 92-149, 12-21-1992)
Sec. 7-141.1. Display Of License-Tag:
It shall be a violation for any person to be in control of a dog over the age of six (6) months that does not
have a visibly displayed license tag affixed to its collar when it leaves the premises of its owner or
keeper. In the event a dog is found to be without a license tag displayed, the animal control officer or
other member of the police department may impound or cause to be impounded said dog. Said dog shall
be released from impoundment upon proof of a valid license tag issued by the city or other government
body having jurisdiction over the dog's owner or keeper or proof that such jurisdiction has no such
requirement. (Ord. 54-2003, § 4, 7-14-2003)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 166/735
Sec. 7-142. Chief Of Police To Provide Metal License Tags:
The chief of police shall provide each year such number of metal tags as may be necessary having
stamped thereon the year for which the license is paid and the number of the tag. The city collector shall
issue a metal tag, numbered to correspond with the number of the registry of the dog or cat, to the
person who paid the license fee upon each dog or cat. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-143. Registry Of Licensed Animals:
The chief of police or his authorized agent shall keep a complete registry of all licensed dogs and cats,
and their breed, color and sex, and shall also enter therein the name and address of the owner as given
and the number of the license tag. (Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord., 6-24-1974; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-144. Sanitation:
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat in the city shall keep the pen clean and odor free at all times.
(Ord., 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-145. Defecation On Public Property:
No owner or keeper of any pet shall permit said pet to defecate on any public way or public property or
upon any private property without the permission of the occupant or the owner of the private property
without immediately removing said defecation and depositing same in a refuse container or similar
depository. (Ord. 86-21, 5-5-1986; Ord. 56-2004, § 1, 5-10-2004)
Sec. 7-146. Spaying And Neutering:
(a)No person shall own, harbor or keep within the city any cat or dog over the age of six (6) months
which has not been spayed or neutered, unless such person holds either a license for breeding cats
or dogs issued by the city or possesses an unaltered dog or cat license as stated in this division or a
written certificate from a licensed veterinarian that, due to health considerations, the animal should
not be spayed or neutered.
(b)An altered dog or cat shall be those that fall into one of the two (2) categories listed herein:
(1) Neutered Male : Any male dog or cat which has been rendered sterile by a surgical procedure
(orchiectomy).
(2) Spayed Female : A female dog or cat which has been rendered sterile by surgical means
(ovariohysterectomy). (Ord. 92-149, § 3, 12-21-1992)
Sec. 7-147. Health And Cruelty:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or person to cruelly deprive food, water, shelter, and
protection to any animal under their control and/or custody, or to abandon, poison, cruelly beat,
cruelly whip or kill any animal under their, another's or no one's control and/or custody, or to mutilate,
overdrive, overload, overwork, torment, torture or otherwise cruelly ill use any animal. This section
shall not apply to wild animals killed in the hunt (not within city limits) by customary and nonbrutal
methods nor to wild rats, mice, insects, fish, arthropods or vermin; nor shall this section apply to
medical research organizations duly licensed and/or otherwise recognized or supported by state or
federal law.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 167/735
(b)It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due
care and control, any animal to bark, cry, howl, whine or cause other objectionable noises which
disturb the comfort, peace, quiet or repose of any person residing in the vicinity.
(c)It shall be unlawful for any animal owner, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care and
control, to maintain an animal or the premises upon which the animal is maintained, in such a
manner as to emit such offensive odors which disturb the comfort, peace or repose of any person
residing in the vicinity.
(d)It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to abandon any animal where it may become a public
charge, or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 92-149, § 3, 12-21-1992)
Sec. 7-148. Commercial Kennels, Pet Shops, Breeders, And Animal Rescuers And
Rehabilitators License:
No person shall operate in the city a commercial kennel pet shop, be a breeder of dogs and/or cats, or
be an animal rescuer and rehabilitator without having first obtained a license therefor as set forth herein.
(1) Definitions :
Animal Rescuer And Rehabilitator : Any person licensed by the state and federal government to
rescue and rehabilitate wild animals and fowl that are sick or injured.
Breeder : A person or persons who own or breed dogs and/or cats primarily for personal recreational
use, such as participation in recognized conformation shows, field or obedience trials, racing,
scenting, specialized hunting or working trials, and water trials, and for the purpose of improving the
physical soundness, temperament, and conformation of a given breed to standard, such person to
sell or exchange, at retail only, and other than for purposes of research, testing, or experimentation,
dogs or cats bred from male/female dogs or cats owned or leased by the breeders.
Commercial Kennel : A structure or premises where dogs and cats over four (4) months of age are
kept, raised, bred or boarded for commercial purposes, excluding animal hospitals, clinics and pet
shops.
Pet Shop : Any person, establishment, store or department of any store that acquires live animals,
including dogs and cats, and sells or offers to sell or rent such live animal to the public or to retail
outlets.
(2)Application For License : Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to be licensed as aforesaid shall
file an application for the license with the city clerk and pay the annual fee thereof as set forth below.
Upon the filing of an application for a license required by this article, the city clerk shall forward
copies of same to the health officer, animal control officer and the zoning enforcement official for
inspection of the premises for compliance with state and city public health regulations and all city
ordinances and for compliance with all zoning ordinances. Upon receipt of reports of compliance with
regulations and ordinances from city officials, the city clerk, upon receipt of the license fee, shall
issue a license to the applicant.
(3)Inspection Of Premises :
a. The animal control officer, health inspector or any city inspector shall have the right, for the
purpose of investigating a complaint, to enter during normal business hours upon any premises
where the animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept provided such entry shall
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 168/735
not be made into any building which is a person's residence except by the consent of the owner, a
search warrant, or a court order. Any person who denies, prevents, or obstructs such access is guilty
of a violation of this section. The officer or inspector shall have the proper identification and/or
uniform and identification.
b. It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or inspector in the legal performance
of their duties, or take or attempt to take an animal from any animal control officer or inspector, or
from any vehicle used by them to transport any animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from
the animal shelter without proper authority.
c. Any premises may be entered for the purposes of inspection for the purposes of issuing a license
for a commercial kennel license, pet shop license or breeder's license.
(4)License Fees : The following annual fees are applicable under the provisions of this section:
Commercial kennel license $200.00
Pet shop license 75.00
Breeder's license 50.00
Plus, for each dog over 10.00
the age of 6 months
Rescuer and rehabilitation 25.00
license
Any license issued under this section shall be in effect for one year. The license year shall be May 1 to
April 30. Any person who attempts to renew a license after thirty (30) calendar days of the license
expiration date shall be subject to a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) in addition to the license fee. (Ord.
92-149, § 3, 12-21-1992)
Secs. 7-149--7-155. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. IMPOUNDMENT
Sec. 7-156. Authorized.
(a)The owner, possessor or keeper of any dog or cat shall keep his dog or cat under restraint at all
times. Such dog or cat shall not be at large off the premises or property of such owner, possessor or
keeper unless under the control of a competent person.
(b)A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this section if it is controlled by a leash attached to a
collar or harness, "at heel" beside a competent person and is obedient to that person's commands,
or when under the control of a competent person on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the
street.
(c)A cat is under restraint within the meaning of this section if it is controlled by a leash or confined.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 169/735
(d)(1) Every dog or cat running at large within the city shall be subject to impoundment at any time by
the animal control officer.
(2) The owner of any dog or cat that is impounded and claims that animal shall pay a penalty of the
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first impoundment.
(3) Any dog or cat that is impounded a second time within a one year period shall be altered. The
owner shall pay a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second impoundment and in
addition thereto the reasonable cost for the mandatory altering of the animal if the altering would not
endanger the health of the animal. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2), 10-25-1982; Ord. 86-
56, § 1, 11-3-1986; Ord. 92-149, § 4, 12-21-1992; Ord. 88-2004, § 1, 9-20-2004)
Sec. 7-157. Duty Of Animal Control Officer Generally:
The animal control officer shall impound, or cause to be impounded, and shall dispose of according to
the provisions of this article, all dogs running at large within the city and shall keep a record of every dog
so impounded, describing the breed, color and sex, together with the time and place such dog was
captured or received and the final disposition made of each dog, together with such other information as
may come to his attention. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 4), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-158. Records:
The animal control officer or the person in charge of the animal shelter to which any dog or cat is taken
in accordance with the provisions of section 7-156 of this division, shall immediately enter in a register
the breed, color and sex of such dog or cat, whether licensed or not, and if licensed, the name and
address of the owner or keeper. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-159. Notice To Owner:
When the owner of any impounded dog or cat is known, he shall be notified by telephone or mail
immediately after its impoundment by the person in charge of the animal shelter. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973;
Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-160. Claiming After Impoundment:
The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article must claim the animal within
seven (7) days from the date of impounding upon payment of the following fees to the animal control
officer:
(1) The amount of the license fee for the current year, if not paid.
(2) The amount of the current veterinarian fee for rabies inoculation, if a valid certificate is not shown.
(3) The amount for the temporary hepatitis and distemper injection for dogs under one year of age.
(4) A redemption fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first impounding and a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for subsequent impounding within a year and in addition thereto the cost of altering as set
forth in section 7-156 of this division if there has been a second offense.
(5) Residents shall pay a fee of three dollars fifty cents ($3.50) for each day the animal has been
impounded. Nonresidents shall pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day the animal has been
impounded. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord., § 1, 3-17-1975; Ord., § 1, 11-7-1977; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2),
10-25-1982; Ord. 85-30, § 1, 8-26-1985; Ord. 87-34, § 13, 4-6-1987; Ord. 92-149, § 5, 12-21-1992)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 170/735
Sec. 7-161. Animals Sold To New Owners:
Any person may purchase an animal impounded under the provisions of this article after seven (7) days
of impoundment, by complying with the following fee schedule:
(1) Dogs under four (4) months of age, the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus the cost of temporary
hepatitis and distemper injection, and an adoption in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the
cost of neutering or spaying.
(2) Dogs over four (4) months of age, the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus the cost of rabies
inoculation and an adoption deposit in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to cover the cost of
neutering or spaying.
(3) Cats, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus the cost of rabies inoculation, if the cat is over four
(4) months of age, and an adoption deposit in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) to cover the cost of
neutering or spaying. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord., § 1, 5-19-1975; Ord., § 2, 11-7-1977; Ord. 82-41, §
1(§ 2), 10-25-1982; Ord. 85-30, § 2, 8-26-1985; Ord. 87-34, §§ 10-12, 4-6-1987)
Sec. 7-162. Disposition Of Dogs Or Cats Not Claimed:
If any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this article is not claimed within seven (7) days after
being impounded, the animal control officer may dispose of such animal in a humane way by approved
methods. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-163. Injured Animals:
The animal control officer shall remove from any street or public place within the city any injured animal
not being attended and properly cared for by the owner and shall, if he deems it necessary, impound and
confine such animal with some veterinarian within the city. If such veterinarian shall treat such animal, he
shall advise the animal control officer of the cost of such treatment and in the event such dog is claimed
as provided in this article, the person so claiming such animal shall also pay the charges of the
veterinarian. If such animal is not claimed, it shall be disposed of in the manner herein provided. (Ord., §
1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 4), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-164. Animals That Cannot Be Impounded:
If any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog or cat cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dog or cat
may be slain by any sworn officer; provided, however, that in all cases where any dog or cat so slain has
bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of such person, it shall be the duty of the officer
slaying such dog or cat to immediately deliver the carcass and the head of such dog or cat to the animal
control officer. (Ord., § 1, 12-3-1973; Ord. 82-41, § 1(§ 2), 10-25-1982)
Sec. 7-165. Animals Released To Animal Shelter For Disposal:
Any nonresident releasing an animal to the animal shelter for disposal shall pay a fee of five dollars
($5.00) per animal or ten dollars ($10.00) for a litter. (Ord. 87-34, § 14, 4-6-1987)
Sec. 7-166. Penalty:
Any person violating the provisions of this article which is not covered by a specific fee and/or fine listed
herein as a first offense shall be subject to a citation, which citation shall be paid at the police
department in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00); if paid within seven (7) days of the date issued
the amount shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Any second and subsequent violation of this article shall be
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 171/735
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
92-149, § 6, 12-21-1992)
DIVISION 4. URBAN CHICKENS
Sec. 7-167. Definitions:
Chicken: A member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, a domesticated fowl.
Chicken Tractor: A lightweight portable chicken coop without a floor that allows the chickens to forage for
weeds and insects.
Henhouse: A henhouse or chicken coop is a structure where female chickens are kept.
Permitted Tract Of Land: The tract of land as identified on the application upon which a permit is granted
for keeping chickens pursuant to this division.
Permittee: An applicant who has been granted a permit to raise, harbor, or keep chickens pursuant to
this division.
Permitting Officer: The city manager or designee.
Single-Family Dwelling: Any building that contains only one dwelling unit that is used, intended, rented,
leased, let or hired to be occupied for living purposes.
Tract Of Land: A lot that has one single-family dwelling located on that property or zoned lot.
Urban Chicken: A chicken kept on a permitted tract of land pursuant to a permit issued under this
chapter. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-168. Permit Required:
(a)Annual Permit Required: No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens within the city of Rock Island
without a valid permit obtained from the permitting officer under the provisions of this division.
(b)Application: In order to obtain a permit, an applicant shall submit a completed application on forms
provided by the permitting officer, either online or in paper form, and pay all fees required by this
division.
(c)Requirements: The requirements to receive a permit include:
(1) All requirements of this division are met.
(2) All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by city council resolution, for the permit are paid
in full.
(3) All judgments in the city's favor and against the applicant have been paid in full.
(4) The tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one single-family dwelling occupied and used
as such by the permittee. Owner permission shall be required if the single-family dwelling is occupied
by a renter.
(5) The applicant has provided notice to the residents of all immediately adjacent dwellings, including
those across the street and/or alley, of the applicant's intent to obtain a permit.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 172/735
(6) The applicant has successfully completed an approved class in raising chickens in an urban
setting. A certificate, or other documentation, of completion shall be provided to the permitting officer.
The permitting officer shall maintain a current list of such approved classes.
(d)Issuance Of Permit: If the permitting officer concludes as a result of the information contained in the
application that the requirements for a permit have been met, then the officer shall issue the permit.
(e)Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Nonrenewal: The permitting officer may deny, suspend, revoke, or
decline to renew any permit issued for any of the following grounds:
(1) False statements on any application or other information or report required by this section to be
given by the applicant;
(2) Failure to pay any application, penalty, reinspection or reinstatement fee required by this section
or city council resolution;
(3) Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the time specified in the notice;
(4) Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation/remediation plan by the permitting
officer, or designee;
(5) Failure to comply with any provision of this division.
(f)Notification: A decision to revoke, suspend, deny, or not renew a permit shall be in writing, delivered
by ordinary mail or in person to the address indicated on the application. The notification shall specify
reasons for the action.
(g)Effect Of Denial Or Revocation: When an application for a permit is denied, or when a permit is
revoked, the applicant may not reapply for a new permit for a period of one year from the date of the
denial or revocation.
(h)Appeals: No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed without notice and an
opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder of the permit. In any instance where the
permitting officer has denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder
of an urban chicken permit may appeal the decision to the city council within ten (10) business days
of receipt by the applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The applicant or holder
of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The decision of the permitting officer which is
not appealed in accordance to this division shall be deemed final action. All final administrative
decisions made under this article shall be subject to judicial review, pursuant to the provisions of the
"administrative review act", approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof,
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-169. Number And Type Of Chickens Allowed:
(a)The maximum number of chickens allowed shall be six (6) hens.
(b)Only female chickens (hens) are allowed. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-170. Zoning Districts Allowed:
Permits will be granted only for tracts of land located in the following residential districts: R-1, R-2, SE-1
and SE-2, as well as R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 with only one single-family dwelling. (Ord. 058-2016, 12-19-
2016)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 173/735
Sec. 7-171. Noncommercial Use Only:
A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for
commercial purposes. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-172. Enclosures:
(a)Secure Enclosure: Chickens shall be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times. Chickens shall
be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during nondaylight hours.
(b)Sanitation: Enclosures shall be kept in a clean, dry, odor free, neat and sanitary condition at all times.
(c)Ventilation; Penetration: Henhouses shall provide adequate ventilation and adequate sun and shade
and shall be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats.
(d)Henhouses And Chicken Tractors:
(1) Henhouses shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions for the chickens with a
minimum of four (4) square feet per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the
neighborhood.
(2) A henhouse shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors. Access doors shall be
able to be shut and locked at night. Opening windows and vents shall be covered with predator and
bird proof wire of one inch (1") or smaller openings.
(3) The materials used in making a henhouse shall be uniform for each element of the structure such
that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and
any windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board,
sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be well
maintained.
(4) Henhouses shall only be located in the rear yard unless the setback requirements cannot be met
in which case they may be kept in a side yard but within the required setbacks.
(5) Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the property line and
at least twenty five feet (25') from any principal structure, and shall meet all other accessory structure
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-173. Odor And Noise Impacts:
(a)Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related substances shall not be perceptible to
persons of reasonable sensitivity beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land.
(b) Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land at
the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-174. Predators, Rodents, Wild Birds, Insects And Parasites:
The permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators, rodents and wild birds
and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and
parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by a Rock Island
animal control officer. (Ord. 014-2017, 4-10-2017)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 174/735
Sec. 7-175. Feed And Water:
Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times. The feed and water shall be
unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-176. Waste Storage And Removal:
All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire
structure. No more than three (3) cubic feet of manure shall be stored on the permitted tract of land. All
other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor,
chicken pen and surrounding area shall be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten
feed shall be removed in a timely manner. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-177. Chickens At Large:
(a)The permittee shall not allow the permittee's chickens to roam off the permitted tract of land. No dog
or cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that
reason alone, be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the city's responsibility to enforce
its animal control provisions. (Ord. 014-2017, 4-10-2017)
Sec. 7-178. Unlawful Acts:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of any provision of this division or any
other provision of this code.
(b)It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property to allow chickens to be kept on the
property in violation of the provisions of this division.
(c)No person shall keep chickens inside a dwelling unit or any other structure other than an approved
henhouse or chicken tractor.
(d)No person shall slaughter any chickens within the city of Rock Island.
(e)No person shall keep a rooster.
(f)No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of land. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-179. Nuisances:
Any violation of the terms of this division that constitutes a health hazard or that interferes with the use
or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance
abatement provisions of article IX of this chapter. (Ord. 043-2016, 10-24-2016)
Sec. 7-180. Reserved:
ARTICLE VII. HOUSING CODE 1
Sec. 7-181. Adopted:
The International Conference of Building Officials, uniform housing code, 1997 edition, copies of which
are on file in the office of the city clerk, is hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the housing
code of the city of Rock Island subject to the amendments which were recommended by the Rock Island
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 175/735
housing code advisory and appeals board which are attached to ordinance 99-66 on file in the office of
the city clerk and made a part hereof by reference. (Ord. 90-75, § 1, 10-15-1990; Ord. 92-64, § 1, 4-13-
1992; Ord. 99-6, § 1, 8-23-1999)
Secs. 7-182-7-220. Reserved:
ARTICLE VIII. REGULATION OF PIGEON LOFTS AND
CARRIER OR RACING PIGEONS
Sec. 7-221. Purpose And Definitions:
(a)Purpose: The purpose of this Article is to protect the health and safety of the community by regulating
and controlling the raising, keeping, and exercising of carrier and racing pigeons in order to prevent
disease and nuisance.
(b)Definitions:
(1) Carrier Pigeon: Homing and racing pigeons which have the name of the owner stamped upon the
wing or tail, or are banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or with an identification
or registration number stamped on the band.
(2) Health Authority: The Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative of the City of Rock
Island.
(3) Loft: Any structure in which carrier, homing and racing pigeons are housed.
(4) Racing Pigeon: A pigeon registered with a national pigeon racing organization and used as a
game competitive bird. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-222. Permit:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a loft or raise, keep, or exercise carrier and racing pigeons
without first obtaining a permit from the health authority in the manner prescribed in this Article. (Ord. 86-
47, 9-15-1986)
Sec. 7-223. Application:
The applicant shall file an application for such a permit with the Chief Building Inspector or his
designated representative on a form he shall prescribe. At this time, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00). The application shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the construction and operation of the proposed loft will conform to the
standards set forth in Section 7-224 of this Article. The application shall also include the name of the
pigeon club or organization the birds are registered with, a contact person within the organization and a
phone number where this person can be reached. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986; Ord. 87-2, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-224. Standards:
No permit shall be issued by the health authority unless such authority shall find:
(1) That no odor related to the keeping of pigeons is to be present at the property line at any time.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 176/735
(2) That the droppings be handled in a sanitary manner within a closed container to prevent fly
breeding and odor.
(3) That the pigeons shall be controlled by their owner so that they will not constitute a nuisance to
neighboring property owners. A nuisance may, among other actions, be defined as the exercising of
pigeons at an unacceptable time of day.
(4) That all lofts constructed after passage of this Article shall be in no yard other than the rear yard;
nor shall it occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of a required rear yard. It shall not exceed fifteen
feet (15') in height and shall be distant at least three feet (3') from alley lines of adjoining lots and at
least six feet (6') from alley lines and any other building or structure on the same lot.
(5) That the construction of the structure meet all other City regulations, including but not limited to
Building Code regulations. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986)
Sec. 7-225. Conditions And Safeguards:
(a)Prior to the granting of such a permit, the health authority shall stipulate such standards as described
in Section 7-224 above.
(b)Said permit, when granted, shall be in full force and effect only as long as the owner of said loft
retains ownership at that particular location. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986)
Sec. 7-226. Authority And Inspection:
The Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-227. Fees:
An annual license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986)
Sec. 7-228. Penalties:
(a)Finding Of Violation: Upon finding a violation of the provisions of this Article, or the conditions
specified by the health authority, the Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative shall
notify the owner of the pigeons and the club contact person as specified at the time of licensing. The
owner shall then have fourteen (14) days to remedy the violations. After this fourteen (14) day period,
the Chief Building Inspector or his designated representative shall reinspect the loft to determine if
violations still exist.
(b)Revocation Of Permit: If violations continue to exist past the fourteen (14) day period, the Chief
Building Inspector or his designated representative shall revoke any permit issued under the
provisions of this Article.
If a license is cited for violation of this Article three (3) times in a twelve (12) month period, said
license shall be permanently revoked.
(c)Civil Remedy: If said pigeon loft is not dismantled and pigeons removed from the premises upon
revocation of said permit, then action shall be brought by the City Attorney, his designee, or by
designated representative of the Community Services and Development Department. (Ord. 86-47, 9-
15-1986; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 177/735
Sec. 7-229. Appeals:
(a)Prior to the revocation of said permit on grounds of violation which do not constitute a nuisance to
neighboring property owners, including but not limited to subsection 7-224(4) and (5), the Chief
Building Inspector or his designated representative shall provide written notice to the permit holder
stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising that the permit shall be
permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following service of such notice, unless a written
request for a hearing before the appropriate board is filed with the health authority by the permit
holder within such five (5) day period.
(b)Revocation of the permit shall occur prior to an appeal hearing if the violations constitute a nuisance
to neighboring property owners, including but not limited to subsection 7-224(1), (2), and (3).
(c)If revocation is a result of violations of subsection 7-224(4) of this Article, appeals will be made to the
Board of Zoning Appeals within five (5) days following service of a notice of revocation by the Chief
Building Inspector or his designated representative. (Ord. 86-47, 9-15-1986; 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 7-230. Applicability:
Owners of existing pigeon lofts as well as proposed lofts shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
Existing lofts shall be exempted from the requirement found in subsection 7-224(4) of this chapter. (Ord.
86-47, 9-15-1986)
ARTICLE IX. NUISANCES AND REFUSE
Sec. 7-231. Definitions:
See chapter 13, article II, "Solid Waste", of this code. (Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 7-232. General Conditions:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any refuse upon any street, alley, lane or public or
private property in the city.
(b)It shall be the responsibility of the owner of record to keep the property in compliance with this article.
(Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 7-233. Enforcement:
(a)In the event of a violation of any provision(s) of this article, the chief building inspector or his
designated representative shall issue a citation to the owner of the property in violation of the
provision(s) of this article either by regular mail or in person and shall give said owner a period of not
more than seven (7) days to correct the violation(s). In the event the said owner fails to correct the
violation(s) in the time given to correct same, the chief building inspector or his designated
representative shall issue a second citation for said violation(s).
(b)In addition to the foregoing, the chief building inspector or his designated representative shall notify
the director of public works of the violation of the provision(s) of this article, and the director of public
works may cause the removal of refuse and debris from the area which is in violation of the
provision(s) of this article and may collect a fee of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). This
cost shall be a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances
except tax liens if a notice of lien is filed in the office of the county recorder of deeds within seven (7)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 178/735
months of completion of removal activities by the city from the parcel setting forth a description of the
real estate involved, the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred for the
services, and the date or times when such costs and expenses were incurred by the city.
(c)In addition, the city attorney is authorized and directed to initiate litigation in court to recover costs
incurred. (Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996; Ord. 085-2014, 12-1-2014)
Sec. 7-234. Nuisances:
Within the territorial jurisdiction of the city it is hereby declared a nuisance for any person:
(1) Nuisances At Common Law: To cause any of those acts or omissions that are declared to be
nuisances by the state and such as are known as nuisances to the common law of the land, not
hereinafter specially enumerated.
(2) Premises To Be Kept Clean: To keep or suffer to be kept within the city limits in a foul, offensive,
nauseous, or filthy condition any building, lot, yard, premises or junkyard.
(3) Junk: To keep or suffer to be kept within the city limits in a foul, offensive, nauseous, filthy,
dilapidated or unsafe condition any vehicle, machinery, appliance or household item.
(4) Furniture: For the owner or keeper of any lot or premises to suffer to remain thereon, to the
annoyance and detriment of other persons outside the buildings located on the premises, any
furniture not designed for outdoor use.
(5) Garbage And Rubbish Storage And Pick Up Areas: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
record to keep the garbage and rubbish storage and pick up areas on public rights of way (defined in
chapter 13 of this code) free from garbage and rubbish on the ground.
(6) Refuse Disposal: For the owner and/or tenant of any lot or premises to place or allow to be placed
any refuse container, yard waste or brush at the street, curb or alley on the public right of way pick up
site earlier than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the day before pick up or to allow any refuse containers
to remain at the pick up site no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the day after pick up.
(7) Brush: For the owner and/or tenant of any lot or premises to allow brush or brush in piles to
remain on the property longer than thirty (30) days of breaking or cutting.
(8) Animals: For the owner or keeper of any lot or premises to allow animal wastes to accumulate to
a point where odors are present at the property line or the presence of insects creates a health
hazard for surrounding properties. Animal wastes shall be handled as garbage.
(9) Unburied Animals: For the owner or possessor of an animal which may die within the city to leave
the same unburied less than twenty four inches (24") below ground or properly dispose of the
carcass therein for more than eight (8) hours after its death, or for any person to bring and leave the
carcass of any such animal within the city. In case the animal is not removed within the eight (8) hour
period after notification, the inspection division shall cause the removal of said animal and certify the
cost of such removal as a lien against the property. Notification shall consist of a posting on the
premises.
(10) Slaughter Of Animals: To kill or slaughter any animals within the city limits, to the injury,
discomfort or annoyance of any inhabitants of the neighborhood.
(11) Animal And Vermin Harborage: For the owner and/or tenant of any residential lot or premises to
allow any material such as lumber, boxes, barrels, scrap iron, construction material or any other
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 179/735
materials which would provide harborage for rats, mice, snakes or other vermin. Firewood must be
neatly stacked and elevated a minimum of four inches (4") above the ground.
(12) Vector Control: For the owner and/or tenant of any lot or residence to permit water to stand in
containers of any kind unless mosquito controls have been taken or allow animal or vermin
harborages under any garage, shed, porch, residential structure or other buildings on the premises
without taking necessary measures to destroy or capture the animals or vermin. Poisons may not be
used unless placed in areas not readily accessible to persons or domesticated animals. For single
user nonowner occupied lots or premises, the owner and/or occupant shall be responsible for the
extermination of any rodents, vermin or other pests of public health significance therein on the
premises. In multi-tenant lots or premises, the owner and/or tenant is responsible for extermination of
such pests.
(13) Offensive Matter In River: For the owner and/or tenant of any lot or property to allow or suffer to
allow any blood, bone, offal, and any other offensive matter to run, fall, or get into any storm drain,
drainage ditch or other watercourse which leads into the Mississippi River. (Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 7-235. Penalties:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following penalties, to be paid in
the City Office of Collections:
(1) Upon detection of the first nuisance violation, the owner and/or tenant of the real estate shall be
issued a notice of the violation(s) and shall be issued a warning ticket. The owner of the property is
required to abate the violation(s) within seven (7) days of the date of the warning ticket.
(2) Upon detection of any second violation during any consecutive twelve (12) month period of the
issuance of the first nuisance violation, or for failure to abate the previous violation within a seven (7)
day period or appeal said alleged nuisance violation within said time, the owner of the real estate
shall be issued a notice of violation and shall pay a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00). In the
event the penalty is not paid in seven (7) days from the date of the notice, the owner of the real
estate shall pay as the penalty the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(3) Upon detection of any third or subsequent violation during this consecutive twelve (12) month
period, the owner of the real estate shall be issued a notice of violation and shall pay a penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00). In the event the penalty is not paid in seven (7) days from the date of the notice, the
owner of the real estate shall pay as the penalty the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(4) Failure of the person violating the provisions of this Article to pay the above listed penalties will
result in the Chief Building Inspector instructing the City Attorney to seek fines and other remedies in
court. Fines are to be a minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per occurrence and a maximum of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per occurrence.
(5) An appeal of any alleged violation of this Article may be filed with the Community and Economic
Development Director in writing no later than seven (7) days from the date of the notice. Results of
this appeal will be sent in writing within seven (7) days of the receipt of the appeal. No further
penalties will be assessed during this appeal process. (Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996)
Chapter 8
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 1, 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 180/735
Sec. 8-1. Licenses Subject To Ordinances:
All licenses which may at any time be issued under any ordinance of the City shall be subject to all
ordinances and regulations of the City which may be in force during the period of such license, or any
portion of such period, and shall also be subject to all laws of the State and conditioned upon their
faithful observance, and a violation of any of the provisions of said ordinances or laws by any licensed
person shall, in addition to the penalties which may be provided for such violation, subject him to a
revocation of his license. (1963 Code art. 6-1)
Sec. 8-2. How Issued; Terms:
All licenses which may be issued under any ordinance of the City, unless such ordinance shall otherwise
provide, shall be signed by the City Clerk under the Corporate Seal of the City, and shall specify the kind
of license. Fees shall be payable at the City Finance Department prior to May 1 of each year. The
licensing year shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the next succeeding calendar
year. All licenses shall expire on said April 30 in each calendar year. In the case of new businesses, new
license applications, or additional licenses for existing businesses only where the application for the
license is made after October 31 of any year, the fee for the license shall be one-half (1/2) of the stated
fee for the remainder of that license year only. (Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-3. Assignment; Surrender; New License; Bond:
(a)Except as provided in this section, licenses are not transferable.
(b)Any person to whom a license may have been issued under any ordinance of this City may, with the
permission of the Council, or other authorized City official, have the same transferred or surrender
such license and have the same cancelled and have a like license issued for the unexpired term of
the one so surrendered to the person or place of business to which he may wish to transfer the same
upon the licensee named in such new license giving bond (if bond is required in such case) and
complying with the ordinances and laws under which the license is issued. (1963 Code art. 6-1)
Sec. 8-4. Revocation By Mayor Or Council:
Any license granted under the provisions of an ordinance of the City may be revoked at any time, upon
written notice by the Council or other authorized City official, when it shall appear that the licensed party
has violated or failed to comply with any provision of any ordinance of the City or the laws of the State
applicable to the person, business occupation or place so licensed. (1963 Code art. 6-1)
Sec. 8-5. Register Of Licenses:
The City Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued; the date, term and kind of license, the amount
paid therefor and the name and place of business of the licensee. (1963 Code art. 6-1)
Sec. 8-6. Garage And Yard Sales 1 2:
Garage, yard and related sales are hereby authorized on residentially zoned property in the City only
upon compliance with the following conditions:
(1) The sale on the premises shall not exceed a seventy two (72) hour period.
(2) No residentially zoned premises in the City shall be used for the site of a sale more than twice in
any calendar year.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 181/735
(3) Property to be sold in said sale shall be limited to items of personal property owned by the
persons on whose premises the sale is being conducted.
(4) Any person authorized by this section shall be allowed to place a sign advertising same on his or
her premises or on other private property when authorized by the owner thereof during the time of
said sale and said sign shall be removed at the end of said sale period. No sign shall be placed or
permitted on a public right-of-way. (Ord., 10-13-1975; Ord., 11-3-1975; Ord., 11-10-1975; Ord. 87-34,
4-6-1987; Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991; Ord. 96-89, 11-11-1996)
Sec. 8-7. Sound-Amplifying Equipment 415 ILCS 5/24.3:
(a)Definitions: As used in this section:
Person: Any corporation, partnership or two (2) or more individuals having a joint or common interest.
Sound-Amplifying Equipment: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music
or any other sound. It shall not be construed as including sound-amplifying devices when used and
heard only by occupants of the vehicle or building in which located, or such devices when used for
authorized traffic-safety purposes.
(b)License - Required: No person either as principal or agent shall operate or cause to be operated any
sound-amplifying equipment, either stationary or mounted on vehicles, in the City, without a license
as provided in this section.
(c)License - Application: Any person, within the meaning of this section, desiring to use "soundamplifying
equipment", as herein defined, shall make, and file with the City Clerk, a written
application stating the applicant's name, residence, place of business, kind of business, the purpose
for which the sound-amplifying equipment shall be used, the proposed hours of operation, the
number of days of the proposed operation, a general description of said equipment and the
maximum sound-producing power of the equipment, including the following:
(1) The wattage to be used.
(2) The volume in decibels of sound which will be produced.
(3) The approximate maximum distance from which sound will be thrown from the equipment.
(d)License - Fee; Issuance: The applicant shall, at the time, pay to the City Collector as a license fee
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each day or part of a day for each unit. Such license shall be issued
by the City Clerk.
(e)Regulations For Use: The use of sound-amplifying equipment and its operation shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) The only sounds permitted are music and the human voice.
(2) Operation is permitted between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
each day except on Sundays and legal holidays, when no operation shall be authorized.
(3) Sound shall not be emitted within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, churches or
courthouses.
(4) The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, slanderous or obscene as defined
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 182/735
(5) The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of
one hundred feet (100') from the sound amplifying equipment, and so that said volume is not
unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
(1963 Code art. 6-2(Q); Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991)
Sec. 8-8. Gasoline Filling Stations 820 ILCS 205/7.1:
Any person operating a filling station for the sale of gasoline or other motor fuel in the City and any
person to whom a license to operate such filling station shall be hereafter granted shall pay to the City
Finance Department an annual fee. The fee for said license shall be forty five dollars ($45.00) for each
nozzle, whether in use or not, located at said filling station, payable in accordance with section 8-2 of
this chapter. (Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-9. Going Out Of Business Sales:
(a)State Law: All persons holding going out of business sales shall comply with 815 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 350/1 through 350/12, which provides for the licensing and regulation of said sales as
defined therein.
(b)Inspection: In addition to the regulations and requirements set forth in said State Statute, any person
conducting a sale defined in said Act shall comply with the inspection requirements as set forth in this
section. The Mayor shall, upon the filing of an application for a sale, appoint an inspector or
inspectors, not to exceed three (3) in number, accordingly as the requirements of the situation seem
to demand, said inspector or inspectors to be residents of the City and who may be City officials or
employees or otherwise, whose duty it shall be to inspect and investigate the inventory submitted
with the application for license, and the stock of goods or merchandise offered for sale thereunder,
and who shall either singly, or as a body, as directed by the Mayor, attend the sale held under the
license when issued, and report to the Mayor whether any goods not listed in the inventory had been
offered for sale, and whether the other requirements of this section are being complied with. The
Mayor shall require that the articles enumerated in said inventory be numbered in sequence and that
tags, corresponding to the numbers so shown in the inventory, be placed on each article when
offered for sale and accompany the article when sold. Such inspector or inspectors attending any
sale shall have with them a copy or copies of the inventory as originally furnished with the application
and shall check or compare the articles offered for sale with the inventory. For the purpose of such
inspection said inspector or inspectors shall have access to the place where such sale is to be held
at any time prior to the opening of any such sale. Such inspector or inspectors shall not receive any
compensation for duties performed hereunder prior to the opening of any such sale, but shall each
be compensated at the rate determined by the City Council for attendance at any sale held under any
license granted hereunder. Provided, however, that no City employee attending any such sale
hereunder shall be entitled to or receive any extra compensation above his regular salary or wage.
Any person holding a sale within the meaning of this section shall deposit with the City Collector prior
to the issuance of a license as aforesaid, a cash deposit in an amount to be determined by the
Mayor, not to exceed one-half of one percent of the cost inventory of the goods to be sold, to
guarantee payment to the City of a sum equal to the cost of inspection as above defined. (1963 Code
art. 6-2(P))
Sec. 8-10. Sale Of Merchandise On Street, Etc.:
No person shall place or allow to be placed on public sidewalks or public ways, any merchandise or
goods for the purpose of advertising or selling same without prior approval of the City Council. (Ord., 6-
23-1975)
Secs. 8-11 - 8-25. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 183/735
ARTICLE II. ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS AND USERS 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-26. Title:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the ROCK ISLAND CITY ORDINANCE REGULATING
BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS, AND USERS. (Ord., 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-27. Definitions:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
Alarm Agent: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose
duties include selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing
on or in any building, structure or facility, any alarm system. Exemption: The provisions of this article do
not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme for
physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
Alarm Business: The business by any individual, partnership or corporation or other entity of selling,
leasing, maintaining, inspecting, servicing, repairing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any
building, structure or facility. Exemption: Said definition shall not apply to persons engaged solely in the
manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a fixed location, and who do not install, alter,
maintain, service or plan the alarm system for a specific location.
Alarm System: Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an
unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal
or message when actuated and to which police are expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm
system" shall include the terms "audible alarm", "automatic dialing device", "burglar alarm system" and
"holdup alarm system" as those terms are hereinafter defined.
Answering Service: A telephone answering business providing among its services receiving, on a
continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice over a signal channel circuit to the communication
center of the Police Department.
Appellant: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this article.
Applicant: A person, firm or corporation that files an application for a new or renewal permit as provided
in this article.
Audible Alarm: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates
an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated. This audible alarm may or may not be combined
with a method of transmitting a signal to a remote point. Exemption: The provisions of this article are not
applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
Automatic Dialing Device: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by
direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of
the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 184/735
Burglar Alarm System: A method of detecting and signaling the presence, entry or attempted entry of an
intruder into protected premises.
Central Station System: A system or group of systems, usually operated from its customers by a person,
in which the operations of protected circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and
supervised from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times, that
have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message including the relaying of
messages by a signal channel circuit to the communications center of the police department.
City: The city of Rock Island or its authorized employees or agents.
Direct Alarm System: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting signals to and receiving
them at the communications center of the Rock Island police department.
False Alarm: The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his
employees or agents which necessitates response by the Rock Island police department where an
attempted or actual burglary or holdup does not exist. Such terminology does not include, for example,
alarms caused by tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions.
Holdup Alarm System: An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.
Modified Central Station: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are
connected, where operators supervise the circuits and relay the messages by a "signal channel circuit"
to the communications center of the police department.
Police Chief: The chief of the police department of the city of Rock Island, or his authorized
representative.
Primary Trunk Line: A telephone line leading into the communications center of the police department,
that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person basis, and which line is
identified by a specific listing among the emergency numbers in a telephone directory issued by the
telephone company serving the city.
Protected Premises: That part of a building, structure or facility to which protection is afforded by an
alarm system.
Signal Channel Circuit: A telephone service that only provides a two-way telephone service from one
location to another location. In the police station, it will be used to report emergency signals from an
"answering service", a "central station" or from a "modified central station" to the police communication
center on a person to person basis.
Subscriber: A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and
thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device. (Ord., §
3(A-V), 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-28. Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of this article and does not wish to contest said
allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued for said violation, the person accused may pay to the
city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for and in full
satisfaction of said violation. (Ord. 005-2011, 2-7-2011)
Sec. 8-29. Purpose:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 185/735
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar and
holdup alarm systems, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm users; require permits therefor;
establish fees; and provide for punishment of violations of provisions as defined in this article. (Ord., § 2,
10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-30. Standards And Regulations Prescribed By Police Chief:
The police chief may prescribe reasonable minimum standards and regulations for the construction and
maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the city. All devices shall meet or exceed such
standards and regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this article. The police chief may
require inspection and approval of all alarm systems installed within the city. (Ord., § 4, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-31. Audible Alarms:
All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons outside the protected
building, structure or facility shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the police chief with the names and
telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises
during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system is activated. It is the responsibility of every
person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone numbers recorded with
the police department are kept current.
(2) No person shall install an audible alarm system which creates a sound similar to that of an
emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system.
(3) No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not automatically discontinue emitting
an audible sound within one-half (1/2) hour after it is activated. (Ord., § 5, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-32. Prohibited Systems:
(a)Automatic Dialing Devices: No alarm system using an automatic dialing device will be allowed to send
a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over a primary trunk line or direct line into the
communications center of the police department.
(b)Panic Alarm: Panic or trouble alarms used to signal any type of fight, disturbance or any other activity
other than an actual or attempted burglary or holdup will not be allowed. (Ord., § 6, 10-2-1978; Ord.
82-23, § 1, 8-9-1982)
Sec. 8-33. Automatic Dialing Device; Intermediary Services:
(a)Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a
telephone line transmitting directly to:
(1) A central station;
(2) A modified central station; or
(3) A licensed answering service.
(b)The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the police department shall be over a signal
channel circuit on a person to person basis.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 186/735
(c)The police chief may limit the number of "signal channel circuits" that come into the communications
center of the police department. (Ord., § 7, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-34. Police Alarms:
No alarm system equipment, unless police owned and operated, shall transmit any message on the
police base radio frequency. (Ord., § 8, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-35. Responsibility For Alarm Response:
Every person who has on his premises under his control or ownership an alarm system, audible or
silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm system is giving a signal, proceed within twenty (20) minutes
to the premises and render all necessary services. Provided, however, that the owner of the premises
may enter into an agreement with an alarm business to respond in his stead. Failure to respond to an
activated alarm shall be considered a violation of this provision and shall result in a penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) ($25.00 if paid within 30 days). (Ord., § 24, 10-2-1978; Ord. 91-17, § 1, 2-18-1991; Ord. 91-74,
§ 1, 6-17-1991; Ord. 93-65, § 1, 6-14-1993)
Sec. 8-36. Service Available:
Each alarm business shall have licensed alarm agents and supplies and equipment so located as to be
able to respond to a request for repair or adjustment on any alarm system that such an alarm business
sold, maintained, or inspected within four (4) hours of the request for this service. They shall respond
within four (4) hours of the request, except that if the request occurs within the hours that protected
premises is open for business or otherwise substantially occupied, repair or adjustment may be made at
any time prior to closing of the protected premises. (Ord., § 25, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-37. Liability Of City:
The city shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals received by the city are
given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the city shall not be liable
for any defects in operation of any alarm devices or signal lines system, for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, nor for the failure or neglect of any
person with a permit issued pursuant to this article, in connection with the installation and operation of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or the delaying of such signals. In the event the city finds it
necessary to disconnect a defective automatic protective device or signaling device, the city shall incur
no liability by such action. (Ord., § 27, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-38. Conflict Of Interest:
No employee of the police department nor member of any such employee's immediate family shall have
any interest, directly or indirectly, in any alarm business within the limits of the city. No such employee or
member of his immediate family shall be employed by an alarm business, subject to the provisions of
this article. (Ord., § 28, 10-2-1978)
Secs. 8-39-8-50. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 8-51. Generally:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 187/735
(a)Alarm System Permit: No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for and
receiving an alarm system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article. The permit
shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located. The police chief may issue an
appropriate identification number and establish requirements for its posting.
(b)Alarm Business Permit: No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business without
first applying for and receiving an alarm business permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of
this article. This includes a central station, modified central station and an answering service. The
permit shall be kept on the premises where the business is located. The police chief may issue an
appropriate identification number and establish requirements for its posting.
(c)Agent Permit: No person shall engage in, conduct or operate as an alarm agent without first applying
for and receiving an alarm agent permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1) Every person engaged in the business of repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, removing,
designing, selling, leasing, maintaining or installing alarm systems shall carry on his person at all
times while so engaged a valid alarm agent permit and shall display the permit to any police officer
upon request.
(2) It shall be a violation of this article for the applicant to wilfully fail to return an identification card to
the issuing agency or business upon termination of his employment with an alarm business. It shall
also be a violation of this article for the alarm business to fail to return to the police chief an
identification card issued by the police chief upon termination of the employment of the alarm agent.
(d)Direct Alarm System Permit: No direct alarm system shall be permitted within the police department
except such as is connected to an indicator panel installed in uniform consoles with uniform
operation within the communication facilities of such department pursuant to a permit issued in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1) An owner or lessee of an alarm system may authorize an alarm business or alarm agent to
connect such system to an indicator panel installed in the communication facilities of the police
department in accordance with this article, upon first obtaining a permit therefor.
(2) If the location of the communication facilities of the police department shall be changed at any
time, the cost of moving any alarm system or parts thereof shall be borne by permittees.
(3) The police chief may limit the number of such permits and may set standards and regulations
governing direct alarm systems. (Ord., § 9, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-52. Application-Form:
Applications for all permits required under this article shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police
and may request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application.
Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable requisite fee. The fee is established to cover part
of the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits. (Ord., § 10, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-53. Application-Investigation; Denial:
(a)Alarm Business; Alarm Agent: Every application for an alarm business or alarm agent permit shall
require a picture and fingerprints of the applicant. The police chief shall conduct an appropriate
investigation of the applicant to determine whether the permit shall be issued. The police chief may
require additional information of applicants which he deems necessary to conduct his investigation.
The permit shall be denied by the chief of police if:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 188/735
(1) The character or reputation of the applicant is determined to be inimical to the safety or general
welfare of the community;
(2) The applicant for the alarm business permit or alarm agent does not comply with the standards
and regulations adopted pursuant to this article;
(3) The applicant, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of a material fact in the application for a permit; or
(4) The applicant has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the past
year unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation.
(b)Alarm Systems; Direct Alarm Systems: The permit shall be denied by the police chief if the alarm
system does not comply with the standards and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. The
permit shall be issued to the person owning, using or possessing the alarm system. If the permit is
denied, the reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and provided to the applicant. If the basis
for denial can be corrected, the writing shall so state and shall explain how these corrections may be
made and set a reasonable time limit for making such corrections. The notice of denial shall inform
the applicant that he may appeal the denial and set forth the procedure for appeal. (Ord., § 15, 10-2-
1978)
Sec. 8-54. Application-Notice Of Information Change:
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information requested by this article, the applicant or
permittee shall give written notice thereof to the services division of the police department within fifteen
(15) days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this article if such hearing is conducted
before the notice has been given. (Ord., § 11, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-55. Fees:
(a)Permit fees under this article shall be paid to the city collector. Said fees are as follows:
(1) For an alarm system permit, sixty dollars ($60.00).
(2) For an alarm business, central station, modified central station or telephone answering system
permit, one hundred dollars ($100.00) annual fee payable in advance of July 1 of each year.
(b)The city reserves the right to own all indicator panels and accessory equipment for direct alarm
systems located within the station. In such case, each permittee, in addition to the annual permit fee,
shall pay an initial installation fee and an annual user fee, as the same may be established by
ordinance, and uniformly applied to cover the cost of the maintenance of such facilities. In the event
the city decides not to own the equipment within the station, but to provide for its installation and
maintenance by a third party, it shall establish and regulate reasonable fees and charges which may
be charged permittees. All such fees provided for in subsection (a)(1) of this section to be charged by
the city shall be payable on the date of installation and shall cover the system until the resident or
occupant changes.
(c)Regardless of the status of an alarm permit, the members of the police department will always
respond as promptly and effectively as possible to any and all alarm actuations. However, there will
be a service charge for each false alarm that the police department responds to while the alarm
permit is under suspension or revocation. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed for
each false burglary alarm and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed for each false
holdup alarm that the police department responds to during this period. This service charge will be
deposited into the city's general citizens' fund. This service charge will not exempt the permit holder
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 189/735
from the violation penalty adopted pursuant to this article. (Ord., §§ 12, 16, 10-2-1978; Ord. 82-23, §
2, 8-9-1982; Ord. 87-34, §§ 8, 9, 4-6-1987; Ord. 91-17, §§ 2, 3, 2-18-1991; Ord. 91-74, §§ 2, 3, 6-17-
1991; Ord. 35-2003, § 1, 4-28-2003; Ord. 012-2009, § 1, 2-2-2009)
Sec. 8-56. Failure To Pay Ad Valorem Taxes:
No permit shall be issued or renewed pursuant to this article if any ad valorem taxes upon any real
property or personal property used directly or indirectly in connection with the proposed business or
service are delinquent. A receipt of payment of ad valorem taxes shall be provided for inspection to the
city clerk at the time of issue or renewal of a permit. Where a permit has been issued and ad valorem
taxes on such property thereafter become delinquent, the permit shall be subject to cancellation
immediately without notice and without right of appeal. (Ord., § 26, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-57. Issuance:
Upon approval by the chief of police of applications for a permit or for renewal thereof, the chief shall
endorse his approval thereon and transmit the application to the city clerk, who shall be responsible for
the issuance of such permit or renewal thereof. (Ord., § 14, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-58. Suspension Or Revocation-Violation Of Article:
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended by the police chief for violation of any of the
provisions of this article. (Ord., §§ 16, 17, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-59. Suspension Or Revocation-Additional Grounds:
The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a permit issued under this
article:
(1) Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a subscriber, his employee or agent in a
situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in progress;
(2) Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required
to be filed with any city agency;
(3) Where any alarm business permittee or alarm agent is charged with a crime involving moral
turpitude or where the character, reputation or moral integrity of the permit holder or his employee is
determined inimical to public safety or the general welfare of the community;
(4) Where the permittee has had a similar type permit previously revoked for good cause within the
past year, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances since the date of
revocation; or
(5) Where an alarm system, while under a valid permit, actuates excessive false alarms, it shall
constitute a public nuisance. There shall be no penalty for the first two (2) false alarms by the system
in any one calendar year. Thereafter, there shall be a penalty for the third false alarm violation in said
year in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) each or seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid
within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation. For any additional false alarms in said year,
there shall be a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) each or one hundred dollars ($100.00) if
paid within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the citation. (Ord., § 16, 10-2-1978; Ord. 91-17, § 5, 2-
18-1991; Ord. 91-74, § 5, 6-17-1991; Ord. 93-102, § 1, 11-15-1993; Ord. 67-00, § 1, 9-11-2000; Ord.
01-2003, § 1, 1-6-2003)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 190/735
Sec. 8-60. Suspension Or Revocation-Procedure:
(a)The police chief, in the case of suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written order of
suspension which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The order shall be effective
immediately if personally served, or forty eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in the
course of transmission in the United States postal service. Immediately upon such an order
becoming effective, the permittee shall discontinue the use of any alarm system requiring a permit
under this article and cease all operations conducted under the authority of any permit issued
pursuant to this article.
(b)The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the order of suspension becomes
effective unless the permittee files an appeal of the order of suspension in the manner set forth in this
article. Where an appeal is filed, the order of suspension shall be stayed, pending a final
determination of the appeal. The suspension shall become a revocation if the decision of the city
manager upholds the suspension, unless said decision is overruled by the city council. The
suspension shall be dissolved immediately if the decision of the city manager reverses the
suspension. (Ord., §§ 18, 19, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-61. Appeal Procedure:
(a)The permittee shall have a period of ten (10) days after the issuance of a ticket in order to present to
the chief of police or his designee as to the circumstances surrounding the incident which the
permittee considers to be beyond the control of the permittee or its alarm agent. The chief shall have
the authority to dismiss the ticket upon good cause shown.
(b)Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days shall constitute a waiver of appellant's
right to review, but the city manager, in his discretion, may nevertheless grant such review.
(c)If the city manager affirms the decision of the chief of police, the appellant may have a hearing before
the city council on said matter. If the city manager does not approve the decision of the chief, he shall
transmit this decision to the chief, who will comply with same. (Ord., §§ 21-23, 10-2-1978; Ord. 91-
17, § 6, 2-18-1991; Ord. 91-74, § 6, 6-17-1991)
Sec. 8-62. Surrender Of Permit:
If any permit is revoked pursuant to this article, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the services
division of the police department. (Ord., § 20, 10-2-1978)
Sec. 8-63. Renewal:
(a)Alarm business permits and alarm agent permits issued pursuant to this article shall expire annually
on June 30. All applications for renewal of such permits shall be filed with the chief of police on forms
provided for that purpose. The fee for renewal of each permit required hereunder shall be the same
as the initial permit fee and shall be paid to the city collector prior to the time the permit is issued.
(b)Alarm system permits need not be renewed. Any modifications of or additions to an alarm system will
require a new permit and may require an inspection as determined by the chief. (Ord., § 13, 10-2-
1978; Ord. 91-17, § 4, 2-18-1991; Ord. 91-74, § 4, 6-17-1991)
DIVISION 3. FIRE ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS, AND USERS
Sec. 8-64. Title:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 191/735
This division shall be known and may be cited as the ROCK ISLAND CITY ORDINANCE REGULATING
FIRE ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS, AND USERS . (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-65. Definitions:
Alarm Agent: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose
duties include selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing
on or in any building, structure or facility, any alarm system. Exemption: The provisions of this division do
not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme for
physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
Alarm Business: The business by any individual, partnership or corporation or other entity of selling,
leasing, maintaining, inspecting, servicing, repairing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any
building, structure or facility. Exemption: Said definition shall not apply to persons engaged solely in the
manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a fixed location, and who do not install, alter,
maintain, service or plan the alarm system for a specific location.
Alarm System: Any mechanic or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of fire or its
byproducts in a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of a fire hazard within a building,
structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated
and to which the fire department personnel are expected to respond. In this division, the term "alarm
system" shall include the terms "audible alarm", "automatic dialing device" and "fire alarm system" as
those terms are hereinafter defined. Exemption: The provisions of this division shall not apply to those
detection devices and systems that are not monitored by an alarm business.
Answering Service: A telephone answering business providing among its services receiving, on a
continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter
immediately relaying the message by live voice over a signal channel circuit to the communications
center of the police and fire departments.
Appellant: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this division.
Audible Alarm: A device designed for the detection of fire or its byproducts on premises, which
generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated. This audible alarm may or may not be
combined with a method of transmitting a signal to a remote point. Exemption: The provisions of this
division are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
Automatic Dialing Device: An alarm system, which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by
direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of
the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
Central Station System: A system or group of systems, usually operated from its customers by a person,
in which the operations of protected circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and
supervised from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times, that
have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message including the relaying of
messages by a signal channel circuit to the communications center of the police and fire departments.
City: The city of Rock Island or its authorized employees or agents.
False Alarm: The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his
employees or agents which necessitates response by the Rock Island fire department where an actual
fire or emergency does not exist. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by
tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 192/735
Fire Chief: The chief of the fire department of the city of Rock Island, or his authorized representative.
Modified Central Station: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are
connected, where operators supervise the circuits and relay the message by a "signal channel circuit" to
the communications center of the police and fire departments.
Nuisance Alarm: An alarm caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of
proper maintenance.
Primary Trunk Line: A telephone line leading into the communications center of the police and fire
departments, that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person basis, and which
line is identified by a specific listing among the emergency numbers in a telephone directory issued by
the telephone company serving the city.
Protected Premises: That part of a building, structure or facility to which protection is afforded by an
alarm system.
Signal Channel Circuit: A telephone service that only provides a two-way telephone service from one
location to another location.
Subscriber: A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm signaling system and
thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device. (Ord. 37-
2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-66. Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this division, unless otherwise provided, shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). In the event a person is issued a notice of a violation of this division and does not wish
to contest said allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued for said violation, the person accused
may pay to the city finance office a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction
of said violation. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-67. Purpose:
The purpose of this division is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to fire alarm
systems, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm users and to provide for punishment of violations of
the provisions of this division. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-68. Standards And Regulations Enforced By Fire Chief:
The fire chief shall enforce reasonable minimum standards and regulations for the construction and
maintenance of all fire alarm systems installed within the city as provided in NFPA 72 (the national fire
alarm code handbook). All devices shall meet or exceed such standards, regulations and adopted codes
before their operation is allowed within the city. The fire chief may require inspection and approval of all
alarm systems installed within the city. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-69. Audible Alarms:
All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons outside the protected
building, structure or facility shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the fire chief with the names and
telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises
during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system is activated. It is the responsibility of every
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 193/735
person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone numbers recorded with
the fire department are kept current.
(2) No person shall install an audible alarm system, which creates a sound similar to that of an
emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-70. Prohibited Systems:
(a)Automatic Dialing Devices: No alarm system using an automatic dialing device will be allowed to send
a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over a primary trunk line or direct line into the
communications center of the police and fire departments.
(b)Panic Alarm: Panic or trouble alarms used to signal the need for help, medical assistance or any
other activity other than an actual fire will be allowed. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-71. Automatic Dialing Device; Intermediary Services:
(a)Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a
telephone line transmitting directly to:
(1) A central station;
(2) A modified central station; or
(3) A licensed answering service.
(b)The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the fire department shall be over a signal
channel circuit to the communications center of the police and fire departments on a person to
person basis.
(c)The police and fire chiefs may limit the number of "signal channel circuits" that come into the
communications center of the police and fire departments. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-72. Fire Alarms:
No alarm system equipment, unless city owned and operated, shall transmit any message on the fire
base radio frequency. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-73. Responsibility For Alarm Response:
Every person who has on his premises under his control or ownership an alarm system, audible or
silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm system is giving a signal, proceed within twenty (20) minutes
to the premises and render all necessary services, provided, however, that the owner of the premises
may enter into an agreement with an alarm business to respond in his stead.
(1) Failure to respond to notification of an activated alarm shall be considered a violation of this
provision and shall result in a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(2) The members of the fire department shall respond as promptly as possible to any and all alarm
actuations. However, there will be a service charge for excessive false alarms or nuisance alarms to
which the fire department is required to respond. There shall be no penalty for the first false alarm by
the system in any one fiscal year. Thereafter there shall be a penalty for each false alarm in said
fiscal year in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 194/735
Sec. 8-74. Service Available:
Each alarm business shall have licensed alarm agents and supplies and equipment so located as to be
able to respond to a request for repair or adjustment on any alarm system that such an alarm business
sold, maintained, or inspected within four (4) hours of the request for this service. They shall respond
within four (4) hours of the request, except that if the request occurs within the hours that the protected
premises is open for business or otherwise substantially occupied, repair or adjustment may be made at
any time prior to closing of the protected premises. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-75. Permits:
There shall be no permit required of any alarm businesses, alarm agents or subscribers for the purposes
of this division. The provisions of this division shall not affect the provisions of any other article within the
code of ordinances of the city of Rock Island and the required permitting as called for under any other
provisions contained therein. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-76. Notice Of Information Change:
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information requested by this division, the
subscriber shall give written notice thereof to the fire prevention division of the fire department within
fifteen (15) days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this division if such hearing is
conducted before the notice has been given. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Sec. 8-77. Appeals Procedure:
(a)The appellant shall have a period of ten (10) days after the issuance of a complaint for violation in
order to present to the chief of the fire department or his designee as to the circumstances
surrounding the incident, which the appellant considers to be beyond the control of the system user
or its alarm agent. The chief shall have the authority to dismiss the complaint of violation upon good
cause shown.
(b)Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days shall constitute a waiver of appellant's
right to review, but the city manager, in his discretion, may nevertheless grant such review.
(c)If the city manager affirms the decision of the chief of the fire department, the appellant may have a
hearing before the code hearing division (see section 4-148 of this code) on said matter. If the city
manager does not approve the decision of the chief, he shall transmit this decision to the chief, who
will comply with same. (Ord. 37-2002, § 1, 4-22-2002)
Secs. 8-78-8-80. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. AMUSEMENT LICENSES 1, 2
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-81. Required:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, conduct, manage or exhibit for gain, within the City, any
circus, carnival, theater, game or amusement machine where money is charged directly or indirectly for
admission to see, hear or operate the same, unless a license for the same shall have first been obtained
from the City. Provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any public entertainment
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 195/735
given, the proceeds of which are for the benefit of any religious, charitable or educational institution
located in the City. (1963 Code art. 6-2(A); Ord. 16-2000, 3-13-2000)
Sec. 8-82. Issuance:
A license under this division may be issued by the City Clerk upon application and the payment to the
City Finance Department of such sum as the Council may fix in each case, except where the amount of
the license fee is specifically designated herein. (1963 Code art. 6-2(A); Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-83. Scope; Duration; Maintenance Of Order:
Every license issued under this division shall specify the object and length of time for which it is issued.
It shall be the duty of the person licensed to keep good order about his place of entertainment. (1963
Code art. 6-2(A))
Sec. 8-84. Circuses, Carnivals, Etc.:
(a)For each circus, carnival or like exhibition, the license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
day.
(b)Proprietors of theaters in the City may be licensed for one year, upon the payment to the City Finance
Department as follows:
(1) is less than 500 Where the seating capacity $25.00
(2) is 500 to 1,000 Where the seating capacity 50.00
(3) is over 1,000 Where the seating capacity 75.00
(1963 Code art. 6-2(A); Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991; Ord. 92-47, 3-23-1992; Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-85. Automatic Musical Instrument:
(Rep. by Ord. 16-2000, 3-13-2000)
Sec. 8-86. Youth Dance License:
(a)Definition; License Required: No person, firm or corporation, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer
or agent, shall operate or permit to be operated on any premises, including any enclosed or
unenclosed structure, and the surrounding premises used for parking or any activity used for the
dancing operation in the City for a dance club where an admission is charged and where any of the
participants are under the age of twenty one (21) without first obtaining a license for use of said
premises for said purposes. Only patrons twenty (20) years of age or younger are allowed on all
premises during operating hours unless they are employees of said club, or a parent or legal
guardian of a patron. Nonprofit organizations shall be excluded upon proof of tax exemption.
(b)Application: To obtain a youth dance license, the applicant shall file an application with the City Clerk
upon a form provided by said Clerk, which shall contain, among other information, a petition signed
by a majority of the property owners, representing at least a majority of the frontage within three
hundred feet (300') in each direction of the proposed location on both sides of the street on which the
proposed location shall front, signifying their willingness to have a license issued hereunder;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 196/735
providing that in any case if the property owners of at least forty feet (40') of the property immediately
adjacent to or abutting on any side of the proposed location shall not appear as signers on said
petition, no license shall be issued hereunder. The approval requirement of property owners and/or
abutting owners can be waived under the procedure set forth in subsection (j) of this section.
(c)Investigation: The City Clerk upon receipt of such application shall:
(1) Cause the Police Department to investigate all the statements contained in each application to
determine if the matters and things therein are true.
(2) Cause the City's building inspectors, health inspectors and Fire Department to inspect the
proposed licensed premises to determine that said premises comply with all City codes and are safe
for occupancy as a dance club.
(3) If upon investigation the City Clerk shall be satisfied that the matters and things therein contained
in said application are true, and that the applicant has complied with all the requirements thereof, and
that the premises to be licensed has complied with all City codes and is safe for occupancy, she shall
approve the same and upon receipt by the City Collector of the required license fee, issue a license
in accordance with the provisions herein.
(d)Fee: An annual license fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall be
paid to the City Clerk. No license issued herein shall be transferable or refunded.
(e)Term Of License: Youth dance licenses shall be in effect for a term of one year and issued on May 1
of each year, expiring April 30 of the next year. Prior to the reissuance of a license for an ensuing
year, the requirements of investigation as set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall again be
complied with by said licensee.
(f)Display Of License: Any person receiving a youth dance license under the provisions of this section
shall display said license prominently in the licensed premises.
(g)Enforcement: The licensee or agent shall permit any police officer or other official of the City free and
unrestricted access to the licensed premises for the purposes of inspecting the same.
(h)Violations And Penalties: The Chief of Police may suspend, or revoke any youth dance license
granted hereunder if, the operation of the licensed premises is found to be detrimental to the health
or safety of the neighborhood, or if the licensee has been found to be guilty of the violation of any
City ordinance or State law in the operation of the licensed premises. In addition thereto the Chief of
Police may in lieu of a suspension or revocation, impose a fine of up to one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) for any violation of this section or the laws of the State of Illinois.
In addition to all other requirements for operation of a youth dance club contained herein, no licensee
hereunder shall allow any loitering, gathering of unruly individuals or crowds, or any unlawful or
dangerous behavior whether inside of the premises or in any parking lot or other adjacent areas
serving the premises; and the licensee shall have the primary responsibility of hiring adequate
numbers of supervisory personnel as identified in subsection (m) of this section, and taking other
appropriate measures to observe compliance with this subsection. In the event of a violation of the
law has taken place, the licensee or his agents shall immediately notify the Police Department.
(i)Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief to suspend, fine or revoke a license
under this article shall have the right of appeal. An appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after
notice of revocation by filing with the city manager a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis
for the appeal. Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days shall constitute a
waiver of appellant's right to review, but the city manager, in his discretion, may nevertheless grant
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 197/735
such review. If the city manager does not approve the decision of the chief, he shall transmit his
decision to the chief, who will comply with same.
(j)Waiver Of Approval Of Signature Requirement: The city council may waive the approval requirements
relating to property owners and/or adjacent owners set forth in subsection (b) of this section after
holding a public hearing concerning said matter at the request of an applicant for a youth dance
license. In the event the city council determines that it is in the best interest of the city that said
waiver be granted then, in that event, the city council shall take official action thereon and refer said
matter to the city clerk, who then may issue said license if all other requirements for the issuance of
said license have been complied with.
(k)Procedure For Waiver Of Approval: Any person that wants a waiver of approval shall submit an
appeal in writing to the city clerk who will determine the date of the public hearing in conjunction with
the city council. After said date is determined, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) A letter will be mailed to all adjacent property owners whose signatures would normally be
required for the approval of a youth dance license application and said letter shall contain the name
of the person appealing the decision, the date of the public hearing, and instructions for the recipients
to file written objections, if any, and/or attend the public hearing in person. These letters will be
signed and mailed by the city clerk who will also be the designated person to receive any written
responses relating to the appeal process.
(2) The notice of appeal letters described above shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least two (2)
weeks prior to the public hearing date and a copy of said letter shall be furnished to the applicant.
(3) The city clerk shall provide the city council with a list of persons to whom the letters are
addressed, along with a copy of the form letter which was mailed to said persons. The clerk shall
also provide a copy of the written appeal and information concerning the youth dance license
requested and the result of compliance efforts made by the applicant to obtain the required property
owner's signature as set forth in this section. The city clerk, upon receipt of written objection(s) to
appeal, if any are received, shall furnish copies of said written objection(s) to the city council, the
applicant, and the Rock Island police department.
(4) The public hearing, on an appeal, will be held during a regular city council meeting using the
same procedures at said meeting as followed by other public hearings held in said council.
(5) At the completion of the public hearing, the city council will then consider a motion as to whether
or not to make a recommendation to the city clerk to waive the signature requirement of subsection
(b) of this section.
(l)Hours Of Operation: All premises licensed under the provisions of this section shall be closed between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. each day. It shall be the obligation of
the owner or operator of said youth dance facility to clear all patrons from the premises fifteen (15)
minutes after closing.
(m)Supervision: It shall be the obligation of the owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent of said youth
dance facility offering a dance to minors under the age of twenty one (21) to provide one person
twenty five (25) years or older per each twenty (20) patrons to ensure proper supervision of said
premises. The person or persons provided for supervision shall not be inclusive of anyone employed
to dispense food, beverages, or other operational duties. All adults who will be on site in the capacity
of security or supervisory personnel shall wear clothing which identifies them as security or
supervisory personnel. The owners shall also provide to the city clerk the names and addresses of
any managers who will be on the premises during the club's hours of operation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 198/735
(n)Curfew: The owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent of any youth dance facility shall cause any
minor patrons to be removed from said premises one-half (1/2) hour prior to curfew hours regulated
by state law. For the purposes of this section, "curfew" shall be defined as: "It is unlawful for a person
less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place,
street, or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible companion at least twenty-one (21) years of age approved by a parent
or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform: (1) Between 12:01 A.M. and
6:00 A.M., Saturday. (2) Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M., Sunday. (3) Between 11:00 P.M. on
Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day". It is unlawful for a parent, legal
guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate this section.
(o)Insurance: All owners of a licensed youth dance club shall be required to carry liability insurance with
limits of liability in an amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The city of Rock
Island, Illinois, must be named as an additional insured under said policy and identified on the
owners' certificate of insurance. Proof of insurance under these conditions is a prerequisite for the
issuance or renewal of any youth dance club license. (Ord. 084-2010, 12-20-2010)
Secs. 8-87-8-95. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. GAMES 1
Sec. 8-96. License-Required:
No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, keep for public use or let for hire, gain or profit any
coin operated amusement or game machine, including, but not limited to, pool table, dart game, video
game, kiddie ride, video gaming terminal, without a license issued by the city as set forth in this division.
(Ord. 004-2010, § 1, 1-18-2010)
Sec. 8-97. License - Duration; Fee:
(a)A license for each game or device set forth in section 8-96 of this division may be granted for the term
of the license year in which the same is granted or any unexpired portion thereof upon payment by
the licensee to the City Clerk for the use of the City the following license fees: for each coin operated
amusement or game machine, sixty five dollars ($65.00) and for each video gaming terminal, two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). No license shall be issued for less than one year, and in no case shall
any portion of the license fee be repaid to the licensee. The license issued hereunder shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in the establishment for which it is issued.
(1) Fine; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of these sections shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) upon the first violation within the license year. Upon each
subsequent violation within the same license year, a fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) will be
imposed. For any noncompliance incurred within the license year, a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00)
per day will be imposed beginning June 1 of the license year until such time as licensee has
complied with these provisions.
(2) Payment Of Penalty: In the event a person is accused of a first violation within the license year
and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation,
then the person so accused may, within seven (7) days of the notice of violation, pay to the City at
police headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation.
(b)The annual license fee for bowling alleys shall be as follows:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 199/735
1 - 25 lanes $250.00
26 - 50 lanes 500.00
51 or more lanes 750.00
(c)No license for any video gaming terminal shall be issued to any applicant until and unless the
applicant provides information to the satisfaction of the Liquor Commissioner demonstrating that the
applicant's proceeds from video gaming machines are secondary to the applicant's combined
proceeds from alcohol and food sales for the location at which the applicant is making application for
a video gaming license or video gaming licenses. The final determination on whether the applicant
has satisfied this requirement rests with the Liquor Commissioner. This subsection shall only apply to
new gaming licenses issued after the effective date hereof. It shall not affect any licensed
establishments seeking to renew gaming licenses which were acquired prior to the date hereof.
No more than twenty one (21) total licenses for video gaming establishments including licenses in
existence at the time of passage of this section shall be in existence at any time. Once twenty one
(21) active licenses are in existence, no new licenses shall be issued unless and until the number of
licenses falls below twenty one (21). (Ord. 070-2018, 12-10-2018)
Sec. 8-98. Pool Halls:
(a)Definition; License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or manage a pool hall in
the city without having first secured a license to do so from said city. A "pool hall" for the purposes of
this section, shall be defined as any place or establishment that has on its premises for public use, or
let for hire, one or more pool tables, billiard tables or bank pool tables. Any person who has a liquor
license in the city may have two (2) such tables on its premises without complying with the
requirements of this section.
(b)Application: To obtain a pool hall license, the applicant shall file an application therefor with the city
clerk upon a form provided by said clerk. Said application form shall contain, among other
information, a statement of whether or not the property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the
front door of the proposed location of the pool hall in either direction and on both sides of the street,
object to the pool hall. The city clerk, upon receipt of a properly completed application, shall refer
same to the city council for determination of the issuance of said license.
(c)Fee: An annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for a pool hall license.
(d)Term Of License: Pool hall licenses shall be in effect for a term of one year and issued on May 1 of
each year.
(e)Display Of License: Any person receiving a pool hall license under the provisions of this section shall
display said license prominently in the licensed premises.
(f)Revocation Of License: The city council may revoke any pool hall license granted hereunder if, after a
hearing before said council, the operation of the licensed premises is found to be detrimental to the
health or safety of the neighborhood, or if the licensee has been found to be guilty of the violation of
any city ordinance or state law in the operation of the licensed premises.
(g)Hours Of Operation: All premises licensed under the provisions of this section shall be closed
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. each day. Liquor licensees
are exempt from this provision based on their individual license option. (1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(H);
Ord., § 1, 6-2-1980; Ord. 91-14, § 10, 2-11-1991; Ord. 16-2000, §§ 5, 6, 3-13-2000)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 200/735
Sec. 8-99. Video Games:
(Rep. by Ord. 16-2000, § 8, 3-13-2000)
Secs. 8-100 - 8-110. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. AUCTIONEERS 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-111. Definitions:
As used in this article:
Auctioneer : Includes any person, firm, association or corporation that shall engage in the conducting
of auction sales or crying off property at auction (except those who act by virtue of legal process).
The term "auctioneer" includes those who conduct an auction sale or cry off their own property at
auction, as well as those who conduct a sale of, or cry off, the property of others.
Legal Process : Any writ, process or order of any kind issued out of any court.
Property : Includes personal property of every kind but not real property, except where a different
meaning is specified.
Selling At Auction : All sales of property within the city of Rock Island by public outcry to the highest
bidder, as well as to the public offer of property at a price beyond its value, then lowering the price, or
increasing the number of articles till someone accepts the property offered as a purchase. (1963
Code, ch. VI, art. II(B))
Sec. 8-112. Penalties:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or shall in any particular wilfully fail or refuse to
comply with any of its terms, conditions or requirements, where no fine is otherwise particularly provided
for herein, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(B))
Sec. 8-113. Excluded Sales:
The provisions of this article shall not extend to any officer or person executing any process or order of
any court in this state, selling any property or effects directed by law to be sold at public vendue, auction
or outcry; nor shall this article apply to property or effects of any deceased person when sold by order of
the executor or administrator of such person; nor to the property and effects of any bankrupt or insolvent
debtor when sold by order of any court of competent jurisdiction; nor to apply or in any way affect regular
merchants of the city in the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise in their stores, by retail, wholesale
or in any other manner, except by auction; nor to apply or in any way to affect the sale of household
furniture at the dwelling of the owner, or real estate sold on the premises; nor to any sale had by virtue of
any bona fide mortgage or chattel mortgage. (1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(B))
Sec. 8-114. Hours Of Sale:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 201/735
No auctioneer shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise between the hours of five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on weekdays, and no selling at auction is permitted at
any time on Sundays; provided that the mayor and city council upon evidence that the peace and quiet
of the neighborhood will not be disturbed may allow auction sales between the hours of five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on weekdays, and for certain designated hours on Sundays.
(1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(B); Ord., § 2, 4-10-1972; Ord., § 1, 6-25-1973)
Sec. 8-115. Substitution Of Sale Articles:
Any auctioneer who shall exhibit and offer for sale any article, and induce its purchase by any bidder,
and who shall afterwards substitute any article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder,
shall forfeit his license and be liable to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00). (1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(B))
Sec. 8-116. False Bids:
No person shall act as a bidder or what is commonly known as a "capper", "booster" or "shiller" at any
auction or place regulated by this article, or offer or make any false bid to buy or pretend to buy any
article sold or offered for sale at any auction. (1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(B))
Sec. 8-117. Fraudulent presentations.
Any auctioneer or person being present when any article of property is offered for sale, who shall
knowingly, with intent to induce any person or persons to purchase the same or any part thereof, make
any false representation or statement as to the ownership of, or the character or quality of the article or
articles so offered for sale, or as to the poverty or circumstances of the owner or pretended owner of
such article or articles, shall, on conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and if such false representation is made by such
auctioneer, or by any other person with such auctioneer's knowledge and consent or connivance, the
license of such auctioneer shall be forfeited.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 17)
Sec. 8-118. Advertising.
No bellman or crier, nor any drum or fife or other instrument of music, nor any show signal, or means of
attracting the attention of the public, other than a sign or flag, shall be employed or suffered or permitted
to be used in connection with any auction sale at or near any place of such sale or at or near any auction
room.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 19)
Sec. 8-119. Sale book.
At every auction sale within the city there shall be kept a sale book in which each purchaser shall
immediately after making a purchase sign his true name and address, opposite which the auctioneer
shall write the name of the article purchased as the same appears upon said tag and the sale price
thereof, and said article shall be delivered to said purchaser with said tag intact and attached thereto.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 20)
Secs. 8-120--8-130. Reserved.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 202/735
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 8-131. Exceptions.
Sections 8-134--8-138 shall not apply to an auction or livestock, used household furniture, used farm
machinery or used cars.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 22)
Sec. 8-132. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exercise the business or trade of an auctioneer, or sell or offer for
sale by way of public vendue, auction or outcry, within the city, any goods, wares, merchandise or other
effects whatsoever, without first having obtained a license and executed a bond to the city, as provided
in this division.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 2)
State law reference--Authority of city to license auctioneers, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-42-1.
Sec. 8-133. Application--Generally.
An application for a license under this article shall be verified, stating the name of the applicant; his
residence; the street and number of the proposed place of sale; the length of time for which the license
is desired and the date to begin; whether the applicant has been previously engaged in a like or similar
business; and the name of the owner or owners of the merchandise to be auctioned.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 3)
Sec. 8-134. Same--Inventory.
The application shall be accompanied by a full and complete inventory of the stock or merchandise to be
sold. Three (3) copies of such inventory shall be so furnished. The articles enumerated in said inventory
shall be numbered, and tags corresponding to the numbers so shown in the inventory shall be placed on
each article when offered for sale. No additional stock or merchandise (other than so inventoried) shall
be offered for sale or auctioned at any auction held under any license granted upon such application.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 4)
Sec. 8-135. Same--Filing.
The application and inventory required in this division shall be filed with the city clerk, by whom any
license to be issued hereunder shall be authorized in accordance with section 8-140, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the granting of the license. (Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 5)
Sec. 8-136. Appointment of inspectors.
The mayor may, upon the ding of an application under this division, appoint an inspector or inspectors,
not to exceed three (3) in number, accordingly as the requirements of the situation seem to demand,
said inspector or inspectors to be residents of the city and who may be city officials or employees or
otherwise, whose duty it shall be to inspect and investigate said inventory submitted with said application
as aforesaid, and the stock of goods or merchandise offered for sale thereunder, and who shall either
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 203/735
singly or as a body, as directed by the mayor, attend the auction sales held under the license when
issued, and report to the mayor whether any goods not listed in the inventory had been offered for sale,
and whether the other requirements of this article are being complied with. Such inspector or inspectors
attending any auction sale shall have with them a copy or copies of the inventory as originally furnished
with the application, and shall check or compare each article as offered for sale with the inventory. For
the purpose of such inspection said inspector or inspectors shall have access to the place where such
sale is to be held at any time prior to the opening of any such sale. Such inspector or inspectors shall not
receive any compensation for duties performed hereunder prior to the opening of any such sale, but
shall each be compensated at a rate determined from time to time by the city council for attendance at
any sale held under any license granted hereunder. Provided, however, that no city employee attending
any such sale hereunder shall be entitled to or receive any extra compensation above his regular salary
or wage.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 6)
Sec. 8-137. Sale of uninventoried goods.
Any licensee under this article who offers for sale at any auction sale any goods or merchandise not
included in the inventory filed with the application for the license for such sale, shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for every
such offence. Upon such conviction, the mayor shall immediately declare the license forfeited, and no
further sales shall be held thereunder. No refund shall be made to any licensee on account of any
license paid in advance upon any such conviction and forfeiture of the license. No appeal taken from any
conviction hereunder shall stay any such forfeiture so declared pending the final determination of such
appeal.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 7)
Sec. 8-138. Period of ownership.
No merchandise shall be sold by any auctioneer licensed under this article, which has not been the
property of said auctioneer for a period of at least thirty (30) days and which has not been stored or kept
at the location at which the auction is to be held, as set out in the application, for a similar period of thirty
(30) days next preceding the filing of said application, or if the property to be sold is owned by a person
other than the auctioneer, said property must have been owned by said person for a similar period of
time next preceding the filing of said application for auctioneer's license.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 8)
Sec. 8-139. Bond.
No person shall receive a license to sell goods at auction in the city until he shall first have executed to
the city a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with corporate surety approved by
the city clerk, conditioned for the strict observance of all ordinances of the city respecting auctions and
auctioneers and for the indemnification of any purchaser at such public auction who suffers any loss by
reason of misrepresentation at such auction. The above-mentioned bond shall be kept in full force and
effect during the period for which the license is granted, and shall in addition thereto be kept in full force
and effect for thirty (30) days after the expiration date of such license.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 10)
Sec. 8-140. Fee.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 204/735
Any person may become an auctioneer and be licensed to sell personal property at public auction in this
city upon complying with the provisions of this division relating to the filing of an inventory and bond in
the time and manner herein prescribed, and the payment to the city collector of the sum of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each day said license is in force, or the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a
yearly license.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 11; Ord. of 2-23-76, § 1)
Sec. 8-141. Transfer.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable or be held to authorize any
person other than the one named therein to sell or cry goods at auction. In no case shall any license be
issued to cover more than one place of business or to authorize auction sales at any place of business
other than the one set out in the application for license. The license shall in all cases be posted in a
conspicuous place where the sale is to be held.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(B), § 12; Ord. of 4-10-72, § 1)
Secs. 8-142--8-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. BENCHES
Sec. 8-156. Installation.
It shall be lawful for any person to install or maintain public benches upon public property for the
accommodation of any person or persons awaiting transportation and to place advertising matters and
signs thereon.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 1)
Sec. 8-157. Size.
No bench, as provided for in this article, shall be more than forty-two (42) inches high nor more than
thirty (30) inches wide, nor more than seven (7) feet long. No bench shall carry any advertising or sign
containing any pictures or words that would be deemed obscene under Ill. Rev. Stat. Chapter 38, section
11-20, and only such advertising matter shall be placed thereon as is ordinarily displayed by other
advertising media. No advertisement or sign on any such bench shall mislead or distract traffic.
Advertising shall be displayed only on the front and rear surfaces of the backrest of said benches. All
benches shall be kept in a safe and sightly condition and shall be inspected periodically by the owner
thereof. All of such benches shall be installed in a location approved by the city council.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 4)
Sec. 8-158. License--Required.
No bench or benches shall be installed or maintained under this article without the consent of the city
council therefor. Application for the installation and maintenance of such bench or benches shall give the
name of the applicant, the location where the proposed bench or benches will be installed and such
other information as said city council shall require. All such applications shall be referred to the chief
building inspector and the director of public works for investigation, and they shall report to the city
council their recommendation of such applications.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 205/735
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 2)
Sec. 8-159. Same--Fee.
The annual license fee for the installation of each bench under this article shall be five dollars ($5.00),
payable to the city collector on May 1 of each year. Any license issued for such bench for a term of six
(6) months or less shall be two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50). All such licenses are issued subject to and
with the express agreement of the licensees that any or all of such licenses may be summarily revoked
by the city council in its sole discretion.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 6)
Sec. 8-160. Bond.
Every applicant under this article, when the license for the installation of a bench or benches shall be
issued, shall file with the city clerk a public liability bond, with suitable sureties thereon, to save and keep
harmless the city from any and all damages of any kind or nature through the installation and
maintenance of said bench or benches. The amount of such bond for death, personal injury or property
damage shall be determined by said city council.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 3)
Sec. 8-161. Removal.
The city council reserves the right to order the removal of any benches, in its sole discretion, at any time
when the interests of the public are best served by the removal of same. If any such bench is ordered
removed by said city council, no remission of the license fees for the unexpired portion of the license
year shall be made.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(C), § 5)
Secs. 8-162--8-175. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 1
Sec. 8-176. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations
shall have the meaning given in this section:
CATV: A "community antenna television system" as hereinafter defined.
City: The City of Rock Island, a municipal corporation of the State of Illinois, in its present incorporated
form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.
Community antenna television system: A system of antennas, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides or
other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing
television or frequency-modulation radio service by cable or through its facilities as contemplated in this
article. CATV shall not mean or include the transmission of any special program or event for which a
separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to
as "pay television."
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 206/735
Council: The present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of
the city.
Grantee: The person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as described in this article, is
granted by the council under this article, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person,
firm or corporation.
Gross annual receipts: Any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any
contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in
payment for television or frequency-modulation radio signals or service received within the city, and also
shall include any other revenues received by a grantee from the sale of advertising or any other source.
"Gross annual receipts" shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed
directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the
grantee for such governmental unit.
Street: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane,
path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the city.
Subscriber: Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee. (Ord. of 9-28-
70, § 1(a--h))
State law reference--"Community antenna television system" defined, Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-42-11.
Sec. 8-177. Franchise to operate.
A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of
the city may be granted by the council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or
not, who offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of
this article.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-178. Uses permitted by grantee.
(a)Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall authorize and permit the grantee
to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose
to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon,
across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and
appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or
properties rented or leased from other persons, including but not limited to any public utility or other
grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. Any franchise granted pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall prohibit the grantee thereof from selling, leasing or servicing of
television receivers within the corporate limits of the City.
(b)The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and
a fixed monthly charge as filed and approved as herein provided. No increase in the rates and
charges to subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with grantee's application,
may be made without the prior approval of the Council expressed by resolution. (Ord., 9-28-1970)
Sec. 8-179. Duration Of Franchise:
No franchise granted by the Council under this article shall be for a term longer than ten (10) years
following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof. Any such
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 207/735
franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the Council in the event
that said Council shall have found, after thirty (30) days' notice of any proposed termination and public
hearing, that:
(1) The grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this article or has, by act or omission,
violated any term or condition of any franchise or permit issued hereunder;
(2) Any provision of this article has become invalid or unenforceable and the Council further finds that
such provision constitutes a consideration material to the grant of said franchise; or
(3) The City acquires the CATV system property of the grantee. (Ord., 9-28-1970)
Sec. 8-180. Acceptance Fee:
The grantee shall, upon the acceptance of this franchise, pay to the City, in consideration of the granting
of this franchise, the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord., 9-28-1970)
Sec. 8-181. Franchise Payments:
(a)MCC Illinois LLC shall pay an annual service provider fee to the City in an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of the annual gross revenues derived from the provision of cable or video service to
households located within the City. The 12-month period for the computation of the service provider
fee shall be a calendar year.
(b)The service provider fee payment shall be due quarterly and payable within forty five (45) days after
the close of the quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a
representative of the grantee showing the basis for the computation. If mailed, the fee shall be
considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
(c)For purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee, "gross revenues" shall mean consideration
of any kind of nature including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by MCC Illinois LLC for the operation of its cable system to provide cable or video service
within the City, including the following: 1) recurring charges for cable service or video service; 2)
event-based charges for cable service or video service, including but not limited to, pay-per-view and
video-on-demand charges; 3) rental of set-top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment; 4) service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but
not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges; 5) administrative charges related to the
provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges; and 6) late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments; 7) a pro rata portion
of all revenue derived by the holder of its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of
the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the local unit of government's
jurisdiction. The location shall be based on the number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement; 8) compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition
of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel,
subject to item 9 of this subsection; 9) in the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's
revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its
books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; 10) the service provider fee
permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 208/735
(d)For purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee, "gross revenues" shall not include: 1)
revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to item 6 of subsection (c) of
this section; 2) refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross
revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate,
credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service; 3) regardless of whether the
services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunications services, information services, or the provision
of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing, or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or non-video
service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of
business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders; 4) the sale of cable
services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider
fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell
the service within the local unit of government's jurisdiction and pay the fee permitted under 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service; 5) any tax or fee of general
applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, Federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including Sales and Use Taxes; 6) security deposits collected from
subscribers; 7) amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise
sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. (Ord.
020-2018, 5-14-2018)
Sec. 8-182. Limitations Of Franchise:
(a)Nonexclusive: Any franchise granted under this article shall be nonexclusive.
(b)Privileges Specified: No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted
under this article except those specifically prescribed herein.
(c)Prior Occupancy Of Street, Etc.: Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any
street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or
other public property.
(d)Transfer: Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee,
and cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part,
either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without
the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may
therein be prescribed.
Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed
copy of which shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after any such
transfer or assignment. The said consent of the Council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided,
however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all
provisions of this article; and provided further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in
trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness.
(e)Promptness: Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee
shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this article by
any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
(f)Functions Of City: Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or
board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department or
board of the City.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 209/735
(g)Recourse Against City: The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss,
cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this article or of any franchise
issued hereunder or because of its enforcement.
(h)Other Regulations: The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of City ordinances, rules,
regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. (Ord., 9-28-1970)
Sec. 8-183. Rights Reserved To City:
(a)Nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the
right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of
the rights of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the
franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall be
construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of
eminent domain.
(b)There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or
provided by any ordinance of the City, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to
be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such
rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.
(c)Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be
construed to prevent the City from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person
within all or any portion of the City.
(d)There is hereby reserved to the City the power to amend any section or part of this article so as to
require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the
part of the grantee.
(e)Neither the granting of any franchise or any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver to the exercise
of any governmental right or power of the city.
(f)The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction
under this article and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of
any franchise granted hereunder. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust,
settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this
article, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public.
Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city
manager may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may
accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and the council may adjust, settle or
compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from
any provision of this article.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-184. Permits, installation and service.
(a)Within sixty (60) days after acceptance of any franchise under this article the grantee shall proceed
with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the
conduct of its business, including but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements,
microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly
constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their
associated microwave transmission facilities.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 210/735
(b)Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, grantee
shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.
(c)Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the commencement of construction and installation of the
system, grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the
construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to
all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in section
8-193 hereof, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided.
(d)Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing
requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of
such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of section 8-179 hereof; provided, however, that
under any circumstances the grantee shall complete construction and be in operation eighteen (18)
months after acceptance of franchise. The council in its discretion may extend the time for the
commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the
grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-185. Location of property of grantee.
(a)Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed
in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be
approved by the director of public works or his designated representative acting in the exercise of his
reasonable discretion.
(b)The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places
or right-of-way, or within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a public
street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map
approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing,
without obtaining the proper written approval of the director of public works or his designated
representative.
(c)Any opening in or removal of any pavement, sidewalk or curbing, street, alley or avenue and all other
excavations made by the grantee shall be made under the supervision and direction of the director of
public works or his designated representative, under permits issued for such work by the proper
officials of the city, and shall be accomplished in such a manner as to give the least inconvenience to
the inhabitants of said city, and the public generally, and all such pavements, sidewalks, curbings and
excavations shall be replaced and repaired in as good condition as before, with all convenient speed,
by, and at the expense, of the grantee, which shall at all times make and keep full and complete
plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public ways,
streets and alleys of said city. Grantee shall deliver to the city maps showing the locations of all its
underground facilities and shall keep such maps up to date at all times. Said distribution lines of
grantee shall be buried wherever any other utility distribution lines are required to be, or are being,
installed underground. Wherever possible, both telephone lines and lines of grantee shall be buried
simultaneously in the future; and no additional street crossing with overhead wires shall be permitted.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-73, § 1; Ord. No. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-87)
Cross reference--Subdivisions, App. B.
Sec. 8-186. Removal and abandonment of property of grantee.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 211/735
(a)In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed
in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise or this
article, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly,
upon being given ten (10) days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property
and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works or his designated
representative may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall
promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition
satisfactory to the public works direct.
(b)Any property of the grantee remaining in place thirty (30) days after the termination or expiration of
the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The director of public works or his
designated representative may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days.
(c)Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the
director of public works or his designated representative shall prescribe. Upon permanent
abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city, and
the grantee shall submit to the director of public works or his designated representative an instrument
in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1; Ord. No. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-87)
Sec. 8-187. Changes required by public improvements.
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or
other public place or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when
required by the city engineer by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and
street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines and tracks of any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies;
provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the
obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in section 8-186 hereof.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-188. Failure to perform street work.
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the
provisions of this article or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time
prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works or his designated representative, the
director of public works or his designated representative may, at his option, cause such work to be done
and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the director of
public works or his designated representative to the grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such
itemized report. (Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1; Ord. No. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-87)
Sec. 8-189. Faithful performance bond.
(a)The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of award of any franchise granted
under this article, file with the city clerk and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for
the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's sole expense, a corporate surety
bond in a company and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the amount of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee,
and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of
the provisions of this article, or of any franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 212/735
suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification
or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may
be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the
bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal
thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have
arisen from the acceptance of said franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any
privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty (30) days' prior written notice of intention
not to renew, cancellation or material change be given to the city.
(b)Neither the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant hereto, nor any
damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the
grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages,
either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-190. Indemnification of city.
(a)The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted
under this article, furnish to the city and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of
any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a
liability insurance policy in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), in a
company approved by the city manager and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, indemnifying
and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims,
demands, actions, suits and proceedings by others, against all liability for damages by reason of or
arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors
or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system, and against any loss, cost,
expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of the
exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability
insurance policy required hereunder.
(b)The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted
under this article, furnish to the city and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of
any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a
general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the city manager and a form
satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage
for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under such
franchise, with minimum liability limits of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for
personal injury or death of any one person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for
personal injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, and fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence.
(c)The policies mentioned in the foregoing paragraph shall name the city, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written
notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the city ten (10)
days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also
covers grantee or any other entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall
contain the standard cross-liability endorsement.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-191. Inspection of property and records.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 213/735
(a)At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to
examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated
within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or
maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or
property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the
city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council shall determine that an
examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense
necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.
(b)The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city engineer and the city clerk at the times and in the
form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs,
transactions or property as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of
the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.
(c)The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing
the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places
in the city.
(d)The grantee shall file with the director of public works or his designated representative, on or before
the last day in March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV
system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1; Ord. No. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-87)
Sec. 8-192. Filing generally; office of grantee; refusal of service.
(a)When not otherwise prescribed in this article, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall
be filed with the city clerk.
(b)The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits or at a location which subscribers may call
without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly
available to subscribers.
(c)No person in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided,
however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay
the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-193. Use of utility poles and facilities; agreement.
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified
copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-194. Application for franchise.
(a)An application for a franchise under this article shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city clerk and
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of
each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 214/735
the names and addresses of its directors, main officers, major stockholders and associates and the
names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies.
(2) A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed,
maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various
components; the manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the
same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities or
other public utilities will be used for such system.
(3) A statement of the number of channels the grantee proposes to make available in the system,
including the number of educational channels to be provided.
(4) A statement indicating the facilities to be given by the grantee to schools within the city, and to the
city government.
(5) A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city manager of proposed rates and charges
to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the
grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application.
(6) A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the
use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines or conduits.
(7) A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied,
existing between the applicant and any person with respect to the proposed franchise or the
proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person posing as a front or as the
representative of another person and such information is not disclosed in the original application,
such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever.
(8) A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory
to the council, showing applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the
construction and installation of the proposed CATV system.
The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or
other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the
requested franchise should be granted.
(b)Upon consideration of such application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the
council may by ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear
from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to
television viewers and subscribers in the city. The council's decision in the matter shall be final. If
favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as
granted.
(c)Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall include the following condition:
"The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the
purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City of Rock Island and no other purpose
whatsoever."
Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority
of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem
necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this
article.
Sec. 8-195. Franchise renewal.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 215/735
Any franchise granted under this article is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same
manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required herein for obtaining the original franchise,
except for the amount of the franchise acceptance fee payable by the grantee for the renewal of the
franchise, which said fee shall be negotiated with the city council existing at that time, and except those
which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the council may at its option
waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of section 8-194 hereof.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-196. Acceptance and effective date of franchise.
(a)No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become effective unless and until
the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things
required in this section and sections 8-189, 8-190(a) and 8-190(b), hereof are done and completed,
all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such
franchise granted hereunder. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time
and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void.
(b)Within twenty-five (25) days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within
such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with
the city clerk his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, together
with the bond and insurance policies required by sections 8-189, 8-190(a) and 8-190(b) hereof,
respectively, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of
him by the provisions of this article and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be
acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to
and approved by the city attorney.
(Ord. of 9-28-70, § 1)
Sec. 8-197. Rate adjustment.
(a)A franchisee under this article requesting a rate adjustment shall give notice to the city clerk of the
amount of the proposed rate adjustment and the effective date of said adjustment. Said notice shall
be given to the clerk sixty (60) days before the effective date of the rate adjustment.
(b)The city council may, after consideration of said notice, within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of
the proposed rate adjustment, request the franchisee to appear before the council to substantiate the
basis for the rate adjustment, and after a hearing on said matter, may either approve or disapprove
said adjustment.
(c)In the event the city council does not request the appearance of the franchisee as provided in
subsection (b), then the proposed rate adjustment shall be effective in accordance with the
provisions of the notice given under subsection (a).
(Ord. of 11-3-79, §§ 2--4).
Sec. 8-198. Tampering with cable television equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an authorized representative of the cable television
franchise holder in the city to charge or supply any person services from any cable television company
with the intent to cheat or defraud such cable television company by installing, rearranging, connecting
or tampering with any facilities or equipment or by any trick or contrivance or by any other device or
means whatsoever. Further it shall be unlawful for any person to connect to the facilities or equipment of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 216/735
cable television franchise holder in the city without authorization from the cable television franchise
holder.
(Ord. of 12-6-76, § 1)
State law reference--Cable television service offenses, 720 ILCS 5/16-10.
Secs. 8-199--8-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. GREAT RIVER PLAZA 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-221. Purpose; intent.
This article is designed to promote the public interest by enhancing the attractiveness of the plaza
environment; to provide opportunities for creative, colorful, pedestrian focused activities; to encourage
activities which add charm, vitality, diversity; and provide minimum standards for the usage of the plaza,
with the intent of preserving the appearance and function of the plaza for all present and future citizens
of the city.
(Ord. No. 92-68, § 1, 4-3-92)
Sec. 8-222. Definitions:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms and words are defined as provided in this section:
Activity Permit: The permit required under section 8-230 of this chapter.
Emergency Vehicle: Any vehicle needed and/or required in an emergency situation, including, but not
limited to, ambulances, police, fire and utility service.
Fire Lane: An area consisting of those sections of the plaza surfaces having a thickness of at least
seven inches (7") and the entire public right of way of Second Avenue, at the intersection of
Seventeenth, Eighteenth and Nineteenth Streets.
Food Vendor: Any person who engages in the selling of foodstuffs while moving around the plaza or
while in a stationary position without the benefit of a permanent or nonambulatory booth or similar
construction.
Great River Plaza Or Plaza: An area of the city containing outdoor pedestrian improvements which
consists of the following streets and sidewalks:
(1) The entire public right of way of Second Avenue between Seventeenth and Eighteenth Streets
and Eighteenth and Nineteenth Streets.
(2) Public sidewalks on the north and south sides of Third Avenue between Seventeenth and
Nineteenth Streets.
(3) The sidewalk on the east side of Seventeenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
(4) Sidewalks on the east and west sides of Eighteenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 217/735
(5) Sidewalks on the west side of Nineteenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
(6) Arts Alley: The municipally owned property extending from the public right of way of Second
Avenue between Seventeenth and Eighteenth Streets to the alley right of way between Seventeenth
and Eighteenth Streets and lying between the Quad City Arts Center and the Renaissance Center
buildings.
Nonfood Vendor: Any person who engages in the selling of any goods, wares, tokens or any other article
other than foodstuffs or any person soliciting contributions while moving around the plaza or while in a
stationary position without the benefit of a permanent or nonambulatory booth or similar construction.
Plantings: All trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, grass and flowers that are located on the plaza.
Plaza Cafe: That portion of the plaza, kept, used, maintained and held out to the public as a place where
food and beverages are sold or served in conjunction with a business operating within the adjoining
premises.
Plaza Cafe Permit: The permit required under section 8-231 of this chapter.
Plaza Fixtures: All permanent street furniture, equipment, special utilities and features constructed as
part of the plaza, including planters, benches, podium, trash receptacles, tree grates, flowerpots, sound
and irrigation systems, pedestrian and tree lights, sewer, water and electrical lines and any other fixtures
which may be added.
Plaza Surfaces: The walking surfaces and curbing covering the plaza consisting of exposed aggregate,
concrete, decorative tile pavers and any replacement materials which may be used.
Portable Sandwich Board Signage: A portable "A" shaped double faced freestanding sign not exceeding
two feet (2') in width and four feet (4') in height, constructed of durable materials that present a finished
appearance, which is not permanently secured or attached to the ground or any other structure.
Public Use: The actions of the individual public toward and on the plaza fixtures, plaza surfaces and
plantings.
Vehicle: Any human, animal, motor, engine or gravity powered device for transportation.
Vendor: All persons or entities who are identified in the definitions of food or nonfood vendors as defined
herein.
Vendor Permit: The permit required under section 8-232 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 94-
66, 7-25-1994; Ord. 045-2009, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-2009; Ord. 056-2011, 7-25-2011)
DIVISION 2. PERMITTED ACTIVITIES
Sec. 8-223. Specified:
The city shall schedule all activities and uses of the plaza, provided that the activities and uses shall not
interfere with allowed public uses or violate any laws of the state and ordinances of the city and that a
valid permit has been secured. These activities include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Presentation of entertainment of a musical, theatrical, cinematic, choreographic or athletic
character.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 218/735
(2) Sponsoring of dances, contests, rallies, auctions, festivals, raffles, lectures, informative
demonstrations and ceremonies.
(3) Placement of displays involving public information and exhibits of art, handicrafts and other
objects of public interest.
(4) Operation of outdoor cafes, restaurants or other food service facilities.
(5) Sale of items that complement or enhance the mix of products available in the downtown.
(6) Fundraising activities and solicitation by student groups and civic, charitable, not for profit,
religious, service and fraternal organizations. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992)
DIVISION 3. PERMITS-GENERAL CONDITIONS
Sec. 8-224. Duties:
Every permittee under this division shall have the duty to:
(1) Cooperate with inspection of the premises, goods, or articles at any reasonable hour by the
authorized agent, officer or employee of the city or its designee.
(2) Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws, ordinances and regulations, and all state statutes,
applicable to such permitted business or premises, including, but not limited to, all building, zoning,
fire and health regulations.
(3) Post and maintain any and all permits delivered for use in a conspicuous place.
(4) During the course of business, not call out, cry, or by the use of any device make any noise or call
attention to the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or service whatsoever, or in any manner
obstruct or interfere with the orderly flow of pedestrian traffic.
(5) Maintain the area within a twenty five foot (25') radius of any cart, structure or location in a neat,
clean and hazard free condition, and shall not use plaza disposal facilities for disposal of permittee's
waste.
(6) Remove structure, cart, furniture or equipment from the plaza area at the close of business for the
day. No structure, cart, furniture or equipment shall be permitted to remain on the plaza overnight. All
structures, carts, furniture and equipment shall be of a type and maintained so as to enhance the
aesthetic and overall appearance of the plaza. The city reserves the right to determine the
acceptability of structures, carts, furniture or equipment for use on the plaza.
Violation of the duties enumerated in this section shall be grounds for revocation of a permit. (Ord.
92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 17-2001, § 1, 2-19-2001)
Sec. 8-225. Indemnification:
All users of the plaza shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any and all loss, cost,
damages or expenses to persons or property, including property of the city, arising out of or claimed to
have arisen out of such use. Furthermore, all users shall defend, at no cost to the city, any such claims
or suits, provided that the city may, at its sole option, join in the defense of such claim or suit without
relieving the user from any of its promises or obligations under this section. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992)
Sec. 8-226. Insurance:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 219/735
The holder of any permit shall obtain and keep in full effect at all times comprehensive general public
liability and property damage insurance, covering any personal injury or property damage arising out of
the permitted use, with liability limits of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage, and
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for personal injury, and where alcoholic beverages are to
be served, shall obtain and keep in effect at all times liquor liability or "dramshop" insurance with liability
limits equal to the maximum recovery permitted by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-15. The policy
shall name the city, its officers, employees and agents, as insurers and shall provide that the insurance
is primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained by the city will be called upon to contribute
to a loss covered by the policy. The policy shall further provide thirty (30) days' notice of cancellation or
material change to the policy. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992)
Sec. 8-227. Application Procedure:
(a)Applicants for plaza use permits shall submit on the appropriate forms an application to the city clerk.
Each application shall state: name and address of applicant, permit and space desired, period of
time, goods or services for sale, a description or photo of any cart, booth, structure, table, chairs, or
other equipment and a drawing to scale of their location, and any electrical or other services desired.
All applications must be accompanied by proof of issuance of all necessary building, health or other
required permits or licenses.
(b)The city clerk shall ascertain that each applicant has obtained insurance, executed an indemnification
agreement, and complied with all other rules and regulations of the city. When all necessary criteria
have been met, the city clerk may issue the permit except as provided in section 8-230 of this article.
(c)The permittee shall have thirty (30) days to become operational. Failure to do so may result in
revocation of the permit.
(d)Permits may be canceled upon ten (10) days' notice of either the city or permittee with cause. (Ord.
92-68, 4-3-1992)
Sec. 8-228. Designation Of Plaza Zones; Permitted Use:
In order to more effectively carry out the provisions of this article, the plaza shall be divided into the
following zones:
Zone 1: The area between Seventeenth Street and Eighteenth Street adjacent to structures along
the north and south sides of the plaza and Arts Alley. Permitted uses in zone 1 shall consist primarily
of activities and events that are passive in nature. Such activities and events may consist of, but are
not necessarily limited to, theatrical performances, musical presentations where amplification levels
are low, display of artwork, cultural activities and plaza cafes.
Zone 2: The area between Eighteenth Street and Nineteenth Street adjacent to structures along the
north and south sides of the plaza. Permitted uses in zone 2 shall consist of all uses permitted in
zone 1 plus more active uses, including amplified musical concerts.
Zone 3: All areas other than those designated as zone 1 or zone 2. Permitted uses in zone 3 shall
consist primarily of vendor sales and plaza cafes. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 94-66, 7-25-1994)
Sec. 8-229. Termination Of Permit:
Any permit may be revoked or terminated for violation of this article or for violation or breach of permit
conditions. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 220/735
DIVISION 4. PERMITS-SPECIAL CONDITIONS
Sec. 8-230. Activity Permits:
Activity permits shall be valid for one to four (4) consecutive days and shall be issued upon approval and
conditions set by city council after recommendations by the chief of police and city clerk. Amplification
must be specifically requested. Activities which involve outdoor musical entertainment utilizing sound
amplification equipment shall be kept at a decibel level and positioned in such a manner so as to
minimize disruption to residents of the surrounding downtown area; and such entertainment scheduled
for Sunday through Thursday shall cease at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., unless otherwise extended by
action of the city council; entertainment scheduled for a Friday event shall cease on Saturday at twelve
thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M. and entertainment scheduled for a Saturday event shall cease on Sunday at
twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M., unless otherwise extended by action of the city council. Any
entertainment may be terminated sooner in the event that it threatens to disturb the peace or that it is
otherwise warranted. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 49-2004, § 1, 4-26-2004; Ord. 080-2009, § 1, 11-23-
2009)
Sec. 8-231. Plaza Cafe Permits:
Plaza cafes may be located on that portion of the plaza and Arts Alley directly adjoining the applicant's
building frontage. Except in the case of liquor licensed establishments, the cafe shall allow at least five
feet (5') for pedestrian passage between the building and cafe. In the event that two (2) liquor licensed
establishments are on the opposite sides of the plaza so that free passageway exists between them,
then a five foot (5') passageway shall be required between the two (2) plaza cafes, except in Arts Alley
where the cafe area may directly adjoin the building frontage provided a minimum five foot (5')
pedestrian passage is maintained between the space delineated for cafe use and the farthest extension
of the planter boxes which abut the exterior wall of the opposing building. Plaza cafes with a liquor
license shall demarcate the area in which liquor is to be served and restrict access to prevent entry of
minors in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3 of this code. Plaza cafes may consist of tables,
chairs and other movable nonpermanent equipment and structures. Plaza cafe permits shall be valid for
a period of one year beginning March 1. Plaza cafes may operate during the hours of operation of their
adjoining business. However, during those periods for which an activity permit has been issued, plaza
cafes may operate only with the approval of the holder of the activity permit. Plaza cafes authorized to
sell alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the hour restrictions provided in chapter 3 of this code. (Ord.
92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 94-66, 7-25-1994; Ord. 99-60, § 1, 8-9-1999)
Sec. 8-232. Vendor Permits:
All carts or booths and other structures or equipment shall conform to the following requirements and
restrictions:
(1) Regulations: Meet all applicable City, State and Federal regulations.
(2) Benefit, Enhance The Plaza: Benefit the public or enhance the ambiance of the plaza.
(3) Maintenance: Be maintained in a high quality state of repair.
(4) Size Requirements:
a. No cart may exceed twenty one (21) square feet in area.
b. No booth may exceed ten feet by eight feet (10' x 8') in dimensions.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 221/735
The number of food vendor permits shall be limited to two (2) daytime vendors and three (3) nighttime
vendors. The number of nonfood vendors shall be limited to one nighttime vendor. Daytime vendors may
operate between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and shall remove their
equipment and supplies from the plaza by two fifteen o'clock (2:15) P.M. daily. Nighttime vendors may
operate between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and three o'clock (3:00) A.M. daily. Food vendors
only shall operate at fixed locations approved by the City. Vendor permits shall be valid for the period
beginning March 1 and ending the last day of February, annually. Vendor operations shall not interfere
with pedestrian traffic. During those activities for which an activity permit has been issued, the vendor
will be allowed to operate only with the approval of the person or organization holding the activity permit.
However, vendors may be required to relocate upon request from the activity permit holder. The City
shall approve any alternate location. Priority for the issuance of vendor permits shall be given to Rock
Island businesses and/or residents. Vendor permits shall be issued to encourage a diversity of products.
The permittee is required to remain operational for a minimum of four (4) times per month during the
months of May through September. Lack of operation during this period of time shall be grounds for the
revocation of the permit. (Ord. 92-68, 4-3-1992; Ord. 93-71, 7-12-1993; Ord. 99-12, 2-22-1999; Ord. 17-
2001, 2-19-2001; Ord. 15-2004, 2-2-2004; Ord. 057-2011, 7-25-2011; Ord. 031-2018, 6-25-2018)
DIVISION 5. FEES
Sec. 8-233. Amount; Regulations:
Activity permits, per event:
Not for profit organization sponsored event $
35.00
For profit organization sponsored event 250.00
Cafe permits, annually 200.00
Cafe permits where there is restricted space which limits the number
of tables to 4 or less
100.00
Vendor permits, annually:
$ 700.00 for the
year 2004
900.00 for the year
2005
1,100.00 for the
year 2006
Permits shall not be transferable, and fees shall not be refundable.
An activity permit fee shall not be required for visual or performing artists who occupy seventy five (75)
square feet or less and do not require utility hookups or other City services. The location for such
activities shall be subject to the approval of the City. Vendor permits for those established Rock Island
district businesses located between 15th and 24th Streets and 1st and 5th Avenues shall be offered for
a reduced rate of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the year 2004, seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for
the year 2005 and nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for the year 2006.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 222/735
The following application fees shall be assessed to all applicants. Application fees are nonrefundable
and shall be paid when an application is submitted.
Not for profit sponsors $20.00 per event
For profit sponsors 35.00 per event
Vendors 50.00 per application
(Ord. 004-2010, § 3, 1-18-2010)
DIVISION 6. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
Sec. 8-234. Specified:
(a)Public uses not allowed on public streets and sidewalks by this code shall be prohibited on the plaza.
(b)Persons and domesticated animals shall be prohibited from entering or placing any objects, materials,
or substances in the plaza planters or causing another person to enter or place the former in the
plaza planters except for necessary maintenance and emergencies.
(c)Portable sandwich board signs are permissible in front along the sidewalk and entrance of the
business, provided a minimum walking distance of five feet (5') shall be maintained to allow for the
pathway of pedestrians. No portable sandwich board sign shall be illuminated, nor shall the sign
contain moving parts or have balloons, streamers or similar adornments attached to it. The city
prohibits portable sandwich board signs being displayed during district special events (activities).
Portable sandwich board signs shall only be displayed during business operating hours and shall be
removed at the end of each business day. Businesses shall be prohibited from displaying more than
one portable sandwich board sign. Such sign must not present a risk to public safety; and must be
removed in adverse weather conditions. The city does not require a permit for said signs. Any
business erecting a portable sandwich board sign shall indemnify and hold harmless the city of Rock
Island and its officers, agents and employees from any claim arising out of the presence of the sign
on city property or rights of way. Portable sandwich board signs placed in violation of this section will
result in immediate and permanent removal of said sign.
(d)The city shall prohibit from the plaza any activity the content or intent of which violates any laws of the
state and ordinances of the city.
(e)Also prohibited from the plaza shall be those activities involving equipment, objects, materials, or
vehicles either prohibited on the plaza by this article or capable of causing damage to the plaza.
(f)No person shall cause damage or discoloration to the plaza surfaces, plaza fixtures and plantings by
application of salts, chemical corrosives, petroleum derivatives, any substances which adhere or
leave permanent or nonpermanent markings, vehicle markings from unauthorized vehicles,
maintenance equipment not approved by the city, or physical abuse.
(g)No person shall apply any chemicals or other substances to plaza surfaces for the purpose of snow
and/or ice removal.
(h)Any person failing to comply with this section shall be responsible for all repair and/or replacement
costs, in addition to penalties established under this article.
(i)No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle on the plaza with the exception of emergency
vehicles or city vehicles used in connection with maintenance of the plaza.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 223/735
(j)No person shall place or allow the placement of any activities, public uses or prohibited vehicles in the
"fire lane" as defined under this article.
(k)No person shall bring onto the plaza any horse, livestock or animal considered to be a mode of
transportation except under the provisions of article XIIA, "Horsedrawn Carriages And Vehicles", of
this chapter or when in conjunction with an approved activity.
(l)No person, firm or corporation shall place or suspend over the plaza any goods or merchandise, or
cause or permit the same to be done or placed or deposited on the plaza, or cause or permit the
same to be done, any personal property of any nature.
(m)No person shall be on the "Great River Plaza" between the hours of three fifteen o'clock (3:15) A.M.
and five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M. except for those persons employed by a business located on the
plaza; persons having their residence located on the plaza or those persons actively engaged in the
maintenance of the plaza area.
(n)Activity permit holders under section 8-230 of this chapter may prohibit any "animal" as defined in
section 7-111 of this code, with the exception of trained seeing eye dogs, from entering the plaza
area specifically occupied by the permitted activity.
(o)(1) Loitering By Underage Persons Prohibited: Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and three o'clock (3:00) A.M., Monday through Sunday, no person between seventeen (17) and
twenty (20) years of age is permitted to loiter, congregate or remain in the public areas of the Great
River Plaza in the areas defined as follows: An area of the city containing outdoor pedestrian
improvements which consists of the following streets and sidewalks:
a. The entire public right of way of Second Avenue between Seventeenth and Eighteenth Streets
and Eighteenth and Nineteenth Streets.
b. Public sidewalks on the north and south sides of Third Avenue between Seventeenth and
Nineteenth Streets.
c. The sidewalk on the west side of Seventeenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
d. Sidewalks on the east and west sides of Eighteenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
e. Sidewalks on the east side of Nineteenth Street between First and Third Avenues.
f. Arts Alley: The municipality owned property extending from the public right of way of Second
Avenue between Seventeenth and Eighteenth Streets to the alley right of way between
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Streets and lying between the Quad City Arts Center and the
Renaissance Center buildings.
g. The city parking facilities identified as lot C, lot F, and lot G in section 9-91 of this code.
(2) Exceptions: The prohibition established in subsection (o)(1) of this section does not apply to the
following:
a. A person between seventeen (17) and twenty (20) years of age who is lawfully going to,
attending, participating in or leaving from a permitted plaza activity as identified in section 8-223 of
this chapter during the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to three o'clock (3:00) A.M.,
including, but not limited to, dining at a restaurant, cafe or other food service facility located in
those areas identified in subsection (o)(1) of this section;
b. A person who is in the company of a responsible parent or legal guardian;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 224/735
c. A person who is employed by a business located in the areas identified in subsection (o)(1) of
this section;
d. A person going to or leaving from a residence located in the areas identified in subsection (o)(1)
of this section;
e. A person actively engaged in the maintenance of the areas identified in subsection (o)(1) of this
section;
f. A person who is a designated driver who is waiting for his riders;
g. A person of the age designated above who is outdoors smoking and who meets the definition of
exceptions in subsections (o)(2)a through (o)(2)f of this section.
(3) Penalty: See section 10-107.11, "Schedule Of Penalties For Ordinance Violations", of this code.
(Ord. 049-2010, § 1, 8-9-2010; Ord. 080-2012, 12-17-2012; Ord. 019-2016, 4-18-2016)
DIVISION 7. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 8-235. Penalties:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 92-68, § 1, 4-3-1992)
Sec. 8-236. Interpretation:
The provisions of this article shall be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Where this article imposes greater
restrictions than are imposed or required by other provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this
article shall prevail. (Ord. 92-68, § 1, 4-3-1992)
Sec. 8-237. Administration:
This article shall be administered by the city. The police department shall have the specific responsibility
for administration of article provisions dealing with the carrying out of public uses. (Ord. 92-68, § 1, 4-3-
1992)
Sec. 8-238. Appeals And Variances:
(a)Appeal To City Manager: Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any person charged with the
administration of this article may take an appeal to the city manager or a designated representative.
(b)Appeal To Council: Appeals relating to administrative decisions on activities shall be made in writing
to the city council.
(c)Variances Authorized: The city council may vary the application of this article in harmony with its
general purpose and intent where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this article. Requests for variances shall be in writing
to the city council.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 225/735
(d)Decisions Of Council: All decisions and findings of the city council on appeal or upon request for a
variance shall in all instances be final, subject to review by a court as may be provided by law. (Ord.
92-68, § 1, 4-3-1992)
Secs. 8-239-8-270. Reserved:
ARTICLE VIII. JUNKYARDS 1, 2
Sec. 8-271. Definition:
As used in this article, a "junk dealer" is any person, firm or corporation operating a business at which
personal property is or may be salvaged for reuse, resale or reduction or similar disposition and is
owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted, including, but not limited to, used or
salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper,
rags, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick and similar property, except animal matter, and used motor
vehicles, machinery or equipment which is used, owned or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or
salvaging parts therefrom. (1963 Code art. 6-2; Ord., 10-18-1976)
Sec. 8-272. License - Required:
No person shall locate, build, construct, keep, operate or maintain any junk store or junkyard in the City
without having first obtained a license from the City therefor. No license shall be issued for any such junk
store or junkyard within three hundred feet (300') of any church, hospital, public or parochial school or
the ground thereof; nor shall either a junkyard or junk store be built, constructed, kept, conducted,
operated or maintained on any site where two-thirds (2/3) of the buildings within a radius of three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed site are used exclusively for resident and retail store purposes or
used exclusively for residence purposes. (1963 Code art. 6-2)
Sec. 8-273. License - Application; Fee:
An applicant for a license as provided for in this article shall state the name of the person, firm or
corporation making the application; the place where said junk store or junkyard is to be located; a
statement to the effect that the proposed site for said junk store or junkyard does not conflict with the
provisions of section 8-272 of this article and shall be accompanied by an annual license fee of six
hundred dollars ($600.00), payable in accordance with section 8-2 of this chapter. Any new business
starting up after November 1 of the current year shall only be required to pay one-half (1/2) of the stated
fee for the remainder of the current license year only. (Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-274. Bond:
(Rep. by Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-275. Obstructing Walks Or Streets:
No person operating or maintaining a junkyard or junk store in the City shall place or store any article or
articles whatsoever upon the sidewalks, parkways or streets of the City or upon the property of another.
(1963 Code art. 6-2(K))
Secs. 8-276--8-290. Reserved.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 226/735
ARTICLE IX. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-291. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
Employees: Any and all persons other than the masseurs or masseuses, who render any service to the
permittee, who receive compensation directly from the permittee and who have no physical contact with
customers and clients.
Health Officer: The Health Officer of the City of Rock Island or his authorized representative.
Massage: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations
commonly used in this practice.
Massage Establishment: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm,
association or corporation engages in, or carries on, or permits to be engaged or carried on any of the
activities mentioned in the definition of massage in this section.
Masseur Or Masseuse: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of
massage as defined in this section.
Out Call Massage Service: Any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at
a location designated by the customer or client rather than at a massage establishment.
Permittee: The operator of a massage establishment.
Sexual Or Genital Area: The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva
or breasts of a female. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-292. Violations:
(a)Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this article, whether acting as
an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting
as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way,
who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or who in conjunction with the massage
establishment gives or administers, or practices the giving or administering of baths as defined
herein without first obtaining a license and paying a license fee so to do from the City or shall violate
any provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6)
months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(b)Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who
knowingly employs a person performing as a masseur or masseuse, as defined in this article, who is
not in possession of a valid, unrevoked permit or who allows such a masseur or masseuse to
perform, operate or practice within such a place of business shall be subject to a fine in a sum not
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 227/735
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-293. Exceptions:
This article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria or persons holding an unrevoked
certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the State, or persons working under the direction
of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this article apply to barbers or
cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid,
unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-294. Maintaining Nuisance 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2.1:
Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this article with the intentional, knowing,
reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building,
together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-295. Permit; Display; Renewal:
Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall display said permit in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the
name may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. All persons who operate a massage
establishment or who are employed as a masseur or masseuse must file applications for renewal of
permits not more than two (2) months nor less than one month prior to termination of an existing permit.
(Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-296. Operating Requirements:
(a)Cleanliness: Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be
kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
(b)Employees; Dressing Rooms: All employees shall be clean and shall wear suitable clean outer
garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. A separate dressing room for each
sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers available for each employee and for
each customer. Said lockers shall be equipped with a key lock or number combination locking device.
Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
(c)Linens: All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in
sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in an approved,
sanitary manner. No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any massage establishment
unless such establishment is provided with approved laundry facilities for such laundry and drying.
Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper towels.
(d)Bathrooms, Etc.: Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly
cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
(e)Residential Uses: If the massage establishment is in any building used for residential or sleeping
purposes, any room used for massage shall not be used for residential or sleeping purposes;
provided, however, that the inspector may allow such room to be used for residential or sleeping
purposes if he finds that the health and safety of the patrons of such establishment will not be
jeopardized.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 228/735
(f)Advertising: No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this article shall
place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
service is available other than those services as described in section 8-291, nor shall any massage
establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any service is available other than those
services as described in said section.
(g)Locked room. No massage service may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area
within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-297. Out call service.
No out call massage service may be operated other than by a licensed massage establishment. All
massages performed by an out call massage service must be performed in the manner prescribed in
section 8-296. Any masseuse or masseur who provides any massage services at any hotel or motel
must first register his or her name and permit number with the owner, manager or person in charge of
the hotel or motel.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-298. Inspections.
The police department and the department of public health shall from time to time, and at least twice a
year, make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this
article for the purposes of determining that the provisions hereof are complied with. Such inspections
shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to
fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Cross references--Health, Ch. 7; police, Ch. 12.
Sec. 8-299. Employment of masseurs and masseuses.
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage establishment or the employer of any
persons purporting to act as masseurs and masseuses to ensure that each person employed as a
masseur or masseuse shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-300. Employment of minor.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage
establishment to employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-301. Identification card.
The chief of police shall provide each masseur and masseuse granted a permit with an identification
card which shall contain a photograph of the masseur or masseuse and the full name and permit
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 229/735
number assigned to the said masseur or masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the outermost
garment at all times during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Secs. 8-302--8-315. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT
Sec. 8-316. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a massage establishment
as defined in this article, without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police, after approval by
the health officer.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-317. Application--Filing; fee.
(a)Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an
application in duplicate under oath with the chief of police under a form provided by said chief of
police and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the city collector, who
shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the chief of police.
(b)The chief of police shall within five (5) days refer copies of said application to the health department,
building inspection department, fire department and planning department. These departments shall
within thirty (30) days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment
and make written recommendations to the chief of police concerning compliance with the codes that
they administer.
(c)Within ten (10) days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforementioned departments, the chief
of police shall notify the applicant that his application is granted, denied or held for further
investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30)
days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional
investigation the chief of police shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted
or denied.
(d)Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the chief of police shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reasons for such action.
(e)The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of
the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for
examination under oath regarding the said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate
with any inspection required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or
she is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the chief of police.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-318. Same--Contents.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 230/735
(a)The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the
massage to be administered and the proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
(b)In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including any partner or limited partner of a
partnership applicant, and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding
more than ten (10) percent of the stock of a corporate applicant shall furnish the following
information:
(1) Name and address.
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(3) All residential addresses for the past three (3) years.
(4) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
(5) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of application.
(6) The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in
previously operating in this or an other city or state under license, has had such license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of
suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo
contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations.
(8) The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant.
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-319. Facilities.
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the appropriate
city inspectors reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof
with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the city's building
code. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the city's plumbing code.
a. For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules and rooms containing bathtubs, there shall be a
waterproof floor covering, which will be carried up all walls to a height of at least six (6) inches.
Floor shall be covered up on base with at least three-fourth-inch cover. The walls of all toilet rooms
and rooms containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six (6) feet with a smooth, nonabsorbent
finish surface of Keene cement, tile or similar material.
b. Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors, walls and ceilings
approved by the inspector.
c. Floors or wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one (1) or more floor drains
properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: Dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 231/735
provided with pitched floors and floor drains.
d. A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms
to facilitate cleaning.
(2) Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees and
patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be
provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or
patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinal may be substituted for water closets after
one water closet has been provided. All toilet rooms shall be equipped with self-closing doors
opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet rooms. Toilets shall be designates as to the sex
accommodated therein.
(3) Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either
the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser
and with sanitary towels.
(4) All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be provided with adequate light and
ventilation by means of windows or sky lights with an area of not less than one-eighth of the total
floor area, or shall be provided with approved artificial light and a mechanically operating ventilating
system. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the total required
window area shall be operable. To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms and areas provided
for patrons' use not served directly by a required window, skylight or mechanical system of ventilation
shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the
floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located.
(5) All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the city's
electrical code.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-320. Issuance; duration.
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the departments referred to in section 8-317, and the certificate
of the health officer that the establishment is in compliance with all of the requirements of section 8-296,
the chief of police shall issue a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment, unless
he finds:
(1) That the operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not have complied with all
applicable laws, including but not limited to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire
codes of the city; or
(2) That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the
management and operation of a massage establishment has been convicted of:
a. A felony.
b. An offense involving sexual misconduct with children.
c. Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping or other
offense opposed to decency and morality.
The chief of police, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes
in paragraph (2)(a)--c) if he finds that such conviction occurred at least four (4) years prior to the date
of application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and the applicant has shown
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 232/735
evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust. Every massage establishment permit
issued pursuant to this subdivision will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its
issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Cross references--Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; fire prevention and protection, ch. 6; health,
ch. 7; planning and development, ch.11; zoning, app. A.
Sec. 8-321. Transfer.
No permit for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be transferable except with the written consent of the chief of police and approval of the health
officer, provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment
may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Sec. 8-322. Revocation; suspension.
(a)Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police
after a hearing for good cause or in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated
or any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct at
permittee's place of business which violates any of the provisions of this article or any state law
which provides for imprisonment, and permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of such
violation or the permittee should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where
any applicant has made a false statement on an application for a permit under this article or in any
case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or health
inspector of the city and the county to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such permit
may also be revoked or suspended by the chief of police, after hearing, upon the recommendations
of the health officer that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard
for the public health or health of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or
hygiene.
(b)Any violation of this article by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, shall
be cause for suspension of the permit for not more than thirty (30) days in the first instance. Any
subsequent violation of this article by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or
masseuse, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit.
(c)The chief of police, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give the permittee at least ten
(10) days written notice of the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public hearing
before the chief of police, at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the
questions. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
(Ord. of 1-17-77, § 1)
Secs. 8-323--8-335. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE PERMIT
Sec. 8-336. Required; fee.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 233/735
Any person, including an applicant for massage establishment permit, who engages in the practice of
massage as defined in this article, shall file an application for a masseur or masseuse permit with the
chief of police upon a form provided by said chief of police and shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an original application and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a renewal
application, to the city collector, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed
with the chief of police.
(Ord. of 1-7-77, § 1; Ord. No. 91-14, § 8, 2-11-91)
Sec. 8-337. Application form.
The application for a masseur or masseuse license shall contain the following:
(1) Name and residence address.
(2) Social security number and driver's license number, if any.
(3) Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes.
(4) Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(5) Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of application.
(6) Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic
violations. If any person mentioned in this paragraph has been so convicted, a statement must be
made giving the place and court in which such conviction was had, the specific charge under which
the conviction was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction.
(7) The name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended and a copy of the
diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing that the applicant has completed
not less than seventy (70) hours of instruction.
(8) The chief of police shall have the right to take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and
the right to confirm the information submitted. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-338. Issuance:
The chief of police may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within twenty one (21) days following a
hearing unless he finds that the applicant for a masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of an
offense involving the use of force and violence on the person of another that amounts to a felony. (Ord.,
1-17-1977)
Sec. 8-339. Revocation:
A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the chief of police shall be revoked or suspended where it
appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for
denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a permit
or has committed an act in violation of this article. The chief of police in revoking or suspending a
masseur or masseuse permit shall give the permit holder a written notice specifying the grounds
therefor. Such person may within ten (10) days of such revocation or suspension file a written request
with the chief of police for a public hearing before the chief, at which time the masseur or masseuse may
present evidence at the hearing upon the question. The decision of the chief of police upon such hearing
shall be a final appealable order. (Ord., 1-17-1977)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 234/735
Secs. 8-340 - 8-355. Reserved:
ARTICLE X. PAWNBROKERS 1
Sec. 8-356. Definition:
Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, bonds, notes or other valuable
things or securities, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, is, for the purposes of this article, a pawnbroker. (1963 Code § 6-2(L)-2)
Sec. 8-357. License - Required:
No person shall exercise or carry on the business of pawnbroker within the city without being duly
licensed therefor. (1963 Code § 6-2(L)-1)
Sec. 8-358. License - Duration; Bond; Fee:
The city clerk with the approval of the city council shall grant a pawnbroker's license to any person of
good character who may apply therefor, upon said person giving bond with approved security in the sum
of five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned upon the faithful observance of all ordinances of the city
applicable to the business so licensed and paying to the city collector the sum required for said license.
Said license may be issued for six (6) months or for one year, but not beyond the end of the municipal
year, and the applicant shall pay therefor, for one year, two hundred dollars ($200.00) and for six (6)
months, one hundred dollars ($100.00). (1963 Code § 6-2(L)-3; Ord., 2-23-1976)
Sec. 8-359. Hours Of Business:
No person licensed under this article shall receive on deposit or pledge any personal property or other
valuable thing before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. nor after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. during January, February,
March, April, October, November and December of each year, nor before five o'clock (5:00) A.M. nor
after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. during the months of May, June, July, August and September of each year.
(1963 Code § 6-2(L)-9)
Sec. 8-360. Time Of Redemption Or Removal Of Pledge:
No personal property received in deposit or pledge by any person licensed under this article shall be
sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such licensed person for
twenty four (24) hours after a report required to be delivered to the chief of police shall have been
delivered as required by 205 Illinois Compiled Statutes 510/7. (1963 Code § 6-2(L)-8)
Sec. 8-361. Dealings With Minors 2:
No person licensed under this article shall take or receive in pawn or purchase any article, property or
effects from any minor, or claimed by any minor. (1963 Code § 6-2(L)-10)
Secs. 8-362 - 8-375. Reserved:
ARTICLE XI. PEDDLERS 3
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 235/735
Sec. 8-376. Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance relating to peddlers,
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent
as if set out at length in this code. (1963 Code art. 6-2)
Secs. 8-377 - 8-395. Reserved:
ARTICLE XII. TAXICABS 4, 5
Sec. 8-396. License - Required:
No automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle shall be used for the transportation of persons for
hire within the city, whether said vehicle secures its passengers from a public stand or stands upon the
street or whether the same is kept in a private garage, unless every such vehicle is licensed as provided
in this article. (1963 Code § 6-2(T)-1)
Sec. 8-397. License - Application; Fee; Term; Bond; Insurance 6:
(a)The owner of any automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle for which it is desired to secure a
license under this article shall make application to the city clerk setting forth therein the name of such
owner or owners, a description of the vehicle for which it is desired to secure a license and the place
where such vehicle is kept, if the same is kept in a private garage. The applicant shall be provided
the application form by said city clerk. The city clerk, upon receipt of such application, shall issue or
cause to be issued a license for such vehicle upon payment by the applicant of a license fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per annum. Such license fee shall be paid to the city collector, and upon payment
thereof, a license shall be issued, attested by the city clerk, authorizing the use of such vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of this article until the expiration of such license. And each license
when granted shall expire at the end of the municipal year following the issuance of such license.
(b)Provided, however, that the owner of any such automobile, autocar, cab, motor vehicle or other
similar vehicle shall first exhibit to the city clerk a certificate issuing from the office of the secretary of
state of Illinois, or an affidavit of said owner certifying that he, his agent, servant or operator has fully
complied with the requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes governing chauffeurs engaged in
driving automobiles, motor vehicles or similar vehicles for hire, and further certifying that said owner,
his agent or operators have posted good and sufficient bond or policy of insurance to the office of the
secretary of state of Illinois pursuant to the requirement of the Illinois Compiled Statutes governing
the same. Said requirements of said Illinois Compiled Statutes are incorporated as requirements of
this section by reference thereto. Failure of any owner or operator licensed hereunder to file such
certificate or affidavit with the city clerk, after ten (10) days' notice given to him by said clerk to so file,
shall be deemed sufficient ground for revocation of any license issued hereunder. Failure to perform
the requirements of this section shall be deemed an offense and shall subject any such offender to
the penalties provided for a violation of this code. (1963 Code § 6-2(T)-2; Ord., 2-23-1976)
Sec. 8-398. Limitation Of Licenses:
(a)The total number of taxicab licenses which shall be issued by the city shall not exceed fifty (50).
(b)Prior to the granting of a license to new applicants for licenses under the provisions of this article, the
application shall be referred to the city council for its investigation and recommendation. All new
applicants shall submit their fingerprints to the Rock Island police department and submit the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 236/735
required, nonrefundable processing fee for the purpose of conducting a criminal history check prior to
the issuance of a taxicab license. (1963 Code § 6-4(T)-4; Ord. 006-2017, 2-13-2017)
Sec. 8-399. Taxicab Drivers - Investigation:
At the time a taxicab driver is hired by any licensee under this article, said licensee shall submit to the
chief of police the name of said driver and any background information said licensee has concerning
said driver and also an authorization in writing from said driver authorizing the police department to
make a background check of said driver, including checking of any available criminal record, along with
the required, nonrefundable processing fee for the purpose of conducting said criminal history check.
Upon receipt of said information, authorization and the required fee, the chief of police shall make or
cause to be made a careful and diligent inquiry as to the character and record of said driver for honesty,
sobriety and capability, and if it shall be found that such applicant is lacking in any of such respects, the
chief of police shall notify the licensee of the information that resulted from said investigation. (Ord. 006-
2017, 2-13-2017)
Sec. 8-400. Taxicab Drivers - License Fee:
The annual license fee for a taxicab driver shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) or ten dollars ($10.00) if
purchased after October 31 of the same license year, and such annual licensing period shall commence
on May 1 of each year. (1963 Code § 6-2(T)-14; Ord., 8-10-1981; Ord. 87-34, 4-6-1987)
Sec. 8-401. Taxicab Drivers - Record:
(a)The chief of police shall keep at his office a record in which shall be kept the name and residence of
each licensed driver or operator together with the names of persons endorsing his application, and
shall carefully note opposite each such licensed driver's name such information as he may gain
concerning said licensee and as may be necessary to provide a complete record of said licensee's
conduct and qualifications as a driver or operator.
(b)The chief of police may suspend or revoke any taxicab driver's license when in his opinion the
licensee does not have the qualifications specified in this article for said license. (1963 Code § 6-
2(T)-13)
Sec. 8-402. Taxicab Drivers - Transfer Of License:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer any taxicab driver's license from one person to another.
(1963 Code § 6-2(T)-15)
Sec. 8-403. Safety Inspection:
(a)All vehicles used and licensed as taxicabs shall at all times be maintained in proper mechanical
condition. It shall be necessary to present the city clerk an affidavit that the particular vehicle used
has a license to operate as a taxicab for said vehicle.
(b)The chief of police shall have the authority to order the owners of any vehicles used as taxicabs in the
city to take said vehicles out of operation if said vehicles are found to be in unsafe mechanical
condition. Said vehicles shall remain out of operation until proper repairs on said vehicles are made
to place said vehicles in proper mechanical condition. (1963 Code § 6-2(T)-3)
Sec. 8-404. Public Stands:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 237/735
(a)Use: Any automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle licensed under the provisions of this article
may stand at such places, and at no other places, as may from time to time be designated by the
council for that purpose.
(b)Location:
(1) General: The following places are public stands where taxicabs, autocars and all other vehicles
let to hire or used for transporting persons or property for hire shall stand while waiting for such
employment:
a. One parking space on the west side of Seventeenth Street between Second and Third Avenues
immediately north of the Sheraton Hotel driveway.
b. One parking space on the south side of Third Avenue between Nineteenth and Twentieth
Streets.
c. Two (2) parking spaces on the north side of Second Avenue between Nineteenth and Twentieth
Streets.
d. Two (2) parking spaces on the south side of Second Avenue immediately west of Nineteenth
Street.
The chief of police shall assign the above spaces to the respective taxicab companies or concerns.
When such spaces or stands have been so assigned, no other taxicab company or concern shall use
any other taxicab space, except the space or spaces to which they have been assigned as aforesaid.
(2) Public Places: Public stands shall also be deemed to exist at hotels, theaters and other public
places at such times and for such length of time as may be reasonably necessary for the receiving
and discharging of passengers at such places.
(c)Parking - Distance From Corner: No automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle entitled to use
such stands shall be permitted to stand anywhere thereon in such manner as to obstruct the
entrance to any building, structure or place, nor shall any automobile, autocar or other similar vehicle
entitled to use stands be permitted to stand within twenty feet (20') of any of the intersecting streets
or avenues upon which any of the stands are located.
(d)Parking - Off Street Facilities: No automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle licensed under the
provisions of this article shall park in or occupy any of the off street parking facilities of the city. (1963
Code § 6-2(T)-5; Ord. 85-19, 6-24-1985; Ord. 88-73, 12-19-1988)
Sec. 8-405. Designation Of Car:
Every automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle licensed under the provisions of this article shall
have the name of the owner thereof plainly painted in letters at least one and one-half inches (11/2") in
height, and the number at least four inches (4") in height, in a conspicuous place on the outside of each
side of such vehicle, and such name and number shall be kept so painted plainly and distinctly at all
times while such vehicle is in use during the continuance of such license. Upon the expiration of such
license (unless same is forthwith renewed) such name and number shall be at once erased from such
vehicle and such vehicle shall not thereafter be used with such name or number thereon. (1963 Code §
6-2(T)-6)
Sec. 8-406. Property Left In Car By Passenger:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 238/735
Whenever any package, article or baggage or goods of any kind shall be left in or upon any vehicle
licensed under the provisions of this article, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon discovery of such
package, baggage or goods, forthwith deliver the same to the shift commander at the police station in
the city.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(T), § 7)
Sec. 8-407. Posting of rates; overnight parking.
(a)Number of passengers, rates posted. No operator or person in charge or control of any automobile,
autocar, cab, motor vehicle or other similar vehicle licensed hereunder shall contemporaneously
convey more than five (5) passengers scheduled for more than five (5) destinations, and no charge
for any additional passengers in excess of one and not in excess of five (5) shall be made where all
said passengers board the vehicle licensed hereunder at the same place of origin and all are
discharged at the point of termination of any one trip. A copy of the schedule of rates herein provided
to be charged in the said zones herein established shall be placed and kept in each vehicle licensed
hereunder in a conspicuous place in each of the said vehicles as to be at all times openly visible to
any or all of the public using said vehicles for public transportation.
(b)Overnight parking. Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., each taxicab company
operating in the city may have one (1) cab parked at each of the following locations:
(1) Zone No. 1, which shall be on Second Avenue between Eighteenth and Nineteenth Streets.
(2) Zone No. 2, which shall be Sixteenth Street between Second and Third Avenues.
(3) Zone No. 3, which shall be Seventeenth Street between Second and Third Avenues.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(T), § 8; Ord. of 12-6-65, § 1; Ord. of 12-11-72, § 1; Ord. of 1-21-74, §§ 1--3;
Ord. of 8-11-75, § 1; Ord. of 9-12-77, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of -15-79, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-79, § 1; Ord. of 2-9-81, §
1; Ord. No. 83-49, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-83)
Sec. 8-408. Seating of passengers.
No person operating under a taxicab license, shall, as principal, agent or employee, permit any person
to stand or sit upon the runningboard, fender or hood of the automobile, autocar or other similar vehicle
while said vehicle is in operation. (Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(T), § 9)
Sec. 8-409. Advance payment; giving information.
Any person licensed under this article may demand his legal fare to be paid in advance by any person
seeking to employ him, and may refuse to convey any person who shall fail to comply with such
demand. Any person so licensed shall give to any person requesting the same, his name and the
number of his license.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(T), § 10)
Sec. 8-410. Records.
Each operator of a licensed vehicle used and operated as a taxicab shall keep records on a daily basis
indicating on said records the time and place each passenger is picked up and delivered and the
amount charged for each fare. These records shall be kept by owners of said vehicle for one (1) year.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(T), § 11)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 239/735
ARTICLE XIIA. HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES AND VEHICLES
Sec. 8-411. Definitions.
(a)Horse-drawn carriage and vehicle means any vehicle which is operated or pulled by a horse which
may be hired for the transportation of passengers and which is operated within the city limits.
(b)City means the City of Rock Island, Illinois.
(c)Coach operator's license means a license granted by the city to a person, authorizing that person to
operate a horse-drawn vehicle upon the streets of the city.
(d)Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city, which has
designated as reserved exclusively for the use of horse-drawn carriages and vehicles.
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 2-3-92)
Sec. 8-412. License required.
The operation of any horse-drawn vehicle upon the streets of the city for the purpose of transporting
persons for hire or as a contractual service is a violation of this article unless operated in accordance
with valid licenses issued pursuant to this article.
The city clerk is authorized to issue licenses pursuant to this article as follows: Horse-drawn carriage
business, vehicle licenses and coach operator's licenses.
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 2-3-92)
Sec. 8-413. Application for license.
Applications for horse-drawn carriage business licenses shall be made to the city clerk on forms
provided by the city clerk. In addition to other information required by this article, the application shall
contain the following information:
(a)The name and address of the applicant.
(b)The applicant's work or corporate history for the past five (5) years. If the applicant is a corporation,
the information shall also be given for the chief administrative officer who will be in charge of the
Rock Island operations. The corporation shall list all its officers and all other businesses operated by
the corporation. If the corporation is a foreign corporation, a copy of the certificate to do business in
the state shall be provided.
(c)A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions including traffic violations by the applicant for the past
ten (10) years. If the applicant is a corporation, such information shall be given for the chief
administrative officer in charge of Rock Island operations.
(d)The number of carriages to be operated pursuant to the license, and the seating capacity,
manufacturer, and scale drawing or photograph of each carriage.
(e)A proposed route and operations schedule for the business.
(f)A schedule of rates and charges to be made to passengers, which rates shall not be changed without
ten (10) days' prior notice to the city clerk.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 240/735
The application shall be verified under oath and include a written agreement by the applicant to
operate the business, if licensed, strictly in accordance with this article, and indemnify and hold
harmless the city for all judgments, liens and expenses arising out of the operations permitted by the
license.
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 2-3-92)
Sec. 8-414. Carriage route and operations schedule.
(a)Horse-drawn carriage businesses shall operate only upon routes and pursuant to schedules approved
as provided in this section. The route and operations schedule filed with the city clerk shall contain
the following:
(1) A map of the routes on which the carriages will operate.
(2) A schedule of hours of operations.
(3) The location of the site or sites to be used for off-street storage, stabling and loading of carriages
and horses.
(b)The city clerk shall refer all route and operations schedules to the traffic engineering committee for
review. The traffic engineering committee shall recommend to the city council such routes and
schedules that represent safe and appropriate use of city streets. The traffic engineering committee
shall also review and recommend to the city council any temporary variances from the established
routes for special purposes. Requests for route variance shall be made no less than fourteen (14)
days prior to the effective date of the requested variance.
(c)Any route and operations schedule approval shall be subject to the right of the chief of police to
prohibit the use of any route at certain times, when such operation would be inconsistent with other
special events or public safety requirements, by giving forty-eight (48) hours' notice of such
prohibition.
(d)Any request for a variance from the route and operations schedules because of a special event or
celebration must be approved by the city clerk and the chief of police. Such a request must be
submitted to the city clerk's office at least four (4) days prior to the date of the event.
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 93-90, § 1, 10-25-93)
Sec. 8-415.7. Annual license fees.
The annual fee for a horse-drawn carriage business license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
business and one (1) carriage. Each additional carriage shall be licensed for fifty dollars ($50.00). A
coach operator's license shall be issued for an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 2-3-92)
ARTICLE XIII. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-416. Definitions.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 241/735
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this article:
Residence: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes, by one (1) or more persons,
contained within any type of building or structure.
Transient merchant: Any person, the nature of whose business activity indicates the intent to remain in
business in the city for less than one (1) year, who:
(1) Offers for sale tangible personal property or personal services, or
(2) Takes or attempts to take orders for the sale of tangible personal property or services, including
advertising or subscriptions to be furnished or performed in the future.
(Code 1963, Ch. VI, Art. II(R), § 2; Ord. No. 82-44, § 1, 10-25-82)
Sec. 8-417. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each sale or solicitation of a sale made without a license or bond in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 82-44, § 14, 10-25-82)
Sec. 8-418. Sales.
(a)No person shall engage in activities regulated under this article on public property without first
procuring special authorization from the city council.
(b)No person shall shout, or use any sound device upon any of the public places of the city or upon any
private premises in said city, where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard from the public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any
goods, wares, merchandise or services which such person proposes to sell.
(c)No person shall engage in business as a transient merchant in defiance of any notice exhibited at a
residence or business indicating that peddlers or solicitors are not welcome or not invited.
(d)No person shall engage in the activities regulated under this article from door to door prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(Ord. No. 82-44, § 4, 10-25-82)
Sec. 8-419. Fixed location.
(a)No transient merchant shall engage in business at a fixed location without the written permission, by
lease or otherwise, of the owner or person in control of the property. This written agreement shall be
signed by the parties and shall include the dates the transient merchant shall be conducting
business. This agreement shall be displayed by the transient merchant at such fixed location when
he is doing business there.
(b)A transient merchant doing business at a fixed location shall provide sufficient off-street parking
space for his employees and customers.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 242/735
(c)Any display of tangible personal property, or signs or advertisements therefor, shall be at least fifteen
(15) feet from the curbline. All signs and advertisements used in connection with the business
licensed in this article shall comply with the appropriate sections of this Code.
(d)The owner or person in control of the property shall furnish bathroom facilities for the use of the
transient merchant.
(e)A transient merchant doing business at a fixed location shall do so only in areas properly zoned for
business activity. A transient merchant selling food items shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the city's health code.
(Ord. No. 82-44, § 5, 10-25-81)
Sec. 8-420. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 8-421. Required; Application:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a transient merchant in the city without
first obtaining a license as provided in this division.
(b)An application for a transient merchant license shall give the following information:
(1) The name or names of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business,
whether such person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee, during the time that it is
proposed it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person while
engaged in such business.
(2) The permanent address or addresses of such person; whether such person will act as proprietor,
agent, consignee or employee and the credentials establishing such relationship; the name and
address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation,
under the laws of what state the same is incorporated.
(3) The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business and the
length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted.
(4) The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant
within three (3) years next preceding the date of said application conducted a transient business,
stating the nature thereof and giving the post office box number and street address of any building or
office in which said business was conducted.
(5) A statement of the nature and character of the tangible personal property or service to be sold or
offered for sale by the applicant in the city; whether the goods are new, damaged or rejects; whether
the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or by sample; where the goods or
property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where goods or products are
located at the time said application is filed.
(6) Whether or not the person having management or supervision of the applicant's business,
whether such person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee, has been convicted of a
felony within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of said application or of the violation of
any law or ordinance relating to the same or similar business to be conducted by applicant, the
nature of such offense and the punishment therefor.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 243/735
a. All applicants, whether such person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee, shall
submit their fingerprints to the Rock Island police department and submit the required,
nonrefundable processing fee per submission for the purpose of conducting a criminal history
check prior to the issuance of a transient merchant license.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under this article, which has been denied.
(8) Whether the applicant has ever held a license under this article, which has been revoked. (1963
Code §§ 6-2(R)-1, 6-2(R)-3; Ord. 82-44, 10-25-1982; Ord. 006-2017, 2-13-2017)
Sec. 8-422. Bond:
(a)Except as provided in this article, each applicant for a transient merchant license or a blanket license
hereunder shall file with the city clerk a bond running to the city, in the penal sum therein set forth,
executed by applicant as principal, and by a corporate surety upon which service of process may be
made in the state, the bond to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall
comply with the provisions of all of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state, regulating
and concerning the sale of goods, subscriptions, wares, merchandise or personal property of any
nature, including foodstuffs, or for services, including advertising, and will pay all judgments rendered
against the applicant for any violation of ordinances or statutes or any of them together, with all
judgments and costs that may be recovered against applicant by any person or persons for damage
growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such
business with applicant, whether said misrepresentation or deception was made or practiced by the
owners or by their servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale, or the
solicitation of the sale, or through any advertisements of any character whatsoever, printed or
circulated with reference to the subject matter of such sale or any part thereof. Action on the bond
may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond shall be further
conditioned to indemnify and pay the city for any penalties or costs occasioned by the enforcement of
this article and shall not be retired until after a lapse of one year from the expiration of each license.
(b)The following persons shall be exempt from the requirement of posting bond: Transient merchants
selling subscriptions, tangible personal property or services, where each sale does not exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00) to any person or to any member of any purchaser's immediate family within any
consecutive three (3) month period and where, in addition, no payment, down payment or deposit
whatsoever is required to be made or paid until the property is actually delivered or the services are
actually performed.
(c)Any person claiming an exemption under the provisions of this section shall make request therefor in
writing and shall state in said request that the applicant shall not make any sales in violation of the
provisions of this section.
(d)All licenses issued where the transient merchant is exempt from the posting of bond under this
section shall contain the following language: "No bond has been furnished the city of Rock Island by
the holder of this license".
(e)The penal sum of the bond required under the provisions of this article is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or two (2) times the value of the tangible personal property or service to be sold or
offered for sale or the average inventory to be carried by the transient merchant as shown by the
application, whichever amount is greater.
(f)The applicant for a blanket license shall in all cases furnish a bond described in subsection (a) of this
section in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 82-44, § 9, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 8-423. Duplicate And Individual Licenses:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 244/735
A transient merchant license may be issued to a person carrying on the business of transient merchant
in this city through employees. Such employees shall carry a duplicate license issued to the person,
which license shall be obtained at the city clerk's office. If the business of transient merchant in this city
is carried on through agents who are not employees or by consignees, or by an unincorporated firm or
association, each person so conducting the business of transient merchant in this city shall be required
to have a separate license, but not post a separate bond if one is posted by the corporation. (Ord. 82-44,
§ 10, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 8-424. Blanket License:
(a)The owner or person in control of any real property located in the city, upon which a permanent
business and building is located, who conducts events regulated and required to be licensed under
this article, or who leases the premises to transient merchants for such regulated events, may
procure a blanket annual license, and the individuals conducting the various concessions there will
not be required to obtain individual licenses, under the following conditions:
(1) The owner or person in control of such real property shall be required to submit in writing to the
city clerk, on forms provided by the clerk, the locations of the premises upon which such activities are
to be conducted, the names and addresses of the officers and directors or other governing body of
the owner of the premises and the name, permanent address and business address of the person in
charge of managing such property. Said person shall also sign a statement that, in the event the
license is granted, he will comply with all the provisions of this article and that he guarantees that the
transient merchant leasing property from him shall also comply with all the provisions of this article.
(2) The licensee shall make the provisions of this article a part of any agreement for the use of the
premises for any purpose to which the provisions of this article are applicable.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of licensee not to permit any person to operate or conduct a business
on the premises as transient merchant who is not entitled to conduct such business under the
blanket license.
(b)Any person conducting or sponsoring an activity described in subsection (a) of this section may
secure a single event blanket license for the same uses and purposes and on the same terms and
conditions as the annual blanket license. A single event blanket license shall be valid for a period of
six (6) months and may be used for fourteen (14) cumulative days during said six (6) month period.
(Ord. 82-44, § 11, 10-25-1982; Ord. 82-74, § 1, 2-28-1983)
Sec. 8-425. Exemptions:
Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the duty of applying for a
transient merchant license:
(1) Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of resale.
(2) Persons selling or distributing newspapers.
(3) Persons selling tangible personal property or services to business enterprises.
(4) Persons who sell, at their permanent residence in the city, works of art or craft made or created
by such person or a member of such person's immediate family.
(5) Persons licensed by the state to sell real estate or insurance or licensed as transient vendors of
drugs.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 245/735
(6) Persons selling or distributing livestock feeds as defined by the laws of the state 1.
(7) Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or services through a permanent business
licensed by the city.
(8) Persons selling at events for which a blanket license has been obtained.
(9) Persons selling or distributing on their property fresh fruit or vegetables cultivated by such person.
(10) Persons selling tangible personal property at a garage, basement or yard sale held at one of the
person's premises.
(11) Persons conducting and selling admissions to or for theatricals, shows, rides, sports and games,
concerts, circuses, carnivals or any other public amusement where no sales of other products are
involved and such sales are made on the premises where the event is to be conducted.
(12) Persons selling food and beverages at a food service establishment regulated pursuant to the
health code of the city.
(13) A religious, charitable, patriotic, social service, civic or political nonprofit organization. (Ord. 82-
44, § 12, 10-25-1982)
Sec. 8-426. Issuance; Fees; Display:
(a)If an application for a license under this article contains a complete statement of the information
required and all material required to be submitted therewith is filed with the city clerk, the clerk,
subject to the provisions of section 8-421 of this chapter, shall issue within twenty one (21) days,
upon posting of the bond required by section 8-422 of this chapter, the license. The license issued
hereunder shall not be transferable. There shall be no refund of the license fee.
(b)Before a license shall be issued, applicant shall pay to the city collector a license fee according to the
following schedule:
(1) Blanket License:
a. Single event blanket license, fifty dollars ($50.00).
b. Blanket annual license, three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(2) Transient Merchant's License:
a. For one day, twenty five dollars ($25.00); for each additional day, five dollars ($5.00).
b. For one month, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
c. For three (3) months, two hundred dollars ($200.00).
d. For six (6) months, two hundred seventy five dollars ($275.00).
e. For one year, four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
(3) Duplicate License: Five dollars ($5.00).
(c)Each transient merchant shall at all times while doing business in the city keep in the possession of
such person the license required by this article and shall, upon request, display the license as
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 246/735
evidence of compliance with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 82-44, §§ 3, 7, 8, 10-25-1982; Ord.
007-2013, 3-4-2013)
Sec. 8-427. Denial; Revocation:
(a)The city manager may deny, within twenty one (21) days, a license to any applicant under this article
who has:
(1) Held a license under this article that has been revoked within two (2) years of the date of the
present application.
(2) Failed to make a complete application.
(3) During the past two (2) years, a history of:
a. Fraudulent applications for similar licenses.
b. Misrepresentation of the quality of merchandise or services offered for sale.
c. Crimes involving personal injury.
(b)The city manager may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article by sending a
notice of revocation by certified mail to the license holder at his last known address, return receipt
requested, or by personal service on the license holder or its officers for any of the following causes:
(1) Information showing that the license was erroneously issued initially.
(2) For any violation of the provisions of this article.
(3) For any violation of any city or state law regulating the sales activities of the license holder.
(c)The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five (5) days after denial or receipt of the
notice of revocation from the city manager the applicant or holder files a written request for a public
hearing on the city manager's action. A public hearing shall be conducted before the city council on
whether a license should be denied, reinstated or revoked, as the case may be. The city council may
order the license issued or reinstated either conditionally or unconditionally, or revoke the license.
Ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given to the license holder,
who shall have an opportunity to appear before the city council and present any evidence or
arguments he may have why the action taken by the city manager should not be approved by the city
council. (Ord. 82-44, § 13, 10-25-1982)
Secs. 8-428--8-430. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. TREE REMOVERS, TREE TRIMMERS, ETC. 1
Sec. 8-431. Definitions:
As used in this article:
Tree Remover: Any person, firm or corporation that, for profit, removes a tree stump or a tree standing in
any street, alley, parkway, boulevard or other public or private place in the city of Rock Island.
Tree Trimmer: Any person, firm or corporation that, for profit, diagnoses the condition of a shade, forest
or ornamental tree and recommends or supervises the treatment of any such tree, by feeding or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 247/735
fertilizing, or by pruning, trimming, bracing, treating cavities or other methods, or protects or attempts to
protect any such trees from damage by insects or disease by spraying or any other method. (1963
Code, ch. VI, art. II(U), §§ 1, 3; Ord., § 1, 2-11-1965)
Sec. 8-432. Tree Remover Generally:
(a)No person engaged in the business of removing trees shall remove any tree standing in any street,
alley, parkway, boulevard or other public or private place in the city without first obtaining a tree
remover's license from the city clerk. No tree remover's license shall be issued by the city clerk to
any person until said clerk is shown evidence that said person has in effect insurance by a reputable
insurance company authorized to do business in the state, covering public liability of twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per accident, and
also twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) liability coverage for property damage. In addition thereto
said applicant shall show sufficient evidence of insurance coverage for workers' compensation
claims. Said insurance coverage shall be kept in effect at all times while said licensee is engaged in
the business as aforesaid in the city. The license fee for such business or occupation shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
(b)The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The United States Of America, the state, the county or the city, any department, bureau or agency
of any of the foregoing or any official representative of any of the foregoing in the pursuit of his official
duties.
(2) Any person who engages in tree removing as defined above on his own premises.
(3) Any public utility, including its authorized employees and agents, when engaged in tree removal
for the purpose of line clearance and in order to ensure the continuity of utility service to the public.
(4) Any person holding a valid city tree trimming license. (1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(U), § 4; Ord. 87-
34, § 5, 4-6-1987; Ord. 004-2011, 2-7-2011)
Sec. 8-433. Tree Trimmer Generally:
(a)No person engaged in the business of trimming trees shall trim, feed or treat in any manner any trees
standing in any street, alley, parkway, boulevard or other public or private place in the city without
first obtaining a tree trimmer's license from the city clerk. The license fee for such business or
occupation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. Any person being issued a tree
trimmer's license shall show the city clerk sufficient evidence that said person has in effect insurance
by a reputable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, covering public liability of
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
accident, and also twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) liability coverage for workers' compensation
claims. Said insurance coverage shall be kept in effect at all times while said licensee is engaged in
the business as aforesaid in the city.
(b)The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The United States Of America, the state, county or city, any department, bureau or agency of any
of the foregoing or any official representative of any of the foregoing in the pursuit of his official
duties.
(2) Any person who engages in tree trimming as defined above on his own premises.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 248/735
(3) Any public utility, including its authorized employees and agents, when engaged in tree trimming
for the purpose of line clearance and in order to ensure the continuity of utility service to the public.
(1963 Code, ch. VI, art. II(U), § 2; Ord., § 1, 10-12-1981; Ord. 87-34, § 6, 4-6-1987; Ord. 004-2011,
2-7-2011)
Sec. 8-434. Reserved:
Sec. 8-435. Tree Trimmings Removed By Licensee:
Any person having a license as provided in this article shall immediately and at his own expense remove
all tree trunks, limbs, branches, twigs or brush and dispose of same at a place designated by the chief
building inspector or at such other place as is provided for the disposal of same. (1963 Code, ch. VI, art.
II)
Sec. 8-436. Planting And Maintenance Of Trees On Public Property - Permit 1:
(a)Required: No person shall plant or set out any trees in any street, alley, parkway, boulevard or other
public place without first procuring a permit therefor from the director of public works or his
designated representative.
(b)Application: Any person desiring to acquire a permit as aforesaid shall make application to the
director of public works or his designated representative therefor and include therein the number of
trees to be planted or set out; the location, grade and variety of each tree, the method of planting and
such other information as the director of public works or his designated representative shall find
reasonably necessary to determine whether a permit shall issue.
(c)Conditions For Issuance: Upon proper application being made as aforesaid, the director of public
works or his designated representative shall issue the permit provided for herein, when he finds that
the proposed planting conforms to the specifications and general regulations set forth hereunder.
(1) No trees shall be planted in a boulevard where sewer or water lines presently exist or where
future plans indicate the need of said lines.
(2) Trees shall be set out so as not to cause undue maintenance and so as not to interfere with any
utilities.
(3) The director of public works or his designated representative may require the applicant to furnish
a detailed planting plan which shall accurately show:
a. The proposed street, together with its subdivision of pavement, curb, gutter, parking strip and
sidewalk areas to a definite indicated scale.
b. The variety of each tree proposed to be planted and of those already existing within the
proposed street lines.
c. The distance between trees in any one row. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord., 4-9-1964; Ord. 87-
22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 8-437. Planting And Maintenance Of Trees On Public Property - Procedures:
(a)Generally: All work done under a permit issued under section 8-436 of this chapter shall be performed
in strict accordance with the terms thereof and with the following regulations:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 249/735
(1) The trunks of all trees planted must not be less than two and one-half inches (2 1/2") in diameter,
when measured one foot (1') above the ground.
(2) No tree shall be placed in such a location where, in the opinion of the city engineer, said tree shall
cause a traffic hazard when planted, or in the future.
(3) All trees shall be planted at least thirty feet (30') apart. Trees of the larger growing varieties shall
be spaced more than thirty feet (30') apart if considered desirable by the director of public works or
his designated representative.
(4) No tree shall be planted where the space between the curb and sidewalk is less than six feet (6').
Trees of the large growing varieties shall be permitted only where the space between the sidewalk
and the curb is adequate to appropriately accommodate them.
(5) No tree shall be planted nearer than three feet (3') from the curb line or the outer line of the
sidewalk.
(6) No tree shall be planted on any street or public place except the following varieties: sugar maple,
pin oak, red oak, ginkgo, honey locust (thornless varieties), columnar maple, littleleaf linden, hopa
crab, Washington hawthorne and any other varieties specifically approved by the director of public
works or his designated representative; provided, however, that Chinese elm, box elder, willow,
poplar, and similar fast growing, brittle wood species, which may be subject to attack by insects or
diseases, are prohibited.
(b)Duties Of Owners: All persons planting trees under authority of section 8-436 of this chapter and this
section shall assume the following duties:
(1) To trim said trees so as to prevent a traffic hazard or interference with the proper lighting of public
highways by any streetlights and so that the clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be a
minimum of twelve feet (12').
(2) To treat or remove any tree so diseased or insect ridden as to constitute a safety hazard or a
hazard to other trees or plants planted on public property.
(c)Compliance: When the director of public works or his designated representative shall find it necessary
to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees which constitute a hazard under subsection
(b) of this section, he shall serve a written order to correct the dangerous condition upon the person
to whom a permit to plant has been issued. Said notice shall be given by mailing a copy of said order,
by registered mail, to the owner of the abutting property as indicated by the property tax assessment
records of the county. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the time
specified in the order, the director of public works or his designated representative shall remedy said
condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom
the order is directed. (Ord., 4-9-1964; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Secs. 8-438-8-440. Reserved:
ARTICLE XV. RAFFLES 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-441. Definitions:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 250/735
When used in this article and unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set out herein:
Net Proceeds: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes,
local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
Nonprofit, Charitable, Educational, Religious, Fraternal, Veterans And Labor: Shall have the same
meaning ascribed to them in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/2(b).
Raffle: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2(b) conducted by an
organization licensed under this article, in which:
(1) The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated
by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which
chances is to be designated the winning chance;
(2) The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an
element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the
lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited
sporting contest.
Rock Island County Model Raffle Ordinance: An ordinance in substantially the same form, and
containing the same provisions and limitations as are set forth in this subject ordinance to be enacted by
any municipality located within Rock Island County, Illinois, and intended to regulate the conduct of
raffles within the jurisdiction of the respective municipality. (Ord. 078-2011, 10-10-2011)
Sec. 8-442. Penalty:
Violation of any provision of this article shall subject the person, firm, or organization to a fine in a sum
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 97-68, 7-
28-1997)
Sec. 8-443. Conduct Of Raffles, Generally:
The conducting of raffles licensed under this article is subject to the following restrictions:
(1) The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the
organization permitted to conduct that game.
(2) No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle.
(3) No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle; however, this shall not prohibit the payment of rent or a permit fee for use of
facilities to hold a raffle if said rent or fee is not dependent upon the raffle proceeds and is binding
upon the parties at the time made.
(4) Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning
chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
(5) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age may participate in the conducting of raffles
or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18)
years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied
by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 251/735
Sec. 8-444. Manager:
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager
designated by the organization. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-445. Records:
(a)Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item
or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall
be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
(b)Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the
organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same
nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor, issued by the department of revenue of the state,
and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The
person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles
shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
(c)Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and to the
licensing local unit of government, its receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
(d)Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make
available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and
places. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Secs. 8-446-8-450. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 8-451. License Required:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a raffle or chance in the city without
having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this article or in violation of the terms of such license.
(Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-452. Reciprocity With Other Municipalities In County:
Any person, firm or corporation who has in his immediate possession a valid license issued to the
person, firm or corporation by another municipality or political subdivision located in Rock Island County,
Illinois, which municipality or political subdivision has enacted the Rock Island County model raffle
ordinance (this article), shall be exempt from the requirements of this division to have obtained a license
from the city. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-453. Eligibility:
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans'
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 252/735
have had during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objectives. Licenses shall be issued to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual
or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident
or disaster. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-454. Restrictions On Issuance:
No such license shall be issued to:
(1) Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
(2) Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
(3) Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a person is active or employed;
(4) Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1) or (2) of this Section, is an officer,
director or employee, whether compensated or not;
(5) Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1) or (2) of this Section, is to participate
in the management or operation of a "raffle" as defined in this Article. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-455. Applications:
(a)Application for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of sales or advertisement of sale of raffle chances.
(b)The application for license must specify the area or areas within the City in which raffle chances will
be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which
winning chances will be determined.
(c)The application for license must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of
the prospective license organization and shall be signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the
organization.
(d)The application for license must state the residence of the applicant and all addresses of offices
within the licensing municipality and, if the raffle drawing is to be conducted within the licensing
municipality, the address of the location of the drawing.
(e)Prior to approval, any application which indicates that the sale of raffle chances would be in an area
outside the corporate limits of the City, or which indicates that the location or locations of determining
winning chances is outside the corporate limits of the City, shall be referred to the licensing authority
of such jurisdiction for comment as to zoning status, licensed status of location, and compliance with
licensing regulations.
(f)The City Clerk shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days from the date of application and
shall notify all jurisdictions affected thereby of said action. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-456. Fee:
Fees shall be charged for the making of application and the issuance of a raffle license as follows:
(1) Five dollars ($5.00) for a temporary raffle license for a single raffle;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 253/735
(2) Fifty dollars ($50.00) for an annual raffle license as defined in Section 8-457 of this Article;
(3) No fee will be charged for the making of application and the issuance of a raffle license for the
medical emergency/financial hardship. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 8-457. Validity; Duration:
A license authorizes the licensee to conduct "raffles" as defined in this Article. Licenses issued pursuant
to this Article shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a
specified period not to exceed one year, and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this
Article. (Ord. 97-68, 7-28-1997)
Secs. 8-458-8-465. Reserved:
ARTICLE XVI. WATERPROOFING OF BUILDINGS 1
Sec. 8-466. Permit Required:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of waterproofing basements, interiors or
exteriors, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or
structure to be waterproofed from the Building Official. (Ord. 87-91, 10-12-1987)
Sec. 8-467. Obtaining A Permit:
To obtain a permit, the contractor shall have on file in the office of the Building Official, a general
contractor's bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Notification of the construction for
each year, or the cancellation of this bond, must be confirmed by the office of the Building Official.
(1) Application For A Permit : To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file an application therefor in
writing on a form furnished by the Building Official for that purpose. Every application shall:
a. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
b. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address
or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
c. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications if required by the Building
Official. The Building Official may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared
and designated by an engineer or architect licensed by the State to practice as such.
e. State the value of the waterproofing measure.
f. Be signed by permitter, or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to
indicate such authority.
(2) Permit Issuance : The application, plans and specifications and other data filed by an applicant for
permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments
of the City to verify compliance with any applicable ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the Building
Official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and plans, specifications and other
data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 254/735
ordinances, and that the fees specified in section 304 of the Uniform Building Code have been paid,
he shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. (Ord. 87-91, 10-12-1987)
ARTICLE XVII. PEDICABS
Sec. 8-468. Definitions:
City : The City of Rock Island, Illinois.
Pedicab : Any vehicle that is a manually operated bicycle-type vehicle pulling a cart for two (2)
passengers equipped with handles and other equipment required by State law by slow-moving vehicles
to operate on the street.
Pedicab Operating License : A license granted to a person and authorizing a person to operate a
pedicab on the streets of the City. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-469. Licenses Required:
The operation of any pedicab vehicle upon the streets of the City for transporting persons for hire or as a
contractual service is a violation of this Article unless operating in accordance with a valid license issued
pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-470. Application For License:
Applications for pedicab business licenses shall be made to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City
Clerk. In addition to other information required by this Article, the application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's work or corporate history for the past five (5) years. If the applicant is a
corporation, the information shall also be given for the chief administrative officer who will be in
charge of the Rock Island operations. The corporation shall list all its officers and all other
businesses operated by the corporation. If the corporation is a foreign corporation, a copy of the
certificate to do business in the State shall be provided.
(3) A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions including traffic violations by the applicant for the
past ten (10) years. If the applicant is a corporation, such information shall be given for the chief
administrative officer in charge of the Rock Island operations.
(4) The number of pedicabs to be operated pursuant to the license and the seating capacity of each.
(5) A schedule of rates and charges to be made to passengers, which rates shall not be changed
without ten (10) days' prior notice to the City Clerk.
The applications shall be verified under oath and include a written agreement by the applicant to
operate the business, if licensed, strictly in accordance with this Article, and indemnify and hold
harmless the City for all judgments, liens and expenses arising out of the operations permitted by the
license. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-471. Pedicab Routing And Operations Schedules:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 255/735
(a)Pedicab business shall operate only within the area of the City located within 1st Avenue to 7th
Avenue and 11th Street to 26th Street and also the City bicycle path. For any special events that the
pedicab business wishes to service, said business shall contact the City Clerk at least four (4) days
before said special events and submit a temporary route to be used by the pedicab business during
said special events. The City Clerk will then review the temporary route with the City Traffic
Engineering Committee and the Police Department prior to authorizing same.
(b)The pedicab business in the City shall operate only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of each day. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-472. Operation Of Pedicab Businesses:
Pedicab businesses shall be operated only with the regulations given in this Section.
(1) A copy of the pedicab license shall be displayed on all pedicabs used in such business. The City
Clerk, upon issuance of the license, shall issue that number of duplicates as requested in the
application identifying each pedicab identified in the application.
(2) Each pedicab used in such business shall have a valid pedicab license issued pursuant to this
Article.
(3) Each pedicab shall be operated by the holder of a valid coach operator's license issued pursuant
to this Article, who shall have such license on his/her person at all times when operating such
vehicle.
(4) When carrying persons for hire or by contract, the vehicle shall be operated only in the approved
area of operations.
(5) Pedicabs shall pick up and discharge passengers only upon the curb lane, while lawfully parked
at designated stands.
(6) Pedicab vehicles, when in motion, shall be operated only in the curb-most traffic lane on any
public street; and the driver shall obey all applicable State and local traffic laws, ordinances and
regulations.
(7) No pedicab vehicle shall be operated on a public street unless a valid liability insurance policy as
specified in this Article is on file with the City Clerk.
(8) It shall be the duty of the driver of the pedicab to inform any person hiring the carriage of all the
rates and charges before any service is rendered, which shall be the same as those on file with the
City Clerk.
(9) Drivers shall carry rate cards and exhibit them on demand.
(10) Occupancy of the pedicab shall not exceed the rated seating capacity of the vehicle.
(11) No passenger shall be allowed to ride on any part of the vehicle when in motion except seated
inside the vehicle.
(12) Drivers shall not solicit patronage in a loud tone of voice or in any manner to annoy or obstruct
the movement of a person, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage.
(13) Drivers are prohibited from smoking while carrying passengers.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 256/735
(14) No person may drink any alcoholic liquor while such person is operating a pedicab. (Ord. 96-58,
9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-473. Insurance:
Before any permit for a pedicab shall be issued, the owner shall file with the City Clerk an insurance
policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in this State, providing insurance
coverage for each and every pedicab owned, operated or leased by the applicant with a minimum of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of any one person; and three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident,
and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident, regardless
of whether the pedicab was being driven by the owner, his/her agent, employee, lessee or permittee.
The policy shall contain a provision requiring the City to be named as an additional insured for the sole
purpose of the City being notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination, or
expiration of the policy thirty (30) days prior to that event. The cancellation or other termination of any
insurance policy issued for or in compliance with the provisions of this Section shall automatically
terminate any license issued for the pedicab covered by such insurance policy unless another policy
complying with the provisions of this Section shall be provided and in full force and effect at the time of
such cancellation or termination. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-474. Issuance Of License:
Upon receipt of the completed application for the pedicab business license, approval of the route and
operations schedule, filing of insurance as required, and payment of the application and license fees, the
City Clerk shall issue a pedicab business license to the applicant. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-475. Operation On The Streets Of The City:
(a)No pedicab shall be operated upon the streets of the City for transporting person(s) for hire or by
contract unless licensed by the City Clerk.
(b)Each pedicab will be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle sign approved by the State and attached to
the rear of the vehicle. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-476. Pedicab Operator's License:
(a)No person shall drive a pedicab carrying persons, for hire or by contract, unless he/she is the holder
of a valid pedicab operator's license issued pursuant to this Section.
(b)The application for the pedicab operator's license shall be made under oath to the City Clerk and shall
verify, or establish that the applicant:
(1) Possesses a valid, current operator's license issued by the State.
(2) Is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(3) Is free of defective vision, defective hearing, and any other infirmities that would render him/her
unfit for safe operation of a public vehicle.
(4) Is free of alcohol or drug addition.
(5) Has not, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding his/her application, been convicted of
any felony, or operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or a drug.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 257/735
(6) Has not received more than three (3) moving traffic violations in the immediately preceding twelve
(12) months or five (5) moving traffic violations in the immediately preceding twenty four (24) months
of application.
(7) Has delivered to the City Clerk a certificate signed by the pedicab licensee or other sufficient
evidence that such person is qualified to operate a pedicab.
(c)Upon approval of the application and payment of the necessary fee, the City Clerk shall issue a
pedicab operator's license to the applicant.
(d)Any person not having been duly issued a pedicab operator's license or a person whose license as
such driver has been revoked, any person whose license has been suspended, or any person who
has had his/her state driver's license suspended or revoked (even if he/she has restricted driver's
permit), and who during the time of such suspension or revocation drives a pedicab upon the streets
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-477. Denial, Suspension Or Revocation:
(a)Any violation of this Article by the holder of a license issued hereunder shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license by the City Clerk.
(b)Any denial of license application may be appealed within fourteen (14) days to the City Council. (Ord.
96-58, 9-9-1996)
Sec. 8-478. Annual License Fees:
The annual fee for a pedicab business license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Each additional pedicab
shall be licensed for fifty dollars ($50.00). A pedicab operator's license shall be issued for an annual fee
of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 96-58, 9-9-1996)
Secs. 8-479-8-485. Reserved:
ARTICLE XVIII. SALE/POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Sec. 8-486. Definitions:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them:
Minor: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
Tobacco Products: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
Vending Machine: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of
money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-487. License Generally:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of
selling at retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products within the City without having first obtained a
tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 258/735
Sec. 8-488. Licensing Procedure:
(a)License Application: Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on a
form provided by the City Clerk's Office.
(b)Licensee Fee: The annual license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00), payable in accordance with section 8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 043-2017, 11-6-2017)
Sec. 8-489. Responsibility For Agents And Employees:
(a)Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
article by an officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner
as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-
1996)
Sec. 8-490. Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines, Costs:
(a)Once a licensee has been notified of a violation of this article, they shall have five (5) days to file a
written notice of appeal. If no hearing is requested, the Mayor may suspend, revoke, or issue a
written reprimand to any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if the Mayor determines
that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article. In lieu of suspension or revocation
of a license, the Mayor may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(b)If no hearing is requested by the licensee and the Mayor determines that a letter of reprimand is
warranted or the license should be suspended or revoked, he shall issue a written order within five
(5) days stating the reasons for the determination, and shall cause a copy of such order to be served
upon the licensee within ten (10) days. In the event a penalty is imposed, the order shall specify the
date by which the penalty shall be paid. If the penalty is not paid by the specified date, the license
shall be suspended for a time determined by the Mayor. All penalties shall be paid at police
headquarters. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-491. Hearing Procedures:
(a)If a hearing is requested, in writing, before the Code Hearing Officer the Code Hearing Officer shall
schedule a hearing on said matter within thirty (30) days. Said hearing shall be open to the public
and a Court Reporter shall transcribe the proceedings.
(b)If the Code Hearing Officer determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter, the Code Hearing Officer may suspend, revoke or issue a written reprimand to any license
issued under the provisions of this chapter or, in lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, impose
a fine on the licensee not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each
day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(c)The Code Hearing Officer shall determine the costs incurred by the City for said hearing, including,
but not limited to: Court Reporter fees, the cost of transcript records, attorney fees, the cost of
preparing the mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the City
or such lesser sum as the Code Hearing Officer may allow.
(d)The licensee shall pay said costs to the City within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the
Code Hearing Officer. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 259/735
this article and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of additional fines.
(e)Witnesses shall be sworn; but the hearing shall be informal, and the strict rules of evidence shall not
apply.
(f)In the event the licensee wishes to appeal a decision of the Code Hearing Officer, said licensee shall
pay the cost of the preparation and transcription of the record of the hearing and shall appeal to the
Circuit Court under the provisions of the Administrative Review Act. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-492. Use Of Premises After Revocation:
(a)When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee
for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling "tobacco
products" as defined in section 8-486 of this article in the premises described in such revoked
license. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-493. Prohibited Sales, Delivery - Signs:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
tobacco products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b)Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee
at or near every display of tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine which offers
tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO
PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF
AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one
inch (1") high. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-494. Minors:
(a)Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products : It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licenses, to engage, employ or permit
any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises.
(b)Purchase By Minors Prohibited : It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess any tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or
altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
(c)Possession By Minors Prohibited : It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by a person under the age of
eighteen (18) years is under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-495. Certain Free Distributions Prohibited:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing,
promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person,
in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco
products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other property owned
by the city or the school district. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 260/735
Sec. 8-496. Vending Machines-Locking Devices:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the
intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless
such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by
the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b)Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law, or
premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the
use of employees of a business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 8-497. Remedies For Violation:
(a)Any violation of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be
punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). In the event any person is accused
of a violation hereof and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued
for the violation, that person so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation.
(b)Any violation committed by a minor of subsection 8-494(b) or (c) of this article, as a first offense, shall
be punishable by a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event any minor is accused of a
violation hereof and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for
the violation, that minor so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum
of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation. In lieu of any citation
payment or any fine mentioned herein for the first offense, a person may notify the chief of police, in
writing, of their intention to complete a "tobacco use" class or other similar class put on by the
American Lung Association, at such minor's sole cost and expense, and if such person shall
successfully complete such class and provide proof of completion to the chief of police, in writing,
then any such citation cost or fine for first offense shall be waived.
(c)These fines are in addition to administrative provisions for suspension, revocation or forfeiture of a
license issued pursuant to this article; and payment of such fine shall not constitute an admission of
guilt or innocence for purposes of such administrative proceedings for suspension, revocation or
forfeiture.
(d)Any duly appointed and authorized security officer for the School District #41 or any subdivision
thereof, or any other peace officer, shall have authority to sign all complaints and charge any
violations of this section that takes place on School District #41 property. Any duly appointed and
authorized administrator for the Alleman High School or any subdivision thereof, or any other peace
officer, shall have authority to sign all complaints and charge any violations of this section that takes
place on Alleman school property. (Ord. 96-67, 9-16-1996; Ord. 96-83, 10-28-1996)
ARTICLE XIX. TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS AND TATTOO ARTISTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 8-498. Definitions:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 261/735
Aseptic Technique : A practice that prevents and hinders the transmission of disease-producing
microorganisms from one person or place to another person or place.
Certificate Of Inspection : Written approval from the health authority that said tattooing establishment
has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this article relating to physical facilities, equipment
and layout for operation of such business. Said writing shall be on a form designated by the health
authority for such purpose.
City : The city of Rock Island, Illinois.
Facial Tattoo : Any tattoo applied above the jawline, anterior to the ear and frontal hairline including
the eyelids, eyebrows or lips.
Health Authority : The health inspector or authorized representative.
Operator : Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation or association that owns or
operates an establishment where tattooing is performed.
Sanitize : To treat a clean surface and destroy pathogenic microorganisms.
Single Service Items : Articles intended for one time, one person use and are to be discarded after
use.
Tattoo Artist : Any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing, on the person of another.
Tattoo, Tattooed, Tattooing : An indelible mark or decorative design created by the introduction of
dyes or pigments beneath the surface of the skin with the aid of needles or other devices. (Ord. 12-
2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 8-499. License Required; Fees:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a tattooing establishment
within the city without first paying an annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
payable to the city clerk's office upon written approval from the health authority and to engage in
such business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
(b)It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any tattooing within the city without a tattoo license,
respectively, which shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, or to employ any person
as a tattooer, who has not paid for such tattoo artist's annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each artist, and payable to the city clerk's office, upon written approval from the health authority.
(c)No tattoo artist shall practice tattooing in any place other than a tattoo parlor having a valid license.
(d)No tattoo artist shall apply a tattoo to any person who appears to be or admits to being under the
influence of intoxicating substances, including, but not limited to, alcohol, drugs, paints and glues.
(e)No tattoo artist shall apply a tattoo in violation of section 12-10 of the Criminal Code of 1961.
(f)Immediately after tattooing, the tattoo artist shall advise the client, in writing, on the care of the tattoo
and instruct the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-
2000)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 262/735
Sec. 8-500. Display Of License:
Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said license in a conspicuous
place. Failure to display said license shall be grounds for revocation. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-501. Exceptions To Provisions Of Article:
The requirements of this article shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed
as applying to any person, firm or corporation licensed by the state to practice medicine or licensed by
the state to practice any of the healing arts. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-502. Application:
Any person desiring to obtain or renew a license to operate a tattooing establishment or a tattoo artist's
license shall make application to the city clerk who shall refer all such applications to the health
inspector for an appropriate investigation. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-503. Contents Of Application:
(a)The application for a tattooing license required by this article shall contain the following information:
(1) Full name and current address;
(2) The two (2) previous addresses of the applicant immediately prior to the current address;
(3) Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years;
(4) Applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
(5) The tattooing license history of the applicant, including whether such person in previous operation
in this or another area has had his license revoked or suspended, the reason thereof, and any
business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation;
(6) A certificate of a medical doctor designating that the applicant has recently been examined and is
free of any contagious or communicable disease which in the opinion of the medical doctor can be
transmitted during the tattooing process. Immunization for hepatitis B is strongly recommended. (Ord.
12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-504. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 8-505. Tattooing Hygiene Procedure:
(a)All tattoo artists shall comply with the following:
(1) No employee, while infected with a disease in a communicable form, or who is a carrier of a
disease which can be transmitted during the tattooing process; and no employee while affected with
a boil, infected wound or acute respiratory infection shall provide tattooing to a client.
(2) No employee shall provide tattooing to any skin surface that shows evidence of any rash, boils,
infections or other unhealthy conditions or disease.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 263/735
(3) Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands and the exposed portions of their arms with soap
and warm water before starting work, during work as often as is necessary to keep them clean, and
after smoking, eating, drinking and using the toilet. Employees shall keep their fingernails clean and
trimmed.
(4) Employees providing tattooing shall, in addition to thoroughly washing, use single-use latex or
vinyl examination gloves, as a barrier to potentially infective blood.
(5) Employees shall not use tobacco in any form, or eat or drink while tattooing a client. (Ord. 12-
2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-506. Tattooing Procedure:
(a)The tattoo artist shall explain in writing the following to each client before a tattoo application and
maintain a copy of the informed consent signed by the client for at least five (5) years:
(1) The application procedure.
(2) Possible tissue reactions, infections and dye reactions following application.
(3) Importance of after-application care.
(b)The area of skin to be worked on shall first be thoroughly washed and scrubbed for a period of two (2)
minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use
sponge shall be used to scrub the area. After shaving and before the tattooing is begun, a solution of
seventy percent (70%) alcohol or other effective germicidal solution shall be applied to the area with
a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument;
(c)For tattooing, single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron, and
the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work on a patron; any dye in
which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person;
(d)Whenever a new sterile tube is used that contains a different color of dye or ink, a separate or new
sterile needle shall also be used. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual
single-use sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be used only on one person and
then immediately discarded. After completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed
with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by the health officer, or a
seventy percent (70%) alcohol solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry and petroleum jelly
from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall
then be fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive;
(e)Only clean single-service stencils may also be used;
(f)Only sterilized needles and tubes or tips, in good condition, shall be used for tattooing;
(g)Persons tattooed shall be provided with printed instructions regarding tattoo care during the healing
process and shall be instructed to consult a physician if signs and symptoms of an infection develop;
(h)Single-use needles, razors or other sharp materials must be disposed of immediately upon
completion of tattooing within EPA and OSHA approved sharps disposal containers.
(i)Used tattoo needles and other infectious waste shall be stored, treated, and disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of title XV of the environmental protection act 1 which regulates the management
and disposal of infectious waste. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 264/735
Sec. 8-507. Facial Tattoos:
(Rep. by Ord. 089-2005, § 1, 10-17-2005)
Sec. 8-508. Physical Facilities:
All tattoo parlors shall comply with all of the following requirements in order to qualify for a license:
(1) The tattooing room and waiting areas shall be separated by a solid partition or barrier that
prevents unauthorized entry into the tattooing room and provides privacy for clients.
(2) All floors, walls, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be constructed from materials that are
easily cleanable, smooth, nonabsorbent, durable, light colored, and in good repair. The tattoo
establishment shall be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(3) A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running water, shall be provided at
each workstation, for the exclusive use of the tattoo artist for hand washing and preparing the client
for tattooing. The hand sink will be under pressure with a mixing valve or combination faucet. Soap,
an approved hand drying device such as disposable paper towels, and a refuse container with a
cover shall be provided at each hand sink.
(4) All tattooing establishments shall be provided with at least one utility sink or curbed cleaning
facility with a floor drain for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning equipment and for the
disposal of mop water or similar liquid waste.
(5) Adequate lighting and ventilation shall be provided within the tattoo establishment.
(6) No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a tattoo establishment except for canine accompanying
the visually disabled.
(7) Effective measures shall be taken by the tattoo operator to prevent and maintain the tattoo
establishment free of pest and/or rodent infestations.
(8) An adequate number of lockers or other suitable facilities shall be provided and used for orderly
storage of employees' clothing and other belongings.
(9) Smoking and the use of tobacco in any form shall be prohibited in the tattooing room.
(10) Any other business or dwelling shall be completely separated from the tattoo parlor by at least a
solid partition from the floor to the ceiling. Only tattooing shall be permitted in a tattooing room. (Ord.
12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-509. Equipment:
(a)All service table surfaces shall be constructed of nonporous, easily cleanable material, and sanitized
after each client.
(b)All inks, dyes, needles and equipment shall be specifically manufactured for performing body art
procedures and shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. All dyes or pigments used
in tattooing shall be nontoxic, free from adulteration and made from materials generally regarded as
safe.
(c)Sterile single-service or sterile individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron. Ink
cups shall be for single patron use with the ink cup holder constructed from material that is easily
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 265/735
cleanable and nonabsorbent.
(d)All tubes, needle bars and instruments used in the tattoo procedure that are not sterile single patron
use and disposable shall be thoroughly cleaned and steam sterilized or dry-heat sterilized between
patrons. After sterilization, equipment used in the tattoo procedure shall be stored in a dry, clean
cabinet or other tightly covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments. Each tattoo
artist will be provided with a storage cabinet for the exclusive storage of instruments, dyes, pigments,
carbon, stencils, and other paraphernalia used in the parlor.
(e)Needles shall be disposable, sterile, single patron use or shall be reusable needles and shall be
thoroughly cleaned and steam sterilized or dry-heat sterilized between patrons. Needles, tubes, and
tips shall be constructed in a manner that permits easy cleaning and sterilization. Needles and
assemblies designed to be disposable shall be used one time, on one person only, and then
discarded in accordance with subsection 8-506(i) of this division.
(f)Razors shall be single patron use and disposable, or shall have the handle of the razor sterilized with
a new blade used for each patron. Alum or other material used to stop the flow of blood shall be used
only in liquid or powder form.
(g)Topical ointment or medications shall be packaged for single patron use. All bandages and dressings
shall be sterile and single use.
(h)All instruments used for tattooing shall remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to the
performance of the tattoo procedure. All instruments, equipment and facilities shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition. When assembling instruments used for the tattoo procedure, the artist
shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized techniques to ensure that the
instruments and gloves are not contaminated. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-510. Sterilization Procedure:
(a)Each tattoo parlor engaged in the practice of tattooing shall utilize sterilization equipment adequate in
size to accommodate needles, tubes, tips and other related utensils and equipment and only
sterilization equipment with the capacity to make a permanent record of the temperatures and
pressures in the machines may be used. All records shall be permanently retained by the licensee
and made available for inspection by the health authority on demand.
(b)After each use, the needles and assemblies shall be cleansed to remove protein residue (blood and
tissue) and sterilized.
(c)One of the following methods of sterilization shall be used:
(1) Autoclave - steam under pressure.
a. One hundred twenty one degrees Celsius (121°C) (250°F) at greater than ten (10) psi for not
less than thirty (30) minutes after the chamber of the autoclave has been evacuated of air and has
reached temperature; or as specified in the manufacturer's operator's manual.
(2) Dry heat sterilization.
a. One hundred seventy degrees Celsius (170°C) (338°F) for not less than two (2) hours after the
sterilizer has reached temperature; or
b. As specified in the manufacturer's operator's manual.
(3) Other methods approved by the health authority.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 266/735
(d)Sterilization shall be monitored by the use of chemical and heat sensitive (color change) indicators
with each batch of equipment sterilized or by other methods approved by the department.
(e)Sterilized equipment shall be stored wrapped or covered in a manner that ensures the equipment will
remain sterile until used. Each batch shall be labeled with the date of sterilization. If exposed to any
potential source of contamination, the equipment shall be resterilized before use.
(f)Sterile equipment stored, in an approved manner and not used within thirty (30) days after sterilization,
shall no longer be considered sterile and shall be resterilized before use.
(g)An equipment fault manual shall be kept by licensee and made available at all times to the health
authority containing a record of all sterilization equipment failures and the remedies taken to correct
the failure.
(h)Sterilizers shall be monitored monthly by an independent testing laboratory. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-
2000)
Sec. 8-511. Inspections:
During the business hours of the tattooing establishment, the health authority may conduct periodic
inspections for the purpose of determining whether or not said establishment and the persons
performing the art of tattooing thereon are in compliance with all applicable health provisions contained
within this article and other pertinent ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a
tattooing establishment wilfully to prevent or restrain the health officer from entering any licensed
establishment where tattooing is being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises, after
proper identification is presented to the operator. Where the health authority has reasonable grounds to
believe that a communicable disease has possibly been transmitted at a licensed tattoo parlor it may
require testing of the tattoo artist and employees. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-512. No Guarantee Or Warranty:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public interest by reducing the dangers involved in
unregulated practice of tattooing. Neither the issuance of a license, the making of an inspection without
finding violations, or any other act by the health officer or by any other city official shall constitute a
guarantee or warranty that any equipment or any treatment is safe or effective, or that any tattooing
establishment will perform without making errors. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
DIVISION 4. REVOCATION OF LICENSE
Sec. 8-513. Hearing Prerequisite To Revocation Of License; Notice:
No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the
administrative hearing officer to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall
be given in writing and served at least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date
of the hearing thereof. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such
license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be had. Said notice shall be
served upon the license holder by delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place
of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion.
In the event the license holder cannot be found, and the service of such notice cannot be otherwise
made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, registered and postage fully
prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of such hearing. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 267/735
Sec. 8-514. Grounds Of Revocation:
The license of a tattooing establishment may be revoked for any legitimate reason, including, without
limitation, any one or more of the following grounds:
(1) That the holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to
such an extent as to incapacitate such person for the performance of his professional duties for any
period of time.
(2) That the holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising.
(3) That the holder is guilty of wilful negligence in the practice of tattooing or has been guilty of
employing, allowing or permitting any unlicensed person to perform tattooing in his establishment.
(4) That liquor is being sold or consumed within the establishment.
(5) That the establishment has abandoned the practice of tattooing or that the individual licensee has
abandoned the same practices. For the purposes of this subsection, "abandonment" shall mean that
the activities regulated hereunder, or any of them, have ceased or otherwise not conducted for a
period of sixty (60) days at the establishment in question, or where an individual licensee has
abandoned the activities regulated hereunder, or any of them, for a like period.
(6) That the licensee, whether an establishment or individual, has violated any provision of this
article, whether or not an action has been commenced in circuit court.
(7) Any licensee, whether an establishment or individual, who has had its license revoked three (3)
times shall be ineligible for any license hereunder for a period of five (5) years beginning with the
effective date of the third revocation. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-515. Tattooing Establishments Practicing When Provisions Of Article
Become Effective:
Any person, firm or corporation who is actually engaged in the practice of tattooing at the time of final
passage of ordinance 12-2000 and meets all the requirements except as to adequacy of facilities, and
upon payment of the prescribed fee, shall be granted a license. Such person shall have thirty (30) days
from the effective date of ordinance 12-2000 from which this article is derived to bring his facilities into
compliance with this article. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
DIVISION 5. REGULATION; PENALTY
Sec. 8-516. Federal, State And Local Regulation:
Wherever federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations conflict with the provisions of this
article, then the law, ordinance, rule or regulation which is most strict shall apply, and it shall not be a
defense to an action under this article, or to a request for suspension or revocation of the license(s)
provided herein, that this article does not specifically enumerate the proscribed, prohibited or regulated
conduct. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Sec. 8-517. Penalty:
In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, any person violating any provision of this
article shall be fined not less then twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 268/735
on which a violation occurs or continues. Complaints for violation of provisions of this article may be
brought to the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 12-2000, § 1, 2-14-2000)
Chapter 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1, 2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Definitions:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
Loading Zone : That space or area defined by ordinance as being reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
Parkway : That part of the street which lies between the property line and the curb.
Property Line : The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting
thereon.
Public Building : A building used by the city or by any park district, school district, the state of Illinois
or the United States government. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. I)
Sec. 9-2. Penalty 3:
Except as otherwise provided herein:
Any individual violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months for any offense.
Any firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. X)
Sec. 9-3. Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted 4:
The provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended, except for those provisions which by their nature
can have no application to the city, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter with
the same force and effect as if set forth at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
of the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code.
Any person charged with any of the following violations:
Vehicle Code Section Illinois Offense
3-402 No valid registration
3-413(r) expired registration, plates or registration sticker Operation of vehicle with
3-416 of state of change of address/name Failure to notify secretary
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 269/735
3-703 or title Improper use of registration
6-101 (expired less than 6 months) No valid driver's license
12-201(b) Taillights-none
12-201(b) No red taillights
12-201(b) Only one red taillight
12-211 headlamp Improper lighting-one
shall have the option at arraignment of pleading "no contest" and paying a penalty of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). At that time, the state charge shall be dismissed by the office of the city attorney.
(Ord. 87-41, 4-20-1987)
Sec. 9-4. Miscellaneous Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance establishing or
eliminating stop intersections, yield right of way intersections, bus stops, through streets, cab stands or
other motor vehicle or traffic restrictions at specific locations, or authorizing traffic signals, or prohibiting
a right turn on a red light, or relating to a mass transit district; and all such ordinances are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
This chapter is intended to and shall be in addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations
concerning traffic, parking and the use of the streets, and shall not be taken to repeal any other
ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. XII)
Sec. 9-5. Tickets:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police officers, after making note of
the license number of the vehicle (and name of the offender where possible), may issue a traffic violation
ticket notifying the offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing such cases. Such
officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does not appear at the time and
place so specified. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. X)
Sec. 9-6. Riding On Fenders, Etc.:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, hood, top, running boards or outside step of
any vehicle. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. IV)
Sec. 9-7. Toy Vehicles Generally:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates or a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any
roadway other than at a crosswalk. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. IV)
Sec. 9-8. Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Streets:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a delivery and
then for one block only, on any street so designated by ordinance and properly signposted. For the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 270/735
purposes of this section the term "truck" refers to any truck required to have a class "D" license under
the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. VII; Ord. 88-57, § 1, 9-1-1988)
Sec. 9-9. Scene Of Fire:
The fire department officer in command, or any fireman designated by him, may exercise the powers
and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has
responded to any emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene, in the
absence of or in assisting the police. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. I)
Sec. 9-9.1. Sound Amplification Systems:
(a)Prohibited : No driver of any motor vehicle within the city of Rock Island shall operate or permit the
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the vehicle from seventy
five feet (75') or more, when the vehicle is present upon a highway, unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This section does not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.
(b)Penalty : Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). In the event a
person accused with a violation of this section does not wish to contest the allegation, said person
may pay to the city of Rock Island police headquarters, within seven (7) days of the issuance of the
notice of violation, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00), which payment shall be in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord. 98-87, § 1, 10-26-1998; Ord. 98-90, § 1, 11-2-1998; Ord. 72-2001,
§ 1, 9-17-2001)
Sec. 9-9.2. Unlawful Use Of Electronic Communication Devices:
(a)As used in this section "electronic communication device" means an electronic device, including, but
not limited to, a handheld wireless telephone, handheld personal digital assistant, or a portable or
mobile computer, but does not include a global positioning system or navigation system or a device
that is physically or electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.
(b)A person may not operate a motor vehicle on a roadway while using an electronic communication
device.
(c)This section does not apply to:
(1) A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while performing his or her official
duties;
(2) A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole purpose of reporting an
emergency situation and continued communication with emergency personnel during the emergency
situation;
(3) A driver using an electronic communication device in hands free or voice operated mode, which
may include the use of a headset;
(4) A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed on a permanently installed
communication device designed for a commercial motor vehicle with a screen that does not exceed
ten inches tall by ten inches wide (10" x 10") in size;
(5) A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on the shoulder of a roadway;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 271/735
(6) A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle is stopped due to normal
traffic being obstructed and the driver has the motor vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
(7) A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
(8) A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for licensees of the federal
communications commission in the amateur radio service;
(9) A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a single button to initiate or
terminate a voice communication; or
(10) A driver using an electronic communication device capable of performing multiple functions,
other than a handheld wireless telephone or handheld personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet
management system, dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is
not otherwise prohibited by this section.
(d)A person who violates this section shall be fined a maximum of seventy five dollars ($75.00). In the
event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a
complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city, at police
headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation. (Ord. 029-2014, 3-24-2014)
Sec. 9-10. Bicycles-Bicycle Sales-Registration:
(a)Bicycle Dealer's License : It shall be unlawful to deal in sales of three (3) or more bicycles within any
calendar year without a bicycle dealer's license. "Bicycle", for the purpose of this section, is any
bicycle twenty inches (20") or more in size.
(b)License Procedure:
(1) License Application: The application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk's Office. Licenses are nontransferable.
(2) License Fee: The license fee for a bicycle dealer's license shall be free and the license shall
remain in effect from the date of issue until the business is closed, sold, or ownership is transferred.
(c)Mandatory Registration Of Bicycles: It shall be mandatory for all bicycle dealers dealing in the retail
sale of bicycles within the City, to register all bicycles size twenty inches (20") and over at the time of
sale. The registration forms and bicycle license plates shall be made available to the businesses at
no cost through the Police Department. The completed registration forms shall be picked up twice a
month by a member of the Police Department. It shall be the responsibility of the business owner
and/or manager to notify the Police Department if they are in need of additional registration forms
and/or license plates. Persons registering a bicycle at the bicycle dealer or at police headquarters
shall not be charged a fee.
(d)Fine: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these ordinances relating to
bicycle dealer's license and procedures shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(e)Operation Of A Bicycle Without A License: No person who resides within this City shall ride or propel
a bicycle on any street, highway, road, etc., or upon any public way set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided
herein. That in the event a bicycle has been purchased outside the corporate limits of the City or was
sold within the City and has not been processed for a license plate as set forth above, the bicycle
shall be licensed through the procedure set below:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 272/735
(1) Registration Agency: Applications for registration should be issued by the Chief of Police.
(2) Application Form: The application for a bicycle license shall be on a form provided by the City.
(3) Proof Of Ownership: The Chief of Police shall refuse to issue a license where he has reason to
believe the applicant is not the owner of, or entitled to possession of, the bicycle.
(4) Inspection: The Chief of Police or an officer assigned such responsibility shall inspect each
bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in
unsafe mechanical condition.
(5) Registration Plate Or Tag: Upon issuing a bicycle license, the Chief of Police must also issue a
plate or tag, which shall be firmly attached to the bicycle in a manner as to be plainly visible from the
rear.
(6) Records: The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued,
the name and address of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for
which issued.
(7) Duration-Transfer Of Ownership; Renewal: A bicycle license shall remain valid as long as it
remains the property of the initial owner. If sold, traded, given away, etc., the new owner shall
reregister the bicycle in their name.
(8) Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the event a person
accused with a violation of this section who does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time
that complaint is issued for said violation, said person may pay to the City at the Rock Island police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for and in full satisfaction of said
violation. In the event a person is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section a second or
more time, he or she shall be fined in an amount equal the minimal fine. (1963 Code art. 11-8; Ord.,
2-23-1976; Ord., 8-14-1978; Ord. 96-64, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-69, 7-28-1997)
Sec. 9-11. Car Owner Responsibility Assignment:
This chapter is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of
the people of the City, and is intended to address a public nuisance created by individuals operating
motor vehicles upon the streets and highways of this City. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-
1997)
Sec. 9-12. Public Nuisance:
(a)A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of any of the offenses contained in this section shall be
declared a public nuisance and the owner of record shall be subject to having said vehicle
impounded for lengths of impoundment described in section 9-13 of this article and shall also be
liable to the City for the penalties indicated in section 9-13 of this article to include the fees for the
towing and storage of the vehicle and fines.
(1) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle who is in violation of section 9-9.1
of this article.
(2) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle where the windows of the motor
vehicle are obstructed in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-
503(a) and (b).
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 273/735
(3) The driver of a motor vehicle who is in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-101 entitled "Drivers Must Have Licenses and Permits" and the violator has an invalid
driver's license or the violator's driver's license has been expired for more than six (6) months.
(4) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is in violation of section 10-90,
"Truancy Prohibited", of this Code.
(5) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 555/1 - Child Curfew Act and/or subsection 10-59(a) of this Code, entitled "Curfew
for Persons Under Seventeen Years of Age".
(6) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle while being twenty (20) years of
age or younger is in possession of alcohol in violation of subsection 3-10(c), "Purchase And
Consumption By Minors Prohibited", of this Code.
(7) The driver of a motor vehicle who is in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-303 entitled "Driving While Driver's License, Permit Or Privilege to Operate a Motor
Vehicle Is Suspended Or Revoked".
(8) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is in violation of the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/4(a), (b), (c), (d) or (e), entitled "Possession
of Cannabis" and/or Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5(a), (b), (c), (d)
and (e), entitled "Manufacture Or Delivery of Cannabis". Possession of cannabis up to ten grams (10
g) shall not be subject to this section.
(9) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle who is in violation of the Illinois
Vehicle Code 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501 entitled "Driving While Under the Influence of
Alcohol, Other Drug Or Drugs, Intoxicating Compound Or Compounds Or Any Combination Thereof".
(10) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is in violation of the Illinois
Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(a)(4), entitled "Unlawful Use of Weapons".
(11) The motor vehicle is used in the commission of, or attempt to commit a violation of Illinois
Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2, entitled "Aggravated Discharge of a Firearm"
and/or Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5, entitled "Reckless Discharge of
a Firearm".
(12) The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/402, entitled "Possession
Unauthorized by This Act".
(13) The motor vehicle unlawfully flees or attempts to flee and elude a peace officer in violation of the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204 or 5/11-204.1.
(b)The driver or other person in possession of the motor vehicle shall be arrested or cited for the
violations of the State Statute(s) or City ordinance(s) as indicated in subsections (a)(1) through (a)
(13) of this section. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997; Ord. 98-88, 10-26-1998; Ord. 72-
2001, 9-17-2001; Ord. 18-2004, 2-2-2004; Ord. 051-2012, 7-23-2012; Ord. 024-2018, 6-11-2018)
Sec. 9-13. Length Of Impoundment And Fines:
(a)Whenever a vehicle is used in violation of subsections 9-12(a)(1) through (a)(13) of this chapter the
registered owner's vehicle shall be impounded for the following lengths of time and a penalty
imposed against the registered vehicle owner as indicated herein:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 274/735
(1) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for
three (3) days and a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(2) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(4) or (a)(5) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for seven (7)
days and a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(3) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(6) or (a)(7) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for fourteen
(14) days and a fine of five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00).
(4) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(8) or (a)(9) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for twenty
(20) days and a fine of five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00).
(5) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(10) or (a)(11) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for thirty
(30) days and a fine of five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00).
(6) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(12) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for thirty (30) days
and a fine of five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00).
(7) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(13) of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for thirty (30) days
and a fine of five hundred eighty dollars ($580.00). (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997;
Ord. 18-2004, § 2, 2-2-2004; Ord. 24-2004, § 1, 2-16-2004; Ord. 051-2012, 7-23-2012)
Sec. 9-14. Fines And Subsequent Violations:
All lengths of impoundment and fines imposed shall double upon any subsequent violation of this article.
(Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 9-14.1. Impoundment With Respect To Sound Amplification Systems
Violations:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this or other ordinances, there shall be no impoundment of an
owner's vehicle for the vehicle's operation as a public nuisance in violation of subsection 9-12(a)(1) of
this chapter when that vehicle has not been so operated as a public nuisance in violation of subsection
9-12(a)(1) of this chapter for a period of two (2) or more years. However, the owner of a vehicle that is
not impounded because of the preceding sentence shall pay a fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) if the
vehicle is found to have been operated as a public nuisance in violation of subsection 9-12(a)(1) of this
chapter. For second and subsequent operations of a given owner's vehicle as a public nuisance in
violation of subsection 9-12(a)(1) of this chapter that occur within two (2) years of the most recent
violation of that section, all other provisions of sections 9-11 through 9-20 of this chapter shall be fully
operable. (Ord. 72-2001, § 1, 9-17-2001)
Sec. 9-15. Seizure, Impoundment And Hearings Request:
Whenever a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this article, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a
facility controlled by the City or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a
person, and the owner of said vehicle of the fact of the seizure and the vehicle owner's right to post a
cash bond as indicated in subsections 9-16(a)(1) through (a)(6) of this chapter to retrieve possession of
their vehicle pending a hearing to be held by the City's Code Hearing Officer. When the vehicle is not
impounded for a first offense pursuant to section 9-14.1 of this chapter, the police officer shall notify the
vehicle's owner that second and subsequent uses of the vehicle as a public nuisance in violation of
subsection 9-12(a)(1) of this chapter that occur within two (2) years of the most recent use as a public
nuisance shall result in the impoundment of the vehicle pursuant to this section. The notification shall
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 275/735
also explain the vehicle owner's right to a hearing with respect to the alleged violation. When a vehicle is
impounded, the officer shall also notify the owner and person in control of the vehicle of the owner's right
to a probable cause hearing as set forth in subsection 9-17(i) of this chapter. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996;
Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997; Ord. 72-2001, § 1, 9-17-2001)
Sec. 9-15.1. Vehicle Involved In An Unlawful Attempt To Flee And Elude A Peace
Officer:
(a)Declared A Nuisance: A vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude a peace officer in
violation of section 11-204 or 11-204.1 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code 1 and is not immediately
stopped by the police and the driver placed under arrest is declared to be a public nuisance under
subsection 9-12(a)(13) of this chapter and said vehicle is subject to being immediately towed by the
police.
(b)Vehicle Subject To Seizure And Impoundment: Whenever a police officer has observed a vehicle
engaged in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude and believes that there exists probable cause to
tow said vehicle, and locates said vehicle on a public thoroughfare or within a parking lot under City
ordinance control or a parking lot open to the general public within the City of Rock Island, Illinois,
before the end of his or her watch, then said vehicle may be seized and impounded by the Rock
Island Ppolice Department. Notice shall be given to the person in control of the vehicle and the owner
of the vehicle as described in subsection (g) of this section.
(c)Incident Report: Whenever a police officer has observed a vehicle engaged in an unlawful attempt to
flee and elude and said vehicle is not located by the police before the end of his or her watch, said
officer shall at the end of his or her watch prepare a written incident report which provides a record, if
possible, of the make, model, year, color, state of registration, license plate number, identification of
the driver, location of the incident and the date and time of the incident. Said report shall include
information sufficient to support the determination of probable cause to tow, including information of
the officer's attempts to stop the vehicle at the time of the occurrence, and that the driver failed or
refused to stop after the officer activated the squad car's emergency signal equipment and that
pursuit of the vehicle was abandoned for public safety reasons.
(d)Interim Seizure: Upon completion of the report, the officer shall give the report to the watch
commander or his or her designee for interim seizure and impoundment authorization of said vehicle.
Once authorized, said vehicle may be seized and impounded by police based upon the reporting
officer's probable cause for a period of ninety six (96) hours prior to the filing of a "notice of intent to
impound" as described in subsection (e) of this section. If said vehicle is towed within the ninety six
(96) hour period and before a "notice of intent to tow" is filed as described in subsection (e) of this
section, notice shall be given to the person in control of the vehicle and the owner of the vehicle as
described in subsection (g) of this section. "Notice of intent to tow" under subsection (e) of this
section may be filed at any time after the officer prepares his or her written incident report.
(e)Notice Of Intent To Impound: If said vehicle is not located within ninety six (96) hours, the police
department may file a "notice of intent to impound" with the administrative clerk of MUNICES. Once
filed, said vehicle may be seized and impounded by police if located on a public thoroughfare or
within a parking lot under city ordinance control, or a parking lot open to the general public within the
city of Rock Island, Illinois, pending a plenary hearing as described in subsection 9-17(b) of this
chapter. The notice of intent to impound shall include the following information:
(1) A statement that the operator on the date, time, and approximate location of the incident in
question failed or refused to stop operation of the vehicle when ordered to do so by the police officer;
(2) A description of the vehicle as contained in the police officer's report;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 276/735
(3) Notice that a plenary hearing on the merits to contest the eligibility for impoundment of the motor
vehicle shall be scheduled on a specified date at one o'clock (1:00) P.M. in the city hall chambers of
the city of Rock Island, Illinois, 1528 3rd Avenue, Rock Island, Illinois. Said hearing date shall be
scheduled as described in subsection 9-17(b) of this chapter;
(4) Notice that if said vehicle, as described in the notice of intent to impound, is located on a public
thoroughfare or within a parking lot under city ordinance control or a parking lot open to the general
public within the city of Rock Island, Illinois, at any time prior to the scheduled plenary hearing as
described in subsection (e)(3) of this section, that said vehicle is subject to immediate impoundment
and seizure;
(5) That the owner is entitled to have a preliminary hearing and/or post bond to retrieve the vehicle
prior to the scheduled plenary hearing as described in subsection (g) of this section.
(f)Delivery Of Notice: Upon filing the "notice of intent to impound" with the administrative clerk of
MUNICES, notice shall be sent by regular mail to the vehicle's owner of record. The notice is
presumed delivered upon it being deposited with the United States postal service with proper
postage being affixed thereto.
(g)Preliminary Hearing And Posting Of Bond:
(1) Whenever any officer of the Rock Island police department has probable cause to believe that a
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to subsection (b), (d) or (e) of this section,
and said vehicle is located on a public thoroughfare or within a parking lot under city ordinance
control or a parking lot open to the general public within the city of Rock Island, Illinois, said officer
shall seize said vehicle and provide for its towing and impoundment. When the vehicle is towed the
officer shall notify the person in control of the vehicle and the owner of the vehicle of the owner's right
to request a preliminary hearing to determine if there was probable cause to believe that a driver of
said vehicle was involved in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude a police officer and of his or her
right to post a cash bond as indicated in section 9-16(a)(7) of this chapter to retrieve possession of
said vehicle prior to any preliminary hearings or plenary hearings on the merits. Notice shall also be
given to the owner of said vehicle of the date and time of the plenary hearing on the merits as
described in subsection 9-17(b) of this chapter. All hearings on the merits will be held on the
scheduled date and time in the city hall chambers of the city of Rock Island, Illinois.
(2) All requests for preliminary hearing shall be in writing and delivered to the Rock Island police
department within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure. All preliminary hearings shall be held within
seventy two (72) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after the written request for hearing is
delivered to the police department.
(3) All preliminary hearings will be conducted by the administrative code hearing officer.
(4) The vehicle so seized shall be impounded pending completion of any preliminary hearings or
plenary hearings on the merits and for the minimum time of impoundment set by subsection 9-13(a)
(7) of this chapter if a violation of this section is found.
(5) If, after proceeding with a preliminary hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines there
was probable cause to tow, or if no timely request for preliminary hearing is filed by the owner, said
matter will be scheduled for plenary hearing on the merits. Said hearing date shall proceed as
described in subsection 9-17(b) of this chapter.
(6) All hearings conducted under this section shall proceed in accordance with the rules and
procedures described in subsections 9-17(b) through (h) of this chapter. (Ord. 051-2012, 7-23-2012)
Sec. 9-16. Bonding Procedure:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 277/735
(a)Whenever the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this article wishes to retrieve their vehicle prior to
the evidentiary hearing they may do so by posting a cash bond at police headquarters in the amount
indicated herein. Once the bond has been posted, the vehicle shall be released without charge until
an evidentiary hearing is held by the city code hearing officer.
(1) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) of this chapter, bond of two hundred forty five
dollars ($245.00).
(2) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(4) or (a)(5) of this chapter, bond of three hundred fifty five dollars
($355.00).
(3) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(6) or (a)(7) of this chapter, bond of eight hundred forty dollars
($840.00).
(4) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(8) or (a)(9) of this chapter, bond of nine hundred thirty dollars
($930.00).
(5) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(10) or (a)(11) of this chapter, bond of one thousand eighty dollars
($1,080.00).
(6) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(12) of this chapter, bond of one thousand eighty dollars
($1,080.00).
(7) Violation of subsection 9-12(a)(13) of this chapter, bond of one thousand eighty dollars
($1,080.00). (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997; Ord. 58-00, § 1, 8-14-2000; Ord. 01-10,
§ 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. 05-2003, § 1, 1-27-2003; Ord. 25-2004, § 1, 2-16-2004; Ord. 004-2006, § 1, 1-
23-2006; Ord. 081-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008; Ord. 051-2012, 7-23-2012)
Sec. 9-17. Hearing And Notification:
(a)Within ten (10) business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this article, or not
impounded by operation of section 9-14.1 of this chapter, the city shall notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner of record, any lienholders or other legally entitled persons of the date,
time and location of a hearing that will be conducted pursuant to this section. When the city does not
know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, the city will
cause the vehicle registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by the secretary of state
for purposes of obtaining the required ownership information.
(b)A hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the city code hearing officer, on
the first and third Friday of each month on the Friday following the day the vehicle was seized if not
within seven (7) days. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at
the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall
be admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public and a court reporter shall transcribe the
proceedings. If the city of Rock Island shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement providing for
the shared use of the code enforcement hearing officer, the notice and hearing date rules established
pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement shall apply to this subsection.
(c)If, after the hearing, the city code hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
the vehicle had been stolen prior to the alleged violation, he shall enter an order dismissing the
procedure. If, however, he determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was not
stolen prior to the violation, he shall enter an order requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded
for the applicable length of time provided for in this section and until the owner pays the fees
imposed under sections 9-13 and 9-14 of this chapter if the vehicle is still in the custody of the city. If
the vehicle is not in the city's custody then subsection (d) of this section shall apply.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 278/735
(d)If a bond had been posted and the owner has possession of the vehicle, the city code hearing officer
shall enter an order deducting the fees imposed under sections 9-13 and 9-14 of this chapter as if the
vehicle was actually held for the time period specified from the cash bond that was posted.
(e)In the event the defendant wishes to appeal the decision of the city code hearing officer under the
provisions of the administrative review act, said defendant shall pay the cost of the preparation and
transcription of the record of the hearing and shall appeal to the circuit court.
(f)If the city code hearing officer determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be
returned without penalty or other fees.
(g)The penalty and fees shall be a debt due and owed to the city. However, if a cash bond has been
posted the bond shall be applied to the fine. If the city code hearing officer determines that the
vehicle was not used with the permission, express or implied, of the owner, he or she shall order the
return of the vehicle or cash bond. In the event it shall become necessary for the city to collect the
debt by filing an action in the circuit court, they shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the amount
due, court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
(h)Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any lienholder of record may obtain possession
of any seized and impounded vehicles they have a legal lien interest in by: 1) submitting to the city
verified proof that they have commenced foreclosure proceedings against the registered owner of
said vehicle, 2) payment of the towing and storage fees for the periods of time said vehicle was to be
held under section 9-13 of this chapter and 3) providing a written agreement to refund to the city the
net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, over and above the amounts necessary to satisfy any liens, to
be applied by the city to satisfy any penalties and costs imposed under sections 9-13 and 9-14 of this
chapter.
(i)In addition to the hearing procedures set forth in the preceding subsections of this section, every
owner who has his or her car impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to a probable
cause hearing before the city's code hearing officer, or if he or she is not available, before an
impartial Illinois licensed attorney at law, on the question of whether or not the vehicle has been
operated as a public nuisance in violation of section 9-12(a) of this chapter. This hearing, if
requested, shall occur no later than two (2) business days from the time of the owner's request for
such a hearing. The owner's request for a probable cause hearing must be made in writing to the city
of Rock Island police department within three (3) days of receiving notice of the right to such a
probable cause hearing. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997; Ord. 98-57, § 1, 8-24-1998;
Ord. 33-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 72-2001, § 1, 9-17-2001; Ord. 081-2010, 12-13-2010)
Sec. 9-18. Unclaimed Vehicles:
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time during
which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the city's action under this article, or the time at
which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the city, or the time a final administrative decision is
rendered against an owner of record who is in default may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as
provided by law. As used in this article, the "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder.
(Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 9-19. Fees And Storage:
Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this article shall be the same as those charged per the
contract for towing service with the city in effect at the time of same violation. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-1996;
Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 9-20. Severability:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 279/735
If any provision or part of this article shall be found unconstitutional or outside the corporate or home rule
powers of the city, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 96-66, 9-16-
1996; Ord. 97-50, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 9-21. Authority To Impound Fleeing Vehicles:
(Rep. by Ord. 051-2012, 7-23-2012)
Secs. 9-22-9-25. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. PARKING 1
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 9-26. Penalty:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any of the parking ordinances of the
city, other than a private parking ordinance violation, a zoned parking ordinance violation, or a violation
of downtown restricted parking use ordinance, and who receives a ticket therefor, shall pay a fine of
twenty dollars ($20.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice,
the operator of the vehicle shall pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of
forty dollars ($40.00). Any person violating the private parking ordinance in the city shall pay a fine of
twenty five dollars ($25.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the
notice, the operator of the vehicle shall pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the
sum of forty five dollars ($45.00). Any person who violates any of the parking ordinances of the city at a
location where tow away placards have been posted on parking control signs shall pay a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice, the
operator of the vehicle shall pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of
seventy dollars ($70.00). Any person who receives a ticket for parking at any curb within five feet (5') of
a fire hydrant shall pay a fine of thirty five dollars ($35.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven
(7) days of the date of the notice, the operator of the vehicle shall pay as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation the sum of fifty five dollars ($55.00). This section shall not apply to
provisions in this article with different penalties from the above. All fines for parking violations may be
paid by credit card by calling the finance department for the city of Rock Island, Illinois. An additional five
dollar ($5.00) processing fee will be charged for this service. (Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-27. Miscellaneous Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance prohibiting or
regulating parking on specified public or private property, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized
as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (Ord. 92-12, 1-
20-1992)
Sec. 9-28. Liability Of Owner:
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article, the
person in whose name such vehicle is registered, as well as the operator of the vehicle and the vehicle
itself, shall be subject to the penalty for such violation. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Arts. X and XII; Ord. 92-12,
1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-29. Unattended Vehicles:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 280/735
No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running, and no vehicle shall be left
without a driver on any hill or incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving. (1963 Code, Ch. XI,
Art. IV; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-30. Impoundment Of Vehicles Generally:
(a)An unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked, or occupying any portion of any street, in
violation of any of the provisions of any of the ordinances of the city, including, without limitation,
traffic and parking ordinances and nontraffic ordinances such as those prohibiting the obstruction of a
fire hydrant, or left parked overnight in any city parking lot is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which
may be abated by any agent or employee of the city designated to enforce the parking ordinances of
the city by impounding such vehicle and by removing and conveying such vehicle or by causing such
vehicle to be removed and conveyed to a vehicle pound. A vehicle pound is hereby declared to be
any suitable place designated by the city as a vehicle pound. The owner or operator of such vehicle
may have the same removed from the impoundment by paying the costs and expenses of the
towage and impounding of such vehicle, together with all fines and penalties, as provided in this
chapter.
(b)In all cases of violations herein referred to, the right to impound shall be in addition to any other
remedy provided in this chapter, or any other remedy provided by law. Whenever any vehicle, while
being used without the consent of the owner, shall be stopped, standing, or parked in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, such owner shall not be subject to the penalty for such violations.
(1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art. X; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 93-11, 3-1-1993)
Sec. 9-31. Abandoned Vehicles:
(Rep. by Ord. 39-00, § 1, 6-26-2000)
Sec. 9-31a. Inoperable Motor Vehicles:
(Rep. by Ord. 39-00, § 1, 6-26-2000)
Sec. 9-32. No Parking Places:
At any time it shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following
places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
policeman or traffic signal:
(1) In any intersection.
(2) In a crosswalk.
(3) Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or the approach thereto.
(4) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb
immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
(5) Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or a through street sign on the approaching side.
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.
(7) At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for
moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 281/735
(8) At any curb within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
(9) At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
(10) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
(11) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side
of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance.
(12) On any sidewalk or parkway except as provided in section 9-33 of this division.
(13) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(14) At any bus stop.
(15) On any bicycle or pedestrian path.
(16) In a Rock Island city park in violation of posted parking requirements. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art.
VI; Ord., 5-19-1975; Ord., 12-15-1975; Ord., 1-9-1978; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 93-11, 3-1-1993;
Ord. 030-2007, § 1, 4-23-2007)
Sec. 9-33. Parking On Public Property:
Parking of motor vehicles may be allowed on parkways, boulevards or other areas of dedicated right of
way not being used as part of the traveled way when authorized by special ordinance. Such ordinance
may place conditions, restrictions and limitations on parking. (Ord., 1-9-1978; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-34. Cabstands; Bus Stands; Limited Parking At Bus Stops:
(a)Generally : No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by special
ordinance as a cabstand, and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated
as a bus loading zone except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(b)Limited Parking At Bus Stops; Signs :
(1) The following bus stop parking locations located in the city may hereinafter be used for open
parking after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. each day.
a. Downtown, as being bounded by 15th Street on the west, 24th Street on the east, 1st Avenue
on the north and 5th Avenue on the south, and including twenty one (21) bus stops.
b. At 1230 30th Street.
c. On 14th Avenue at 40th Street.
(2) If a bus parking location is to be available at certain times for public parking, signs shall be added
below the bus stop signs indicating the times that the bus parking location is available for public
parking and any applicable parking time limitations. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art. VI; Ord. 89-11, 3-20-
1989; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-35. Parking At Curb:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb except on one-way streets
where parking is permitted on both sides thereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park
any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 282/735
within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb; except that upon those streets that have
been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such
marks with the front wheels at the curb. Trucks may back to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading for actual periods of time necessary for loading or unloading, but in no case shall they
interfere with the movement of traffic. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art. VI; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-36. Vehicles For Sale:
(Rep. by Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-37. Loading Zones:
(a) During the times specified in this section, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any vehicle of the second
division, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-217, being used for carrying freight, goods,
wares or merchandise for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials,
not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places:
(1) In any public alley during any hour of the day or night except that the delivery vehicle shall not
block access to and from the alley at any time.
(2) At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any hotel
at any time.
(3) At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public
building, between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on Sunday.
(4) Directly in front of the entrance to any theater for the purpose of loading or unloading of
passengers or for the purpose of purchasing theater tickets for a period not to exceed three (3)
minutes.
(5) At any other location in the city as is designated by special ordinance. Such ordinance may
designate the hours that the area shall be used as a loading zone. At any other time, the area can be
used generally for parking.
(b)Any person operating a vehicle other than a second division vehicle to pick up or deliver goods or
merchandise may apply at the finance department for a permit to display in the windshield stating
that the vehicle is an authorized delivery vehicle. Such permit will be granted when proof of such use
is presented to the finance department and upon payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee per year.
(c)Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined fifteen dollars ($15.00). In the
event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice, the operator of the vehicle
shall pay as the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of thirty five dollars
($35.00). (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. VI; Ord., 8-30-1971; Ord., 1-26-1976; Ord., 5-2-1977; Ord., 9-25-
1978; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 100-2001, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. 20-2002, § 1, 3-18-2002; Ord.
08-2003, § 1, 2-10-2003; Ord. 005-2010, § 2, 1-18-2010; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-38. Alleys:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except as provided in section 9-37 of this chapter and shall
then park only in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available not less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; and no person shall stop, stand or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 283/735
park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(1963 Code, ch. XI, art. VI; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-39. Double Parking:
It shall be unlawful for any person to double park any vehicle in the city at any time. Any person violating
this provision shall be fined fifteen dollars ($15.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days
of the date of the notice, the operator of the vehicle shall pay as the penalty for and in full satisfaction of
such violation the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00). (Ord. 005-2010, § 3, 1-18-2010; Ord. 058-2015, 12-
14-2015)
Sec. 9-40. Fire Lanes:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any area designated as a fire lane by special
ordinance in the city. Any agent or employee of the city designated to enforce the parking ordinances of
the city is hereby authorized to cause any motor vehicle parked in a fire lane in this city to be towed from
the fire lane. In such a case, the owner of the vehicle shall be assessed the cost of towing and any
storage charges in relation thereto plus a fine of thirty five dollars ($35.00). In the event the fine is not
paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice, the operator of the vehicle shall pay the penalty for
and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of fifty five dollars ($55.00). (Ord. 013-2011, 2-21-2011;
Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-41. Snow Removal 1:
(a)In the event of two inches (2") or more of snow, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow a
motor vehicle to remain on any street or avenue in the central business district between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. The "central business district" shall be defined as
the area circumscribed by and including the following:
1st Avenue, 14th Street to 21st Street
5th Avenue, 14th Street to 21st Street
14th Street, 1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
21st Street, 1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
(b)In the event of two inches (2") or more of snow, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow a
motor vehicle to remain on any marked snow route until the snow has been cleared.
(c)This section shall affect other parking restriction ordinances that are presently in effect in the city,
except bus stop and loading zone ordinances.
(d)Whenever the city manager or mayor perceives an emergency to exist in the city or in any section or
sections thereof because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts or other natural phenomena
which create hazardous conditions or impede the free movement of fire, police, health, emergency or
other vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the safety and welfare of the public, the city manager or
mayor may declare an emergency to exist. Notice of the existence of an emergency and the terms
and termination thereof shall be given to the print, radio and television media, which shall be
requested to cooperate with the city in the dissemination of such information to the public. When
given, such notice shall constitute due and proper notice of the emergency and the terms and
conditions thereof.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 284/735
(e)Any agent or employee of the city designated to enforce the parking ordinances of the city is hereby
authorized to cause any motor vehicle in violation of this section to be towed from any snow route. In
such a case the owner of the vehicle may be assessed the cost of towing and any storage charges in
relation thereto plus a fine of thirty five dollars ($35.00). In the event the fine is not paid within seven
(7) days of the date of the notice, the operator of the vehicle shall pay as the penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation the sum of fifty five dollars ($55.00). (Ord., 12-17-1979; Ord. 92-12, 1-
20-1992; Ord. 20-2002, § 1, 3-18-2002; Ord. 08-2003, § 1, 2-10-2003; Ord. 005-2010, § 5, 1-18-
2010; Ord. 013-2011, 2-21-2011; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-42. Parking On Private Property 2:
(a)No person, firm or corporation shall park a motor vehicle on private property controlled by a private
parking ordinance passed by the city council without the consent of the property owner. The owner of
said property shall pay an annual fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to the city of Rock Island
and shall post a sign or signs on said premises indicating that:
(1) Parking is prohibited without the consent of the property owner;
(2) Parking a motor vehicle without the consent of the property owner is a violation of city ordinance;
(3) The owner of any vehicle violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty
five dollars ($25.00); and
(4) Any vehicle violating the provisions of this section may be impounded and the owner of the
vehicle shall be responsible for all costs of the towing and impoundment.
The size, design, number and location of these signs shall be approved by the Rock Island public
works department.
(b)The owner of any vehicle violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). In the event that the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice,
the owner of the vehicle shall pay as the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum
of forty five dollars ($45.00).
Any vehicle violating the provisions of this section may be impounded as described in section 9-30 of
this chapter. (Ord., 2-19-1979; Ord. 87-54, 4-6-1987; Ord. 91-13, 2-11-1991; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992;
Ord. 92-112, 8-24-1992; Ord. 36-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 20-2002, § 1, 3-18-2002; Ord. 08-2003, § 1, 2-
10-2003; Ord. 005-2010, § 6, 1-18-2010; Ord. 006-2011, 2-7-2011; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-43. Parking Large Trucks In Residential Zones:
(a)It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Park any truck, except public service vehicles, with an allowable gross vehicle weight of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds or more, abutting or adjacent to any lot zoned under residential
classifications as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city, except for the purpose of making a
delivery, and then only for such length of time as it takes to complete delivery.
(2) Park a garbage or refuse truck on any public or private property in the city unless the property is
zoned I-1 or I-2, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
(b)Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00).
In the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice, the operator of the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 285/735
vehicle shall pay as the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of forty dollars
($40.00).
(c)For each day that any such truck remains parked in such an area, it shall be considered a separate
violation under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 82-79, 3-14-1983; Ord. 83-13, 5-23-1983; Ord.
92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996; Ord. 20-2002, § 1, 3-18-2002; Ord. 005-2010, § 7, 1-18-
2010; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-44. Parking Enforcement Attendants; Positions Created:
There is hereby created the position of parking enforcement attendant. A sufficient number of attendants
shall be employed. These attendants may be employed by the city or may be third party contract
employees. These attendants shall issue parking tickets against any person or persons violating any of
the rules, regulations or ordinances pertaining to parking as set forth in this article. Such parking tickets
shall be placed upon the windshield of any motor vehicle found parked in violation of such regulations
and ordinances. The attendants shall not be members of the police department, nor shall they have the
power to make arrests or direct or regulate traffic; but their authorization and duties shall be limited
strictly to those set forth in this section. (Ord. 052-2014, 7-14-2014)
Sec. 9-45. Impoundment For Unpaid Violations:
(a)Whenever it is determined that any vehicle has accumulated five (5) or more parking tickets or fifty
dollars ($50.00) or more worth of accumulated parking violations as defined in the provisions of this
code, the public works director shall serve notice of such condition to the registered owner of the
vehicle. Service may be made by certified or registered mail or by personal service. The notice shall
state the date and nature of each ticket and the amount presently due and shall inform the vehicle
owner of the following procedures:
(1) The vehicle owner may obtain a review of the tickets by giving written notice to the public works
director within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice of unpaid tickets, requesting a
conference with the public works director.
(2) If within fifteen (15) days of the date of the receipt of the notice of unpaid tickets, the vehicle
owner has not either given written notice requesting a conference or paid the full amount of the
unpaid tickets, it shall be deemed that he has waived the right to a conference, and the full unpaid
amount of the tickets shall be due immediately.
(3) If the vehicle owner fails to either give written notice requesting a conference or to pay the full
amount of the unpaid tickets within the prescribed time period, such vehicle shall be subject to
impoundment.
(b)The public works director shall schedule a conference to be held not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days after receiving written notice from the vehicle owner requesting the conference.
After a review of the tickets at the conference, the public works director shall determine the amount
due up to the full amount of the unpaid tickets and shall inform the vehicle owner of the decision.
Unless other arrangements for the payment are made by the public works director and approved by
the finance director, the amount shall be paid within fifteen (15) days. If, after reaching an agreement
concerning payment of the tickets, the vehicle owner fails to make any payment when due, the
vehicle of such owner shall thereupon be subject to impoundment until all payments then due are
made. The public works director and the finance director shall have full authority to make binding
agreements concerning payments due, if any, and may agree to payments and other terms which
they deem to be in the best interests of the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 286/735
(c)When any vehicle owner within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice of unpaid tickets
required by subsection (a) of this section has not either paid the full amount of the unpaid tickets or
given written notice to the public works director requesting a conference, or when any vehicle owner
after an agreement with the public works director as described in subsection (b) of this section fails to
make any payment when due and such payment has not yet been made, the vehicle of such owner
thereafter found parked and unattended on a public right of way in the city, within the municipal
parking ramp or within a city parking lot, by any agent or employee of the city designated to enforce
the parking ordinances of the city, may be impounded.
(d)Impoundment shall constitute either impoundment by immobilization or by towing.
(1) Impoundment by immobilization shall be accomplished by the attachment of a mechanical device
such as a denver boot consisting of clamps or jaws and a locking device which, when attached to the
wheel of a vehicle, prevents the vehicle from being driven. If a vehicle that has been impounded by
immobilization has not been reclaimed within twenty four (24) hours, the immobilization device may
be released and the vehicle may be impounded by towing.
(2) Impoundment by towing shall be accomplished by removing and conveying such vehicle or by
causing such vehicle to be removed and conveyed to a vehicle pound. A vehicle pound is hereby
declared to be any suitable place designated by the city as a vehicle pound.
(e)Any vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions herein may be reclaimed by the registered owner
or operator by appearing at the police department. At such time, the owner or the operator shall sign
a certificate that he/she is the owner or operator of the impounded vehicle, pay all charges and costs
incurred in impounding the vehicle, and pay all outstanding parking fines and late payment penalties.
In lieu of paying these charges, costs, fines, and penalties, the owner or operator may execute a
binding payment agreement. The agreement shall be a standard prepared in advance by the public
works director with the approval of the finance director, and it shall contain a payment schedule and
the penalties for failure to fulfill the conditions of the agreement.
(f)The public works director and finance director may designate others to exercise powers and perform
functions provided in this section.
(g)The fine for impoundment by immobilization shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the fine for
impoundment by towing shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 92-
112, 8-24-1992; Ord. 08-2003, § 1, 2-10-2003)
Sec. 9-46. Suspension Of Driver's License:
(a)Notice Of Intent To Impound: Once the registered owner of a vehicle has been delivered the notice of
intent to impound a vehicle for unpaid parking violations through certified mail, registered mail, or
personal service and allows the fifteen (15) day time period to expire without seeking further review
or breaks an agreement concerning the payment of tickets, the public works director may initiate
driver's license suspension with the Illinois secretary of state and/or file a petition in the circuit court
to have the unpaid fines and penalties rendered as a judgment in favor of the city.
(b)Notice Of Impending Suspension: A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to
the owner for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more parking violations.
This notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state. Failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's
date will result in the public works director notifying the secretary of state that this person is eligible
for initiation of suspension proceedings.
(c)Report Of Public Works Director: The report of the public works director notifying the secretary of
state of unpaid fines or penalties shall be certified and shall contain the following information:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 287/735
(1) The name, last known address and driver's license of the person who failed to pay the fine or
penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such people in this
state;
(2) The name of the municipality making the report;
(3) A statement that the municipality sent a notice of impending driver's license suspension to the
person named in the report at the address recorded with the secretary of state; the date which the
notice was sent; and the address to which the notice was sent.
(d)Suspension Challenge: The vehicle owner may challenge the notice of impending driver's license
suspension within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice. Challenges will be strictly limited to:
(1) The person not having been the owner or the lessee of the vehicle.
(2) The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on
the certified report.
(e)Obtain Judgment: The public works director may commence a proceeding in the circuit court for the
purpose of obtaining a judgment after the fifteen (15) day time period during which an administrative
review may be sought. This shall not prevent the city from consolidating multiple license plates or
parking violations against a person in such proceeding. (Ord. 95-27, 4-10-1995)
Sec. 9-47. Increased Fine For Unauthorized Use Of A Parking Place Reserved For
Handicapped Persons:
Any person making an unauthorized use of a parking place reserved for handicapped persons in
violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1303.3 shall be fined the sum of three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). (Ord. 013-2011, 2-21-2011)
Sec. 9-48. Parking Unattended Trailers On Public Right Of Way Prohibited:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer that is detached from its towing vehicle within any
alley, highway, street, right of way, or public property located within the city.
(b)Every trailer parked in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may be
abated by any police officer or parking enforcement attendant by removing and impounding such
vehicle as described in section 9-30 of this chapter.
(c)A trailer is excepted from this prohibition when it is actively engaged in deliveries, lawn maintenance,
construction or other trade activity upon property immediately abutting the parked trailer. However, at
all times, the roadway shall be free for the passage of other vehicles, traffic control signs and signals
shall not be obstructed and sightlines for intersections shall not be obstructed.
(d)The owner of any vehicle violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty
dollars ($20.00). In the event that the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice,
the owner of the vehicle shall pay as the penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum
of forty dollars ($40.00). (Ord. 35-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 31-2002, § 1, 4-8-2002; Ord. 005-2010, § 8,
1-18-2010; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Secs. 9-49 - 9-80. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. ZONE PARKING
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 288/735
Sec. 9-81. Definitions:
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
Operator: Every person who shall operate, drive or be in control of any vehicle upon any street.
Park: The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any street for a period of time greater
than is reasonably necessary for the loading or unloading of persons or materials.
Parking Lot: That area of city owned property located off street and designated for the parking of motor
vehicles.
Permit: That authorization issued by the city to operators of vehicles complying with the provisions of this
division.
Street: Any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place located in the city and
established for the use of vehicles.
Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street.
A bicycle or motor bicycle shall be termed a vehicle.
Zone: Any area designated and marked for parking of a particular and specific duration. (Ord. 86-70, § 1,
12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-82. Zones Generally:
The city council shall establish parking zones upon such streets of the city as it shall select. The council
may add to, change or abandon such parking zones. In selecting, changing or abandoning such parking
zones, the council shall be guided and governed by location, amount of traffic, demand for parking
spaces, congestion of traffic, use of the street, and other traffic conditions. (Ord. 86-70, § 1, 12-15-1986;
Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-83. Parking Zones Established:
Thirty (30) minute, one hour, two (2) hour and four (4) hour parking zones shall hereby be established
and identified by the placement of appropriate parking control signs within the zones. The establishment
of such zones in no way supersedes the existence of any previously established no parking zones,
loading zones, bus lanes or otherwise restricted parking zones. (Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015; Ord. 023-
2016, 5-9-2016)
Sec. 9-84. Marking Spaces:
The city council shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or street for the purpose of
designating each parking space, and each vehicle parked at any parking space shall park within the
lines or markings so established. It shall be a violation of this division for any person to park any vehicle
in such a position that the same will not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
(Ord. 86-70, § 1, 12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-85. Location Of Vehicle:
When a parking space in any parking zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle
parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle alongside of and as
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 289/735
near as is practicable to the front of the parking space. When a parking space in any parked zone is
diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked at and as
near as possible to the curb. (Ord. 86-70, § 1, 12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-86. Parking Time Limit - Generally:
Upon entering any posted zone parking space, a vehicle may occupy such space for a period of time not
to exceed the posted time limit for the zone. (Ord. 86-70, § 1, 12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-87. Parking Time Limit - Enforcement:
(a)All parking zones shall be enforced during the times posted in the zone. The parking zones shall not
be enforced on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth Of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day and Christmas Day.
(b)During these times, enforcement personnel will patrol designated streets. Vehicles which have
occupied any given parking space in excess of the posted parking limitation shall be considered as
parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking and shall be in violation of this division. (Ord.
86-70, § 1, 12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992; Ord. 92-112, § 4, 8-24-1992)
Sec. 9-88. Overtime Parking, Penalties:
The city council shall hereby adopt the following progressive fine structure for overtime parking
violations:
(1) See section 10-107.11, "Schedule Of Penalties For Ordinance Violations", of this code. (Ord. 013-
2011, 2-21-2011; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-89. Moving Of Vehicles Prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move any vehicle from any designated zone parking space to any
other such space for the purpose of extending the legal parking limit beyond the posted time limit. Upon
observance of or detection of such offense in accordance with section 9-87 of this chapter, the operator
of the vehicle shall be issued a notice of violation and shall pay a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). In
the event the fine is not paid within seven (7) days of the date of notice, the operator shall pay as the
penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation the sum of forty five dollars ($45.00). (Ord. 005-2010,
§ 10, 1-18-2010; Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-89.1. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. PERMIT AND FEE PARKING
Sec. 9-90. Definitions:
For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section:
Operator: Every person who shall operate, drive or be in control of any vehicle upon any street.
Park: The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon any street for a period of time greater
than is reasonably necessary for the loading or unloading of persons or materials.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 290/735
Parking Lot: That area of city owned property located off street and designated for the parking of motor
vehicles.
Permit: That authorization issued by the city to operators of vehicles complying with the provisions of this
division.
Street: Any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place located in the city and
established for the use of vehicles.
Vehicle: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street.
A bicycle or motor bicycle shall be termed a vehicle.
Zone: Any area designated and marked for parking of a particular and specific duration. (Ord. 86-70, § 1,
12-15-1986; Ord. 92-12, § 1, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-91. Designation Of City Parking Facilities:
The city council shall establish the following locations as parking facilities:
(1) Lot A, located south of 2nd Avenue between 16th Street and 16 1/2 Street.
(2) Lot C, located at the southwest corner of the intersection of 1st Avenue and 20th Street.
(3) Lot E, located at the northwest corner of the intersection of 18th Street with 7th Avenue.
(4) Lot F, located at the northeast corner of the intersection of 18th Street with the Great River Plaza.
(5) Lot G, located along the alley connecting 17th and 18th Streets south of 1st Avenue.
(6) Municipal parking ramp, located between 16th and 17th Streets and 3rd and 4th Avenues. (Ord.
058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-92. Permit System Established:
(a)The city council shall hereby establish a parking permit system by which specific permits authorize
parking in specific designated locations. A permit shall be obtained from the finance department upon
payment of the appropriate fee. Permits shall be displayed on the front left side of the vehicle's
dashboard or displayed in a vinyl case and affixed to the lower left corner of the rear window of the
vehicle. The permit system shall be established as follows:
(1) Construction permit authorizes the permit holder to park a construction vehicle in any city owned
parking lot, ramp, or on street parking space for any length of time.
(2) Daily/visitor permit authorizes the permit holder to park in any city owned parking lot, ramp, or on
street parking space for one day only.
(3) Rover permit authorizes the permit holder to park in any city owned parking lot, ramp or on street
parking space for any length of time.
(b)Parking permits have the following exceptions:
(1) Permit holders may not park in any space designated for handicapped parking unless displaying
the proper identifying tags or license plates.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 291/735
(2) Permit holders may not park in any marked loading zone, no parking zone, bus lane or other
restricted parking area. (Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-93. Permit Fees:
The city council does hereby establish the following fee schedule for parking in the municipal parking
facilities:
(1) Construction parking permits $20.00 per month
(2) Daily/visitor parking permits 5.00 per day
(3) Rover parking permits 80.00 per month
(Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-94. Fees - Discounted; Parking Incentive Plan:
(Rep. by Ord. 14-2004, § 1, 2-2-2004)
Sec. 9-95. Display Of Permit Generally:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
Sec. 9-96. Penalties:
(Rep. by Ord. 058-2015, 12-14-2015)
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL PARKING LIMITATIONS
Sec. 9-97.1. Minimum Size For Residential Permit Parking Area:
The minimum size for residential permit parking areas shall be the lesser of ten (10) contiguous parcels
of property or lots or one complete block unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 92-78, 4-
27-1992)
Sec. 9-98. Residential Parking Permit:
The city council may designate residential parking areas as either type A area or a type B area.
(1) Type A Area : The resident or residents of a dwelling unit which abuts or is adjacent to a
designated residential parking only area may obtain from the finance department of the city, by
payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee, a parking permit for each owned, leased, rented or assigned
vehicle. This permit will allow parking adjacent to applicant's residence only without restriction. These
permits shall not be transferable to other vehicles. Each resident issued a parking permit will also
receive without additional fee two (2) visitor parking permits which may be displayed only upon
vehicles not registered to residents of the dwelling and may be transferred between vehicles. Visitor
parking permits may be displayed only on vehicles used by persons not at the home of the resident
to whom the permit was issued, and parking is limited to that area which abuts or is adjacent to the
resident's property only. In the event that a resident does not own any vehicles, two (2) visitor permits
may be obtained by payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 292/735
(2) Type B Area : The resident or residents of a dwelling unit which abuts or is adjacent to a
designated residential parking only area may obtain from the finance department of the city, by
payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee, a parking permit for each owned, leased, rented or assigned
vehicle. This permit will allow parking without time restriction in any otherwise legal parking space
within the designated area. These permits shall not be transferable to other vehicles. Each resident
issued a parking permit will also receive without additional fee two (2) visitor parking permits which
may be displayed only upon vehicles not registered to residents of the dwelling and may be
transferred between vehicles. Visitor parking permits may be displayed only on vehicles used by
persons not at the home of the resident to whom the permit was issued. In the event that a resident
does not own any vehicles, two (2) visitor permits may be obtained by payment of a five dollar
($5.00) fee. (Ord. 87-53, 5-18-1987; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992; Ord. 95-61, 8-28-1995)
Sec. 9-99. Permit Issued Annually:
Residential parking permits must be renewed annually by payment of a five dollar ($5.00) fee and are
applicable only to the designated street. (Ord. 87-53, 5-18-1987; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
Sec. 9-100. Penalty For Unauthorized Use:
The penalty for unauthorized use of a permit shall be a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 87-53, 5-18-1987; Ord. 92-12, 1-20-1992)
ARTICLE III. PEDESTRIANS 1
Sec. 9-101. Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance establishing
pedestrian crossings, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art. XI)
Sec. 9-102. Adult Crossing Guards:
There are hereby created the positions of adult crossing guards, who shall operate the traffic control at
designated school crossings in the city. They shall be supervised by a city employee or official
designated by the city manager to act in this capacity in addition to his present duties. These persons
shall be responsible for maintaining the traffic control at designated crossings. They shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the proper use of school crossings, and this function shall be separate and
distinct from the police department. The persons working pursuant to this section, whether they receive
compensation or not, are not members of the police department but shall work under the direction of the
police department. (1963 Code, Ch. XI, Art. XI)
Sec. 9-103. Standing On Sidewalk:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to
the building line or curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other
pedestrians. (1963 Code, ch. XI, art. V)
Secs. 9-104-9-110. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. PARADES, RUNS, ETC., PERMIT
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 293/735
Sec. 9-111. Permit Required:
No person shall use the public streets in the city for runs, marches, parades and air activities without
having first obtained a permit from the city clerk. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 83-19, 6-13-1983)
Sec. 9-112. Application:
Any organization or individual desiring to sponsor an activity shall file an application for a permit with the
office of the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk. (Ord. 83-19, 6-13-1983)
Sec. 9-113. Notice Requirement:
(a)Any application for a permit shall be filed with the city clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the
scheduled event. This sixty (60) day period or any portion thereof may be waived by the city council.
(b)In the case of applications for new events and/or new routes, the sponsor of said new event shall
notify the residents and/or businesses located along said race route, parade route, or other, for that
specific activity, in writing, at least three (3) weeks prior to city council consideration. Prior to council
consideration, sponsor shall notify and obtain written approval or disapproval from the residents
and/or businesses and submit a copy of same to the city clerk. Any resident and/or business who
objects to said event shall have the opportunity to be heard at the city council meeting during which
time the event is to be considered. (Ord. 095-2014, 12-15-2014)
Sec. 9-114. Liability Insurance:
No permit shall be issued until the sponsor of the scheduled event files with the city clerk evidence of
liability insurance coverage for the event in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for any one person or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one accident,
with the city being listed as an additional insured, claims or damages which may arise out of the event.
(Ord. 83-19, 6-13-1983)
Sec. 9-115. Review By Police; Issuance:
At such time as an application is filed, it shall be forwarded to the traffic unit supervisor of the police
department for review and estimation of service costs excluding a public works service and police
vehicles used but including charges for auxiliary police and off duty police officers' time. In addition, the
traffic unit supervisor may contact the event sponsor regarding any suggested changes in routing or any
other suggested changes. After the review as aforesaid, the application shall be returned to the city
clerk, who shall then contact the event sponsor regarding the estimated cost. If the cost figure is
acceptable to the sponsor, and the sponsor agrees to pay same, the application and cost estimate shall
be forwarded to the city manager for final review and placement on the council agenda. If the city council
approves the event, the city clerk shall issue a permit allowing the event to take place. After the event
has taken place, the sponsor shall be billed for the actual police and public works services rendered.
(Ord. 83-19, 6-13-1983; Ord. 96-50, 7-22-1996)
Sec. 9-116. Reimbursement Of Excess Costs:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-50, 7-22-1996)
ARTICLE V. NEIGHBORHOOD NUISANCE VEHICLES
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 294/735
Sec. 9-117. Purpose:
The city of Rock Island is committed to maintaining the attractiveness, aesthetics, and safety of all
residential neighborhoods and promoting the health and safety of its citizens. Pursuant to its home rule
authority, the city hereby declares vehicles stored, parked, housed, and repaired as defined herein which
are in violation of this article, to be public nuisances and the city will abate these nuisances by towing or
having the owner of the vehicle or property abate the nuisance. Pursuant to that authority, the city
council finds that such regulations, restraint or prohibition is necessary and desirable to promote or
enhance the public good. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-118. Regulated:
Except as permitted by the zoning ordinances, no person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking,
storage or leaving of any vehicle of any kind which is an abandoned vehicle on private property,
abandoned vehicle on city property, hazardous vehicle, vehicle having evidentiary value, inoperable
motor vehicle, or unregistered vehicle, whether upon public or private property within the city except as
authorized herein. The presence of such vehicle in violation of the provisions hereof is hereby declared a
public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article.
This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle
stored on the premises of a business enterprise actively operated on the subject premises and being
properly operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city and
engaged in such business enterprise as would properly be associated with the storage of such vehicles.
(Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 39-00, § 3, 6-26-2000; Ord. 78-2000, § 1, 10-9-2000)
Sec. 9-119. Definitions:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Abandoned Vehicle On City Property : One that is left on property owned or operated by the city
(except for a city street or alley) for longer than two (2) hours or in a city owned parking lot for longer
than twelve (12) hours, without permission of the city.
Abandoned Vehicle On Private Property : A vehicle parked or otherwise located on private property
that has not been moved for a period of seven (7) days.
Abandoned Vehicle On Street Or Alley : An abandoned vehicle is one that is abandoned on any
highway, street or alley or other public right of way. Continuous standing of a vehicle on a highway,
street or alley or any public right of way for over a seventy two (72) hour period shall be prima facie
evidence of abandonment of such vehicle.
Administrative Hearing Officer : Defined and created pursuant to section 10-107 et seq., of this code.
Hazardous Vehicle : Any motor vehicle on private or public property that is declared to be a health or
safety hazard by a duly authorized police officer, community service officer, or city inspector, when
the vehicle is found to be:
(1) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects, snakes, rats, or other pests; or
(2) A point of weed growth and/or other vegetation over ten inches (10") in height; or
(3) A point of collection for pools or ponds of water; or
(4) A point of concentration of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive materials; or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 295/735
(5) So situated that there is a danger of the vehicle falling or turning over; or
(6) A place in which debris, bottles or other solid waste is discarded and is present within the
vehicle or immediately next to or around the vehicle; or
(7) A source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of confinement that cannot be
opened from the inside or from exposed surfaces of metal, glass or other rigid materials.
Inoperable Motor Vehicle : A vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other essential parts have
been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power for a period of
at least seven (7) days. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include: 1) a motor vehicle which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary
service or repair operations, 2) any motor vehicle that is kept concealed within a building when not in
use, or 3) a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in repairing, wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles where properly zoned.
Owner : An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental agency or any
combination thereof, as evidenced by the title to the vehicle. If no title to the vehicle is available, then
the last record owner as contained in the records of the secretary of state of the state in which the
vehicle was last titled shall be rebuttably presumed to be the current owner.
Seized Vehicle : Any vehicle which is seized as a result of an arrest, pursuant to 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., recovery of a stolen vehicle, or any other lawful seizure.
Unregistered Vehicle : One that:
(1) Does not have an attached current registration (license plate) valid in any state; or
(2) Does not have displayed a current temporary registration valid in any state; or
(3) Has a registration (license plate) which is expired pursuant to the laws of the issuing state.
Vehicle : A machine propelled by power, other than human power, designed to travel by use of
wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall
include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, RV, SUV, snowmobile,
personal watercraft, conversion van, boat, camper, mobile home, pop-up camper, pickup truck, and
wagon.
Vehicle Having Evidentiary Value : Any vehicle which is seized so it can be searched for evidence of
a crime (hit-and-run, blood, fingerprints, etc.). (Ord. 34-00 § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 39-00, § 2, 6-26-2000)
Sec. 9-120. Authority To Abate The Nuisance By Towing:
The chief of police or his designee is hereby authorized to immediately tow away, or cause to be towed
away, any vehicle on any public street, public place, or private property at any time:
(1) When the motor vehicle is a hazardous vehicle, or "abandoned vehicle on city property", as
defined herein;
(2) When the motor vehicle is an evidentiary vehicle;
(3) When the motor vehicle is a seized vehicle;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 296/735
(4) When the vehicle is on private residential property and is parked there without consent of the
property owner, proprietor or agent of the property, provided:
a. That signs approved by the city posted on the property give notice that parking is prohibited, and
b. That the person requesting the tow signs a statement that he is the owner, proprietor, or agent of
the property with the authority to request the tow. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-121. Pretow Notice Of Removal:
In all other instances of a violation of this article, the chief of police or his designee is hereby authorized
to tow away, or cause to be towed away, any vehicle on any public street, public place, or private
property at any time but shall first give notice of removal to the registered owner of the vehicle, if the
owner can be ascertained and if the vehicle is located on private property, to the owner or occupant of
the private property where the vehicle is located at least seven (7) days before the vehicle is removed.
(1) It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice outlined in the pretow notice of
removal is posted upon the vehicle itself and on a conspicuous place upon the private property on
which the vehicle is located; and
(2) A duplicate copy of the pretow notice of removal is sent by registered mail to the registered owner
of said vehicle if one can be determined based on the information on the vehicle such as the
registration (license plate) or VIN number; and
(3) A duplicate copy of the pretow notice of removal is sent by certified mail to the lien holder if one
can be determined based on the information on the vehicle such as the registration (license plate) or
VIN number.
The notice of removal shall identify the vehicle, the statutory grounds for removal, the right of the
vehicle owner to request a pretow hearing before the administrative hearing officer to contest the
grounds for removal prior to the removal date, and the method of making such a request.
In the event that the vehicle owner requests a pretow hearing, the removal shall be delayed until the
next scheduled hearing date of the administrative hearing officer, at which time the administrative
hearing officer shall conduct a hearing as hereinafter provided to determine whether grounds exist for
removal. If the administrative hearing officer finds that grounds exist for removal, the vehicle may be
immediately removed. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-122. Notice Of Hearing:
Whenever a vehicle is towed without pretow notice of removal, the police department shall provide to the
owner of record of the vehicle the notice described in this section no later than twenty four (24) hours
after the time of the tow and any lien holder of record within seventy two (72) hours, except that when a
motor vehicle is towed after three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday or holiday or the day
before a holiday, the notice described herein shall be provided no longer than the second working day
after the tow. Whenever a vehicle is towed after a pretow notice of removal has been given, the notice
described in this section shall be provided to the owner and any lien holder of record within four (4)
working days of the tow.
(1) Notice : The notice shall include:
a. Description of the motor vehicle including year, make, model, registration (license plate number),
expiration date, and vehicle identification number (VIN);
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 297/735
b. The present location of the motor vehicle;
c. The basis for the removal of the vehicle;
d. The right of the owner to a hearing;
e. The consequences of the failure to request a hearing;
f. The consequences of the failure to reclaim a motor vehicle;
g. A deadline of seven (7) days from the date of notice, by which the owner must respond.
(2) Delivery Of Notice : The notice required in subsection (1) of this section shall, at the discretion of
the police department, be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery.
The date of personal delivery or the date of mailing of the certified letter shall be the date of providing
notice.
(3) Posting Of Notice : A notice containing the requirements set forth for the notice, described in
subsections (1)d through (1)g of this section, shall be posted at the Rock Island police department
and at all tow/impound areas.
(4) Notices On Failure To Act :
a. Consequences Of Failure To Request A Hearing : If the registered or legal owner, lien holder, or
person who is otherwise entitled to possession of a motor vehicle does not request a hearing
within seven (7) days of the delivery or mailing of notice, the right to such hearing shall be forfeited.
A registered or legal owner, lien holder, or person who is otherwise entitled to possession of a
motor vehicle must pay the total cost of the tow and any storage incurred.
b. Consequences Of Failure To Reclaim A Motor Vehicle : If the registered or legal owner, lien
holder, or person who is otherwise entitled to possession of a motor vehicle does not claim and
take possession of said motor vehicle within fifteen (15) days after the tow hearing, the motor
vehicle shall be considered abandoned and shall be disposed of pursuant to state statute. (Ord.
34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-123. Post-Tow Hearing:
A hearing shall be held after a vehicle is towed pursuant to this article, if the owner requests a post-tow
hearing to determine the validity of such tow and any tow or storage charges.
(1) The administrative hearing officer shall conduct the post-tow hearing. The hearing officer shall
have the authority to require the presence of the enforcement officer issuing the citation or any other
city personnel or witnesses at such hearing. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing
and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public and a court
reporter shall transcribe the proceedings.
(2) Hearings shall take place as follows:
a. In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the deposit of a cash bond in an
amount equal to the tow and storage charge, the hearing shall take place within forty five (45) days
from the date of request following the tow after the posting of cash bond.
b. In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing shall take place within
twenty one (21) days from the date of request immediately following the tow.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 298/735
(3) The city must establish said authority by the preponderance of the evidence and shall establish a
prima facie case upon the showing of the documents related to the tow.
(4) If the city's administrative hearing officer determines that there is no such probable cause, the
vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees.
(5) In the event the defendant wishes to appeal the decision of the city's administrative hearing
officer under the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, said defendant shall pay the cost of the
preparation and transcription of the record of the hearing and shall appeal to the circuit court.
(6) The penalty and fees shall be a debt due and owed to the city. However, if a cash bond has been
posted the bond shall be applied to the fine. If the city's administrative hearing officer determines that
the vehicle was not in violation of this article the administrative hearing officer shall order the return of
the vehicle or cash bond. In the event it shall become necessary for the city to collect the debt by
filing an action in the circuit court, it shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the amount due, court
costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-124. Bonding Procedures:
Whenever the owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle towed pursuant to sections 9-120 and
9-121 of this article wishes to retrieve their vehicle prior to the post-tow hearing, they may do so by
posting a cash bond at police headquarters in an amount twice the fees charged for towing and storage
pursuant to the contract for towing services with the city in effect at the time of the tow for a period of
thirty (30) days from the date of the tow. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-125. Responsibility For Costs Not Recovered:
Any costs incurred by the city for removal, impoundment or destruction of vehicles under this article not
otherwise recovered, shall be paid by the registered owner, person legally entitled to possession, or lien
holder of the vehicle unless the administrative hearing officer determines that no violation has occurred.
(Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-126. Parking, Storing, Housing Of Vehicles:
It shall be a violation of this article for a property owner or renter to park, store, or house upon their
property vehicles that are: inoperable, unregistered, abandoned vehicle on private property, or
hazardous, as defined herein, except a property owner or renter may park, store, or house upon their
property no more than one unregistered vehicle that does not fit into any of the other categories defined
herein unless the vehicle is enclosed in a building and not visible by the public. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-
2000)
Sec. 9-127. Detrimental Health Nuisances Associated With Vehicle Repair In
Residentially Zoned Neighborhoods:
Whenever the pursuit of any vehicle repairs or the maintenance of any vehicle results in the spilling of
solvents, oil, gasoline, or other hazardous substances on the ground (public or private property), or the
condition of things at a specific location where vehicle repairs are being conducted result in a condition
detrimental to the health of any person, the same shall be deemed a health nuisance and shall be
abated. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000)
Sec. 9-128. Enforcement:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 299/735
A police officer, community service officer, or inspector, shall have the authority to: 1) issue a parking
ticket to the owner of a vehicle described herein for violations of this article when the vehicle is parked
on public or city property, or 2) issue a city ordinance citation to the owner of a vehicle described herein
or to the property owner where the vehicle is located for violations of this article when the vehicle is
parked on private property. However, the processing of all tows shall be handled through the abandoned
vehicle division of the Rock Island police department. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 068-2006, § 1, 9-
11-2006)
Sec. 9-129. Penalty And Fines:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject
to a fine. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
A violation of abandoned vehicle on city property, abandoned vehicle on street or alley, or hazardous
vehicle when the vehicle is on public property shall be charged by the issuance of a parking ticket, as
with other parking violations. The fine for violation of these articles shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
A violation of abandoned vehicle on private property or hazardous vehicle when the vehicle is on private
property shall be charged by the issuance of a city ordinance citation, as with other motor vehicle
violations. The first violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). In
the event a person is accused of a first violation of this article and does not wish to contest the
allegation, then the person so accused can pay to the city of Rock Island police headquarters a penalty
sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid within seven (7) days of the first violation for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. The fine for any second and subsequent violation of this article within two (2)
years of the first violation shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
These fines shall be in addition to any towing and storage charges. (Ord. 34-00, § 1, 6-5-2000; Ord. 068-
2006, § 1, 9-11-2006)
ARTICLE VI. NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
Sec. 9-130. Purpose:
Whereas, the city council of Rock Island, after considering volume, speed and character of traffic on
streets within the city of Rock Island finds that neighborhood vehicles as defined herein, may safely
travel on and across the streets within the city with the regulations set forth herein and that the public
safety will not be jeopardized by operation of said vehicles in accordance with said regulations except on
roadways prohibited by this article. (Ord. 027-2008, § 1, 4-14-2008)
Sec. 9-131. Definitions:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Neighborhood Vehicle: A self-propelled, electrically powered four-wheeled motor vehicle (or a selfpropelled
gasoline powered four-wheeled motor vehicle with an engine displacement under 1,200
cubic centimeters) which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles
per hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations
under title 49 CFR part 571.500. (Ord. 027-2008, § 1, 4-14-2008)
Sec. 9-132. Prohibited Roadways:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 300/735
(a)General Authorization: Except as expressly prohibited in this section it shall be lawful for any person
who holds a valid driver's license issued in this or any other state to operate a neighborhood vehicle
on any street within the city. (Ord. 027-2008, § 1, 4-14-2008)
Sec. 9-133. General Limitations:
(a)No person shall operate a neighborhood vehicle on any street having a posted speed limit of thirty
five (35) miles per hour or greater, provided that nothing herein shall prohibit a person from driving a
neighborhood vehicle across a street with a posted speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per hour or
greater.
(b)All persons operating neighborhood vehicles shall comply with the applicable requirements of section
11-1426.1 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., hereinafter
referred to as the Illinois vehicle code.
(c)No neighborhood vehicle may be operated on a street unless, at a minimum it has the following:
brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front
and rear, a "slow moving" emblem (as required of other vehicles in section 12-709 of the Illinois
vehicle code) on the rear of the neighborhood vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible from
at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, brake light, and turn signals. When operated on a
roadway, a neighborhood vehicle shall have its headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by section
12-201 of the Illinois vehicle code.
(d)A person who drives or is in physical control of a neighborhood vehicle on a roadway while under the
influence is subject to sections 11-500 through 11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code.
(e)No neighborhood vehicle shall be left on the roadway in such a way that it disrupts the normal flow of
traffic. All costs related to the removal of any neighborhood vehicle shall be the responsibility of the
owner. (Ord. 027-2008, § 1, 4-14-2008)
Chapter 10
OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS 1 Annotations-The city may regulate the
permitting of steam to be released from railroad locomotive engines.
Chicago, R.I. & P. Ry. Co. v. Steckman , 125 Ill. App. 299; affirmed, 224 Ill. 500,
79 N.E. 602 (1906).
A railroad speed limit ordinance is applicable to the case of a railroad
employee injured while at his employment on a railroad right of way. Potter v.
Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co. , 208 Ill. App. 363 (1917).
Where a railroad train was running at a greater rate of speed than the
maximum permitted by ordinance, a prima facie case of negligence was
established against the railroad company. Edwall v. Chicago, R.I. & P. Ry. Co. ,
208 Ill. App. 489 (1917).
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Misdemeanor Defined Generally 1; Penalty:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 301/735
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, each of the sections in this Article shall be deemed to state
a misdemeanor or misdemeanors, which, if severally or jointly committed by any person or persons
within the territorial jurisdiction of the City, shall subject the offender or offenders, severally to a penalty
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
The court, in lieu of imposing any fine provided in this Article, may, in its discretion, impose a sentence of
community service. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I; Ord. 99-11, § 1, 2-22-1999)
Sec. 10-2. Swimming In River-Prohibited:
No person shall swim or bathe in the Mississippi River where posted 2. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I)
Sec. 10-3. Swimming In River-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of Section 10-2 of this Article shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of Section 10-2 of this Article and does not wish
to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused
may pay to the City, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-4. Indecent Exposure; Lewd Exhibitions-Prohibited:
No person shall appear in any public place within the City in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd
dress, or make any indecent exposure of his or her person, or be guilty of any indecent or lewd act or
behavior, or exhibit or perform, or in any way cause to be exhibited or performed, any play, show or
representation of any sort that would be deemed to be obscene under 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I)
Sec. 10-5. Indecent Exposure; Lewd Exhibitions-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of Section 10-4 of this Article shall be one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of Section 10-4 of this Article and does
not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the City, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-
136, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-6. Obscenity 1:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to commit obscenity within the City. A person commits obscenity
when, with knowledge of the nature of contents thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable
inspection which would disclose the nature of contents thereof:
(1) He or she sells within the City any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph,
drawing, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(2) He or she offers or attempts to sell within the City any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper,
photograph, drawing, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(3) He or she distributes or gives away within the City any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet,
paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 302/735
(4) He or she offers to or attempts to give away within the City any obscene book, magazine,
pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(5) He or she prints or publishes within the city any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper,
photograph, drawing, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(6) He or she exhibits or shows within the City any obscene photograph, drawing, motion picture,
video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(7) He or she produces, directs, or plays a part within the City in any obscene play.
(8) He or she advertises for sale within the City any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper,
photograph, drawing, motion picture film, video recording, phonograph record, filmstrip or slide.
(9) He or she advertises for viewing within the City any obscene motion picture, video recording, play,
filmstrip or slide.
(10) He or she publicly performs an obscene act or otherwise publicly presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body within the City.
(11) He or she buys or procures in the City for resale in the City any obscene book, magazine,
pamphlet, paper, photograph, motion picture film, video recording, filmstrip, slide or phonograph
record.
(12) He or she buys, leases, or procures in the City for showing in the City, for gain, any obscene
motion picture, video recording, filmstrip or slide.
(b)As used in this Section material is "obscene" when:
(1) It depicts or describes any of the following types of sexual conduct:
a. Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, sodomy;
b. Masturbation;
c. Excretory functions; or
d. Exhibition of the human genitals; and
(2) To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the
material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex; and
(3) The material is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards in its
description or representation of the sexual conduct; and
(4) The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
(c)Any person who commits obscenity or any act thereof as defined herein is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) 1. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I; Ord. 83-62, 2-20-1984)
Sec. 10-7. Forfeiture Of Licenses Upon Conviction Of Certain Violations:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 303/735
In case of the conviction of any person for a violation of any of the provisions of sections 10-4, 10-6 and
10-63 of this chapter, such person shall, in addition to the penalty prescribed for such violation, incur a
forfeiture of any city license that he may hold. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-8. Cruelty To Animals Generally 1:
No person shall overload, overdrive, overwork, cruelly beat, torture, torment, mutilate or cruelly kill any
animal or cause or knowingly allow the same to be done. No person shall cruelly work or cruelly
abandon any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or cause or knowingly allow the same to be
done, or unnecessarily fail to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with
proper food, drink or shelter. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-9. Firearms; Explosives; Slingshot; Fireworks; Bow And Arrow; Air Gun:
(a)Prohibited: No person shall, in any part of the city, fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other
firearm, or set off, fire or explode any torpedo, firecracker, fireball, rocket or other fireworks
whatsoever 1. However, the discharge of firearms by the members of any military organization when
on parade and in accordance with the command of the commanding officer, or by any city officer or
other person in the discharge of any legal duty or necessary and lawful act done in a proper and
careful manner, shall not be deemed a violation hereof 2. No person shall in any part of the city
possess any torpedo, firecracker, fireball, rocket or other fireworks whatsoever. Fireworks as defined
in the fireworks regulation act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/2.
(b)Air Guns And Toy Guns: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge on the streets, avenues,
alleys or other public grounds any air gun or toy gun from which is sent a lead or metal missile.
(c)Slingshots; Bow And Arrow; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a slingshot or bow
and arrow within the corporate limits of the city. However, archery may be practiced if done in a safe
place and under the competent supervision of an adult. The prohibition against shooting a bow and
arrow within the city limits shall not apply to the hunting of deer with a bow and arrow in accordance
with subsection (d) of this section.
(d)Archery Deer Hunting: A person may discharge a long, recurve, compound bow, or crossbow as
permitted by the Illinois department of natural resources regulations and the laws of the state of
Illinois, within the corporate limits of the city during the course of harvesting deer if the following
requirements are met:
(1) The person must possess a valid deer archery permit issued by the state of Illinois and must
comply with all of the conditions of the permit and all applicable laws and regulations of the Illinois
department of natural resources relating to archery deer hunting.
(2) The person must possess a deer hunting permit issued by the city. The cost for this permit shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00). The application procedure necessary for obtaining a permit shall be
according to the city of Rock Island deer management rules and restrictions for deer hunting in
subsection (f) of this section.
(3) The number of locations or "sites" for deer hunting to be permitted shall be set by the city council
on an annual basis. There shall be fourteen (14) permitted "sites" with no more than eight (8) "sites"
located on private property. The size of each "site" whether on public or private property, must have a
minimum of three (3) contiguous acres. City staff shall identify and approve all "sites".
(4) Each hunter shall be authorized to hunt from an approved "stand" located on the permitted
hunting "sites". Each "stand" located on an approved "site" shall have a minimum platform height of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 304/735
six feet (6'). No person shall knowingly direct an arrow across the boundary of or off the designated
"site". Only one hunter per "stand" at any one time will be allowed. If multiple "stands" are to be
located on a "site", each "stand" shall have a density of no less than five (5) acres.
(5) Locating appropriate hunting "sites" will be the responsibility of the hunter. The hunter shall
provide "site" information to the chief of police who will forward it to the community and economic
development department who will determine if the "site" information complies with this section and
the rules and procedures for deer hunting in subsection (f) of this section. The "site" information
submitted by the hunter shall include a description and address of the proposed hunting "site".
(6) Hunting will only be allowed on those specific days designated as deer bow season by the Illinois
department of natural resources and the city of Rock Island, Illinois.
(7) The total number of deer to be harvested as well as the number of male and female deer allowed
to be harvested per hunter shall be set by rule in subsection (f) of this section.
(8) The manner for removal of a harvested deer shall be set by rule in subsection (f)(1)b of this
section.
This subsection (d) shall only be in force for the bow and arrow deer hunting seasons as approved by
city council.
(e)Penalty: The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest
said allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused
may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation.
(f)Deer Management Rules And Restrictions: The city of Rock Island permits an archery hunting
program for deer in an effort to better control the deer population within the boundaries of the city,
contingent, however, upon annual council review. The intent is to give control of hunting to the
property owners, yet enable archery hunters to harvest the deer for their use or to provide meat for
social agencies.
Hunting sites will be selected based on criteria including deer concentration, safety, and overall
impact. There are stipulations required of hunters in an effort to make the program as safe as
possible, yet achieve the goal of thinning the number of deer within the city limits.
(1) Hunters:
a. Obtaining A Permit: Hunters must obtain a permit in order to participate in the Rock Island deer
management program. In order to obtain a permit, hunters will need to provide the following:
1. Written permission from the property owner of the site they desire to hunt.
2. Hunters are encouraged to obtain permission from adjacent and abutting property owners,
these properties will be considered part of the hunting site.
3. Proficiency certification from an approved provider.
4. Copy of Illinois hunting license.
5. Completed Rock Island deer management application form.
b. Hunting Rules And Regulations:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 305/735
1. Hunters must adhere to all state of Illinois and department of natural resources guidelines,
rules, and restrictions.
2. Hunters must obtain appropriate state permits and tags.
3. Hunters must have a valid city of Rock Island permit.
4. Hunters will harvest at least two (2) does before harvesting a buck.
5. All deer harvested as part of the deer management program must be checked in at the two (2)
identified fire stations (entire deer).
6. All remains must be removed from the hunting site.
7. Hunters will obtain permission from property owners before tracking or retrieving a deer that
travels out of the approved hunting area. Illinois is not a right to retrieve state.
(2) Hunting Sites: Sites will be approved by the city based upon criteria including deer concentration,
safety, and overall impact.
a. Restrictions And Requirements:
1. Consist of no less than three (3) contiguous acres.
2. One hundred (100) yards from a school, park, or church, unless approved.
3. Situated in a manner that all shots are taken at a downward angle.
4. Shots must not be taken in a way they may carry into an open or occupied area.
5. Only one hunter active per site at any time.
6. Certain sites may have a time restriction when hunting is allowed.
7. All sites will be signed with signage obtained from the Rock Island police department. This
signage will be placed in a manner that is visible to neighboring and abutting property owners
when hunters are active.
8. Hunters cannot use nails, screws or other hardware to affix stands. Only straps or other
noninjuring attachment may be used in trees.
b. Multiple Hunters:
1. Additional hunters may be allowed when using a separate stand at a density of no less than
one hunter per five (5) acres.
2. Property owners may coordinate with multiple hunters to utilize a site, but only one hunter
may actively use a stand at any one time.
(3) Property Owners:
a. Property owners reserve the right to deny hunting on their property.
b. Property owners wishing to hunt or allow hunting on their property must submit their site for
approval to the deer management program manager.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 306/735
c. The city will notify property owners that are adjacent and abutting an approved hunting site in
advance via letter.
d. Property owners with objections or concerns regarding hunting in their vicinity should state their
concern in writing or contact the deer management program manager.
(4) Public Lands: Hunters who are unable to locate a suitable site within Rock Island are eligible to
hunt on selected public lands such as golf courses or other specifically identified areas. The hunters
will follow all of the requirements identified for hunting on private land. In addition, the following
procedures will be used to determine who will hunt on those lands. Larger private properties such as
cemeteries may follow a similar process.
a. Hunting stand areas will be identified by the "controlling agency", a department, board, or
designated individual.
b. Hunter will enter their name into a lottery for a chance of being awarded permission to place a
hunting stand on designated areas.
c. Names will be selected through a drawing with each of the names noted in order.
d. Hunters who are awarded an area, must obtain their city of Rock Island permit before any
hunting takes place.
e. If a hunter exhausts their supply of deer tags and the season is still open, they are to notify the
controlling agency. The controlling agency is then responsible for contacting the next eligible
hunter.
f. The hunter will notify the controlling agency in advance when they plan to be active. This may be
done in person or through a mutually agreed upon process.
(5) Unpermitted Hunting:
a. Any hunting which takes place without appropriate permits will be considered poaching and
treated as such.
b. Any hunting on property which is not approved by the city will be considered poaching and
treated as such.
c. Hunting on property without the property owners explicit permission is impermissible.
d. Any violation of the deer management program rules and guidelines will result in the permanent
revocation of city hunting privileges and subject the hunter to a possible fine for violating the
enabling ordinance. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord., 12-21-1970; Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord., 1-11-
1982; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, 12-9-1991; Ord. 94-106, 12-12-1994; Ord. 062-2013, 11-
18-2013; Ord. 016-2014, 3-17-2014; Ord. 022-2015, 4-20-2015)
Sec. 10-10. Obstruction Of Roadways:
(a)Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to walk along and upon an
adjacent roadway and hinder the passage of vehicles or obstruct the passage or business of any
person.
(b)Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a roadway shall, when
practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or the shoulder facing traffic that may approach
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 307/735
from the opposite direction and shall not hinder the passage of vehicles or obstruct the passage or
business of any person.
(c)No person shall hinder the passage of vehicles or obstruct the passage or business of any person in
any public street or sidewalk in the city, by flying kites, throwing stones, throwing snowballs, using
skateboards, using in-line skates, playing ball or in any other manner. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord.
97-51, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 10-11. Obstruction Of Roadways - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-10 of this chapter shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-10 of this chapter and does not
wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, 12-9-
1991; Ord. 97-51, 7-14-1997)
Sec. 10-12. Getting On Or Holding Onto Vehicles - Prohibited:
No person shall, within the limits of the city, seize, hang upon, get upon, hold, tie or fasten to any railroad
car, engine, motor vehicle, carriage, buggy, wagon, sleigh, sled or other vehicle or conveyance while the
same is in motion or attempt so to do, or attach to any such vehicle or conveyance any sleigh or sled,
and ride thereon, unless he shall be acting in compliance with law and his duty in so doing. (1963 Code,
ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-13. Getting On Or Holding Onto Vehicles - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-12 of this chapter shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-12 of this chapter and does not
wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and
in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-14. Coasting On Streets - Prohibited:
No person shall coast or slide on any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, except as designated by the
mayor and council. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-15. Coasting On Streets - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-14 of this chapter shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-14 of this chapter and does not
wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and
in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-16. Excavations, Openings, Etc. - Safety:
No person shall leave open, uncovered, unguarded or in an unsafe condition any cellar door, hatchway,
pit, vault or excavation upon or adjoining any sidewalk, street, alley or public place of the city. (1963
Code, ch. XII, art. I)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 308/735
Sec. 10-17. Excavations, Openings, Etc. - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-16 of this chapter shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-16 of this chapter and does not
wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and
in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-18. Abandoned Or Unattended Refrigerators 1 Or Airtight Containers-
Generally:
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside any dwelling, building or structure or within any
unoccupied dwelling, building or structure under his control in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other container of sufficient size to admit a small child,
which has an airtight closing door, snaplock or other locking device, without first removing the airtight
closing door, snaplock or other locking device from the abandoned icebox, refrigerator or airtight
container. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-19. Abandoned Or Unattended Refrigerators Or Airtight Containers-
Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-18 of this article shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-18 of this article and does
not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-20. Assault; Battery 1:
(a)No person shall commit an assault or battery. A person commits an assault when, without lawful
authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any
means: 1) causes bodily harm to an individual, or 2) makes physical contact of an insulting or
provoking nature with an individual.
(b)The minimum fine for committing the violation of assault shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event a
person is accused of a violation as aforesaid and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the
time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to the city at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation.
(c)The minimum fine for committing the violation of battery shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation as aforesaid and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may
pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for
and in full satisfaction of the violation. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I,; Ord., § 2, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, §
1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-21. Disturbing The Peace:
No person shall create, maintain, assist or participate in the creation of a loud or raucous noise, or loud
or raucous talking, or loud or raucous singing on the public streets at any time or place so as likely to
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 309/735
disturb the public peace or quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
No person shall allow or cause to be used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, on any
residential property in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person
who is in the residence in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener
thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, machine or device
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of ten feet (10') from the property on which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
No person shall create, maintain, assist or participate in the creation of a loud or raucous noise, or loud
or raucous talking, shouting, or loud or raucous singing on any residential property in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
Exemption: Persons who have obtained a sound amplification permit shall be exempt during the duration
of the permit. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord. 90-55, § 1, 8-13-1990; Ord. 50-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 10-21.1. Public Urination And Defecation Prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, public
parking lot, or other public place other than in a facility designed for that purpose. (Ord. 52-2004, § 1, 5-
3-2004)
Sec. 10-22. Penalty For Sections 10-21 And 10-21.1:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of sections 10-21 and 10-21.1 of this article shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-21 and/or 10-21.1 of
this article and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the
violation, the person so accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 1, 1-11-1982; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-
1984; Ord. 53-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 10-23. Loitering:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to loiter or congregate about or upon any public building or
public property, any stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house, theater,
church or street corner or elsewhere, and by so doing obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
persons entering or occupying such building or premises, or by language, conversation or conduct to
annoy, insult or disturb persons passing along the streets or alleys or occupying, residing in or doing
business in any of such houses or places. The fine for violating this section will be from fifty dollars
($50.00) up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 060-2011, 8-8-2011)
Sec. 10-23.1. Loitering For Drug Activities:
(a)Acts Prohibited : It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to
the public or near any public or private place in manner and under circumstances manifesting the
purpose of engaging in drug related activity defined as offenses in the Illinois controlled substances
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 310/735
(b)Circumstances : Among circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such purpose
is manifested are that the person:
(1) Is a known drug user, possessor, or seller. For purpose of this chapter, a "known unlawful drug
user, possessor, or seller" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been
convicted in any court within this state or any other state of any violation involving the use,
possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in the Illinois controlled substances act, or
such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of those sections or
substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any state; or a person who
displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks"; or a person
who possesses drug paraphernalia.
(2) Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic
area.
(3) Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in
or is then engaged in an unlawful drug related activity, including, by way of example only, acting as a
"lookout".
(4) Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang" or association which has as its
purpose illegal drug activity.
(5) Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion.
(6) Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an
unlawful drug related activity.
(7) Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking.
(8) Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful
drug activity.
(9) Is in, or within six feet (6') of, any vehicles registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or
seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug related activity.
(c)Enforcement : Enforcement of this section shall be by an officer of the Rock Island police department
and the Quad City metropolitan enforcement group. (Ord. 93-27, § 1, 4-12-1993)
Sec. 10-24. Noisy Animals-Generally 2:
No person shall, in the city, keep any dog, whelp, bitch, calf, hog or any other animal which, by barking,
howling or other noises, shall disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art.
I)
Sec. 10-25. Noisy Animals-Generally-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-24 of this article shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-24 of this article and does not wish
to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused
may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 1, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-26. Disorderly Conduct 3:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 311/735
(a)A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
(1) Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a
breach of the peace.
(2) Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a
false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for
believing that such fire exists.
(3) Transmits in any manner, to another, a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of
any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the
time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place.
(4) Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the
effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable grounds for believing that such an offense has been committed.
(5) Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a
dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it.
(6) Conducts himself or herself in a disorderly manner, makes, aids, countenances or assists in
making any improper noise, riot or disturbance in the city or congregates with others in any of the
streets, alleys or public places of the city for unlawful purposes, or for a lawful purpose in a riotous or
tumultuous manner, to the annoyance of the citizens or travelers therein, or aids or abets the same.
(7) Delivers any public speech or holds any public meeting or gathering or gatherings on any streets
or avenues within the city without first obtaining from the city council a permit. If the city council shall
grant a permit, then the permit shall designate upon which street or avenue any such meeting or
gathering may be held or conducted. An application to the city council for the place at which the
meeting or gathering is to be held or conducted shall be filed with the city clerk not less than twenty
four (24) hours before the time of the meeting or gathering.
(8) Makes any kind of false alarm not described above by outcry, bell, other sounding instrument or
other means for disturbing the peace of the city.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of subsections (a)(1), (a)(6) 4 and (a)(7) of this
section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of those
subsections and does not wish to contest the allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued for
the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the
sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation.
(c)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) of this
section shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of
those subsections and does not wish to contest the allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued
for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in
the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (1963 Code, Ch.
XII, Art. I; Ord., § 1, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-27. Disturbing School Or Assembly:
(a)No person shall willfully interrupt or disturb any school or any congregation or assembly meeting for
religious worship, or for any other lawful purpose, by making unnecessary noise or by rude or
indecent behavior, or by profane discourse within such meeting, or so near the same as to disturb the
order or solemnity of such meeting.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 312/735
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may
pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for and in
full satisfaction of the violation.
(Code 1963, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 24; Ord. of 1-12-81, § 3; Ord. of 1-11-82, § 3; Ord. No. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-84;
Ord. No. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-91)
Editor's note--At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of Ord. No. 83-57, adopted Feb. 6,
1984, have been treated as amendatory of § 10-27(b). Ord. No. 83-57 was not specifically amendatory
of this Code.
Sec. 10-28. Time of closing for places of amusement--Generally.
No person shall, by himself, his agent or servant, keep open or permit or suffer any person to remain at
any public place of amusement kept or owned by him at a later hour than 2:00 a.m., except as otherwise
provided in this Code. The mayor may, in his discretion, upon proper application to him in writing, grant a
special written permit to keep the same open to some hour that shall be specified therein, such permit to
be good for one (1) night only, such permit and application to be filed with the city clerk before taking
advantage of the provisions thereof.
(Code 1963, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 26)
Cross reference--Amusements, licenses, § 8-81 et seq.
Sec. 10-29. Same--Penalty.
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-28 shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-28 and does not wish to contest
the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to
the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation.
(Ord. of 1-12-81, § 3; Ord. No. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-84)
Editor's note--At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of Ord. No. 83-57, adopted Feb. 6,
1984, have been treated as amendatory of § 10-29. Ord. No. 83-57 was not specifically amendatory of
this Code.
Sec. 10-30. Concealed weapons--Prohibited.
No person shall within the limits of the city carry or wear under his clothes, or concealed about his
person, any pistol, revolver, bowie knife, dirk or other deadly weapon, nor shall he in a threatening or
boisterous manner display or flourish any deadly weapon. This shall not apply to police officers when on
duty. Any such weapon worn, carried or displayed by any person in violation of this section shall be kept
and retained by the chief of police pending final adjudication of the violation.
(Code 1963, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 28)
Sec. 10-31. Same--Penalty.
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-30 shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-30 and does not wish to contest
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 313/735
the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to
the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation.
(Ord. of 1-12-81, § 3; Ord. No. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-91)
Editor's note--At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of Ord. No. 83-57, adopted Feb. 6,
1984, have been treated as amendatory of § 10-31. Ord. No. 83-57 was not specifically amendatory of
this Code.
Sec. 10-32. Resisting or obstructing a police officer; aiding in arrest; impersonation
of officer.
(a)No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance of any police officer or member of the
police department nor shall in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent him from discharging any
authorized act within his official capacity. No person shall interfere with the mayor, the chief of police,
any police officer or any person authorized and required to enforce the laws of the city, nor prevent,
hinder or delay such person in the execution of the duties required of him by any of the ordinances of
the city or laws of the state.
(b)A peace officer making a lawful arrest may command the aid of persons over the age of eighteen
(18). A person commanded to aid a peace officer shall have the same authority to arrest as that
peace officer. No person shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance when commanded to
do so.
(c)No person shall falsely represent himself to be a member of the police department of this city or shall,
maliciously or with the intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the signs, signals or devices adopted
and used by any such person.
(d)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of subsection (a) shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of subsection (a) and does not wish to
contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so
accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation.
(e)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of subsection (b) shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), and
for subsection (c), one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation
of subsection (b) or (c) and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is
issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police headquarters a
penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation.
(Code 1963, Ch. VII, Art. I, § 4 and Ch. XII, Art. I, § 29; Ord. of 1-12-81, § 1; Ord. of 1-11-82, § 1; Ord.
No. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-91)
Editor's note--At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of Ord. No. 83-57, adopted Feb. 6,
1984, have been treated as amendatory of § 10-32 subsections (d) and (e). Ord. No. 83-57 was not
specifically amendatory of this Code.
Cross reference--Police, ch. 12.
State law references--Assisting police officer, 725 ILCS 5/107-8; resisting or obstructing public officers,
725 ILCS 5/31-1 et seq.; false personation of public officer or employee, 725 ILCS 5/32-5; refusing to aid
a peace officer, 725 ILCS 5/31-8.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 314/735
Sec. 10-33. Destruction or injury of property--Prohibited.
(a)Generally. No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, injure, deface or interfere with any bridge,
engine house or other public building, fire engine, fire hose or other property of the city, or any public
property or public work.
(b)Tampering With Telephones. It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert into
the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone any slug, button or other substance or to
manipulate or operate, or to attempt to manipulate or operate, in any manner whatever any
telephone instrument or any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, with the
intent to obtain telephone service without paying therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to inset,
or attempt to insert, into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, wire,
hook or other implement or substance with the intent to obtain from such coin box or money
receptacle a legal tender coin of the United States.
(Code 1963, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 30)
State law reference--Obtaining telecommunication services with intent to defraud, 720 ILCS 365/1.
Sec. 10-34. Same--Penalty.
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-33 shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-33 and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to the
city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation.
(Ord. of 1-12-81, § 6; Ord. No. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-84)
Editor's note--At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of § 1 of Ord. No. 83-57, adopted Feb. 6,
1984, have been treated as amendatory of § 10-34. Ord. No. 83-57 was not specifically amendatory of
this Code.
Sec. 10-35. Excavation in street.
No person shall within the limits of this city dig or make any ditch, drain or other excavation, or remove
any sod, earth, sand, gravel or stone in, upon or from any street, avenue, alley or public grounds within
this city, except when in possession of a permit from proper city authority.
(Code 1963, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 31)
Cross reference - Excavations in street generally, § 13-71 et seq.
Sec. 10-36. Breaking Into, Opening, Etc., Sewers 1:
No person shall break or make any opening in or in any manner injure or interfere with any of the main
drains or sewers of the city, or connect any drain, sewer or pipe therewith, without permission from the
director of public works or his designated representative. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 32; Ord. 87-22, §
26, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 10-37. Injury To Trees, Fences, Fixtures, Etc.-Prohibited:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 315/735
No person shall within the limits of the city wilfully or carelessly destroy or injure any tree, shrub, fence,
railing, lamppost, electric light post or wire, or in any manner cause the same to be done, or hitch or
fasten any horse or other animal to or so near any tree, shrub, fence, railing, lamppost, electric light post
or wire as to render the same liable to destruction or injury by such horse or other animal. (1963 Code,
Ch. XII, Art. I, § 33)
Sec. 10-38. Injury To Trees, Fences, Fixtures, Etc.-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-37 of this article shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-37 of this chapter and does
not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 6, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-39. Depositing Rubbish In Streets; Burning Rubbish, Leaves, Etc., In
Streets-Prohibited 1:
(a)No person shall place, deposit or throw, or cause to be placed, deposited or thrown on any street,
alley or public place in the city any leaves, yard waste, ashes, paper, rags, sticks, blocks, posts,
boards, lumber or building material of any kind or any shavings, dirt, tin cans, junk or other rubbish of
any kind or description; and no rubbish of any kind shall hereafter be burned anywhere within the city
of Rock Island, Illinois. No box, barrel or other receptacle for dirt, ashes, paper or other rubbish shall
be placed or allowed to remain in or upon any street or upon any sidewalk in the city, or upon any
public grounds or upon any part thereof.
(b)Any duly appointed and authorized firefighter for the city of Rock Island or any subdivision thereof, or
any peace officer for the city of Rock Island shall have the authority to sign all notices of violation and
charge any violations of this section. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 34; Ord. 87-48, § 1, 5-18-1987;
Ord. 082-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008; Ord. 043-2009, § 1, 6-15-2009)
Sec. 10-40. Depositing Rubbish In Streets; Burning Rubbish, Leaves, Etc., In
Streets-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-39 of this chapter, other than for the
offenses of burning leaves or yard waste, shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). In the event a person is
accused of a violation of section 10-39 of this chapter and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to
the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to the city, at police
headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation. (Ord., § 5, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991; Ord. 043-2009,
§ 2, 6-15-2009)
Sec. 10-40.1. Leaf Burning Prohibited:
(a)The burning of leaves or yard waste is prohibited in the city of Rock Island, Illinois.
(b)Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a notice of violation, which shall
be paid at the police department in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid within seven (7)
days of the date issued. If said amount is not paid within seven (7) days, the fine amount shall be
forty dollars ($40.00). Any subsequent violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 316/735
(c)Any duly appointed and authorized firefighter for the city of Rock Island or any subdivision thereof, or
any peace officer, shall have authority to sign all notices of violation and charge any violations of this
section. (Ord. 84-77, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-1984; Ord. 87-48, § 2, 5-18-1987; Ord. 83-2003, § 1, 9-15-2003;
Ord. 90-2003, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-2003; Ord. 083-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 10-40.2. When Open Burning Permitted:
It is permissible to burn vegetation and trees in the city for purposes of preparing a property for
commercial or residential development using an air curtain burner device. Burning shall be in
accordance with all applicable state regulations and shall be subject to a permit to be issued by the fire
department which shall establish criteria for burning of vegetation and trees consistent with protection of
public health and safety.
The permit fee for said permissible burn shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 024-2005, § 1, 4-4-2005)
Sec. 10-41. Littering Streets; Billposting:
(a)All contractors, truckers, teamsters and all persons hauling dirt, sand, gravel, ashes, rubbish, leaves
or yard waste or other material on streets or alleys shall so construct, keep and maintain their trucks
or wagon boxes, dumps and sideboards with front and rear ends and bottoms at all times as to
prevent the spilling of such material from the same; and in case the same fall into the streets or the
same are scattered in any street or avenue, they shall cause the same to be forthwith removed.
(b)It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place upon the surface of any of the streets, alleys or
sidewalks of this city any glass, earthenware, metal, stones or other articles or substances likely to
cause injury to travelers or pedestrians or to automobiles or bicycles used on the streets.
(c)No person shall post, paste or in any other way attach or affix to any telephone or electric light pole
within the city any bill, notice, announcement or other advertising medium. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art.
I, § 35; Ord. 084-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 10-42. Rubbish Not To Be Placed In Gutters:
No person shall sweep rubbish, leaves, yard waste or debris from sidewalks into street gutters or place
litter of any sort on streets or in gutters. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 36; Ord. 085-2008, § 1, 12-22-
2008)
Sec. 10-43. Unlawful Use Of Mailbox:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any private mailbox used by the
letter carriers of the city as a receptacle in which to deposit United States mail, any circular, letter, note
or other advertising matter whatsoever unless the same bears United States postage or has been
regularly consigned through the United States mail. (1963 Code, Ch. XII, Art. I, § 37)
Sec. 10-44. Trimming Of Trees On Streets:
It shall be necessary for every person having in charge any tree upon any street or avenue in the city or
any tree which extends over on any street or avenue, to remove all branches which are less than twelve
feet (12') from the ground. All trees shall be trimmed so as not to obscure or obstruct the city lights along
the streets and avenues of the city. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I, § 39)
Sec. 10-45. Smoking Carelessly; Notice To Be Posted In Hotels, Etc.-Generally:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 317/735
(a)Any person who by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in
any manner in which lighters or matches are employed who in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner, whether wilfully or wantonly or not, shall set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes or
any household fittings, in any sleeping room, lodging house or room of any hotel, rooming house or
other place of public abode, or any apartment house or other type of multiple dwelling, so as to
endanger life or property in any way or to any extent, shall be guilty of violating this section.
(b)In each sleeping room of all hotels, rooming houses, lodging houses and other places of public
abode, a plainly printed notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place advising tenants of the
provisions of this section. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I, § 41)
Sec. 10-46. Smoking Carelessly; Notice To Be Posted In Hotels, Etc.-Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-45 of this chapter shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of section 10-45 of this article and does
not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so
accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-11-1982; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-47. Destruction Of Or Injury To Street Signs-Prohibited:
No person shall wilfully or maliciously destroy, deface or interfere with any street sign belonging to the
city. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I)
Sec. 10-48. Destruction Of Or Injury To Street Signs - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-47 of this chapter shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of said section 10-47 of this chapter
and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the
person so accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord.
91-136, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-49. Steel Jaw Animal Traps 1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rig, set or maintain any steel jaw leg hold trap. Snare or box type
traps or other animal traps that could cause cruelty to animals within the city are prohibited; however,
boxed traps may be used by licensed humane organizations or individuals that have obtained written
approval from the police department, and with this permission, may be used for the capture of stray or
nuisance domesticated animals or wild animals. (Ord., 1-7-1980)
Sec. 10-50. Barbed Wire And Electric Fences:
No person shall install or permit to be installed any barbed wire fences or electrically charged and
regulated fences within the corporate limits of the city except as provided in this section. Barbed wire
fences shall be allowed in residentially zoned areas in the city where livestock is allowed to be kept
under the provisions of the city ordinances, and barbed wire installations shall also be allowed on top of
security fences which are at least six feet (6') in height. Low voltage (not to exceed 24 volts), low
amperage electric fences are allowed in posted fenced in areas in residential areas after the issuance of
a permit by the chief building inspector for said fence based on his inspection of the proposed
improvement. Any permitted electrified fence shall be tagged with a sign large enough to warn persons
that such fence is electrified. (Ord., 11-3-1975; Ord. 91-61, 5-13-1991; Ord. 96-22, 4-8-1996)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 318/735
Sec. 10-51. Possession Of Alcoholic Liquors On Public Right Of Way - Prohibited:
No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about his possession
on any street, alley or public right of way, except in the original package, with the seal unbroken.
Provisions of this section shall not apply to any area where the consumption of alcoholic liquors is
permitted by action of the city council. (Ord., 5-8-1967; Ord., 5-19-1980)
Sec. 10-52. Possession Of Alcoholic Liquors On Public Right Of Way - Penalty:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of section 10-51 of this chapter shall be one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of said section 10-51 of this chapter
and does not wish to contest the allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the
person so accused may pay to the city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-11-1982; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord.
91-136, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-53. Presence In City Parking Building And Parking Lot C:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the premises of the city parking building located between
Third Avenue and Fourth Avenue and Seventeenth Street and Sixteenth Street in the city, and parking
lot C located between First Avenue and Second Avenue and Nineteenth Street and Twentieth Street in
the city, unless the person is there for the purpose of parking his motor vehicle thereon or going to or
from said motor vehicle located thereon. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to
employees or agents of the city who are on the premises in the scope of their employment or with the
authorization of the city. The fine for violating this section will be from fifty dollars ($50.00) up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 060-2011, 8-8-2011)
Sec. 10-54. Retail Theft Under One Hundred Fifty Dollars 2:
(a)A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
(1) Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred any
merchandise valued at less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with
the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise;
(2) Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings
which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise valued at less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00), displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and
attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;
(3) Transfers any merchandise valued at less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of
the full retail value of such merchandise;
(4) Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of merchandise
valued at less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); or
(5) Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the
consent of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 319/735
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest
the allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused
may pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
and in full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-48, 4-5-1991)
Sec. 10-55. Theft Of Lost Or Mislaid Property 3:
(a)A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he:
(1) Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable
method of identifying the owner; and
(2) Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and
(3) Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the
event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the
city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of
the violation. (Ord., § 5, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-56. Criminal Damage To Property Less Than Three Hundred Dollars 1:
(a)Any person committing any of the following acts is in violation of this section when the damage to
property is less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). The person:
(1) Knowingly damages any property of another without that person's consent;
(2) Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damages the property of another;
(3) Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without that person's consent;
(4) Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without that person's consent, any
stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with the use by
another of the land or building; or
(5) Knowingly damages the property of another without that person's consent by defacing, deforming
or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or any other similar substance.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the
event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the
city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of
the violation. (Ord., § 6, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-57. Criminal Trespass To Land 1:
(a)No person shall enter upon the land or any part thereof of another, after receiving, immediately prior
to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, nor shall he remain
upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 320/735
(b)A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of subsection (a) of this
section if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice
forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land
or the forbidden part thereof.
(c)No person shall knowingly and without authority enter any structure or any part thereof, whether
occupied or not, of another without that person's consent.
(d)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the
time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation. (Ord., § 1, 1-17-1977; Ord., § 7, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-133, § 1,
12-7-1991; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-57.1. Criminal Trespass To Gaming Facility:
(a)No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall enter upon any premises used for gaming licensed
to the casino Rock Island by the Illinois state gaming board unless authorized by the Illinois gaming
board and the casino Rock Island.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a first violation and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may
pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for
and in full satisfaction of the violation. Complaints under this section may be brought in circuit court
or in front of the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 85-00, § 1, 11-20-2000)
Sec. 10-58. Criminal Trespass To Vehicles:
(a)No person shall knowingly and without authority enter any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any part
thereof of another without that person's consent.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the
time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation. (Ord., § 8, 1-12-1982; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-59. Curfew Hours For Minors:
(a)Definitions : Whenever used in this section:
Curfew Hours :
(1) Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day; and
(2) Twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any Friday or Saturday and until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
the following day.
Emergency : An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for
immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile
accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 321/735
Establishment : Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is
invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian :
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor : Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Operator : Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or
conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent : A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
Public Place : Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and
includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain : To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or
other person in control of the premises.
Serious Bodily Injury : Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death,
serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.
(b)Offenses :
(1) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient
control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.
(3) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(c)Defenses :
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 322/735
c. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity,
without any detour or stop;
d. Involved in an emergency;
e. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious,
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
f. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
g. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under emancipation of mature minors
act, as amended.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(d)Enforcement : Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the
apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation
or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) of
this section is present.
(e)Penalties : The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may
pay to the city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in
full satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 9, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 91-136, § 1,
12-9-1991; Ord. 51-2004, § 1, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 10-60. Possession Of Less Than Two And One-Half Grams Of Cannabis 2:
(a)It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to possess two and one-half grams (2.5
g) or less of any substance containing cannabis.
(b)"Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from
any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol
derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced
directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the
resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination.
(c)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 323/735
city at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 10, 1-12-1981; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984; Ord. 17-2004, § 1, 2-2-
2004)
Sec. 10-60.1. Possession Of More Than 2.5 Grams But Not More Than 10 Grams Of
Cannabis:
(a)It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess more than 2.5 grams but not
more than ten grams (10 g) of any substance containing cannabis.
(b)"Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation
of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol
derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced
directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the
resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination.
(c)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the
city, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord. 029-2014, 3-24-2014)
Sec. 10-60.2. Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
(a)It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a
controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that
use.
(b)In determining intent under subsection (a) of this section, the trier of fact may take into consideration
the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substance to the drug paraphernalia or the presence of
cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
(c)Drug paraphernalia shall be those items as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/2.
(d)Exempt items shall be those as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/4.
(e)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, the person so accused may pay to the city at
police headquarters a penalty in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for and in full satisfaction
of the violation. (Ord. 029-2014, 3-24-2014)
Sec. 10-61. Prostitution 1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of prostitution. Any person who performs, offers or
agrees to perform any of the following acts for money commits an act of prostitution:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 324/735
(1) Any act of sexual intercourse; or
(2) Any act of deviate sexual conduct. (Ord., § 1, 1-11-1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-61.1. Solicitation Of A Sexual Act:
Any person who offers a person not his or her spouse any money, property, token, object or article or
anything of value to perform any act of sexual penetration as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/12-12 or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person for the purpose
of sexual arousal or gratification, commits the offense of solicitation of a sexual act. (Ord. 99-95, § 1, 11-
15-1999)
Sec. 10-62. Soliciting For A Prostitute 1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for a prostitute. Any person who performs any of the following
acts commits soliciting for a prostitute:
(1) Soliciting another for the purpose of prostitution;
(2) Arranging or offering to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or
(3) Directing another to a place, knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. (Ord., § 1,
1-11-1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-63. Keeping A Place Of Prostitution 2:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a place of prostitution. Any person who has or exercises
control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution
who performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution:
(1) Knowingly granting or permitting the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution;
(2) Granting or permitting the use of such place under circumstances from which he could reasonably
know that the place is used or is to be used for purposes of prostitution; or
(3) Permitting the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from
which he should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. (1963
Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord., § 1, 1-11-1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-64. Patronizing A Prostitute 3:
It shall be unlawful for any person to patronize a prostitute. Any person who performs any of the
following acts with a person not his or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
(1) Engaging in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute; or
(2) Entering or remaining in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of sexual
intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. (Ord., § 1, 1-11-1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-65. Pimping 1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive money or other property from a prostitute, not for a lawful
consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from the practice of prostitution. (Ord., § 1, 1-11-
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 325/735
1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-66. Public Indecency Generally 2:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards to perform an act
of public indecency. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any
of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
(1) An act of sexual intercourse;
(2) An act of deviate sexual conduct;
(3) A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the
person; or
(4) A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either sex.
(b)"Public place" for purposes of this section means any place where the conduct may reasonably be
expected to be viewed by others. (1963 Code, ch. XII, art. I; Ord., § 1, 1-11-1982; Ord. 91-136, § 1,
12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-67. Theft Of Property Generally 3:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a theft of property. A person commits theft when he
knowingly:
(1) Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner valued at less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00);
(2) Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner valued at less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00);
(3) Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner valued at less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00); or
(4) Obtains control over stolen property having a value of less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as
would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen; and
intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; knowingly uses,
conceals or deprives the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or uses, conceals or abandons
the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation, and does not wish to contest the allegation
prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay the city
at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (Ord., § 2, 1-11-1982; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-68. Trespass To Restricted Area 1:
(a)A person commits the offense of trespass to a restricted area whenever he or she enters upon or
remains in any restricted area that would be designated by the police department or used in
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 326/735
connection with a police investigation and after such person has received notice from police authority
that such entry is forbidden. Notice that the area is restricted and entry thereto forbidden for
purposes of this section means that the person has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, or by a printed or written notice forbidding such entry to him or her or a group or organization
of which he or she is a member and which has been conspicuously posted.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the
event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time a
complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the city at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation.
(Ord. 82-04, § 1, 4-26-1982; Ord. 83-57, § 1, 2-6-1984)
Sec. 10-69. Police Dogs:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully or maliciously to torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate,
injure, disable or kill any canine used by the police department of the city in the performance of the
functions of such department, or to interfere with or meddle with any such canine being used by the
department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the
department or of such member or officer. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord., § 1, 8-11-1980; Ord. 91-136, § 1, 12-9-1991)
Sec. 10-70. Driver and Passenger Required to Use Safety Belts, Exception and
Penalty:
(a)Each driver and passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway within this city shall
wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a
passenger who is unable, due to infirmity, illness, or age, to properly adjust and fasten a seat safety
belt and is not exempted from wearing a seat safety belt under subsection (b) of this section shall
secure the passenger in a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt as required under this
section.
(b)Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any of the following:
(1) A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle or delivering property from the
vehicle, if the speed of the vehicle between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour;
(2) A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a physician that such person is
unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear a seat safety belt;
(3) A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license endorsement issued by the
appropriate agency in another state or country indicating that the driver is unable for medical,
physical, or other valid reasons to wear a seat safety belt;
(4) A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse;
(5) A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965;
(6) A motorcycle or motor driven cycle;
(7) A moped;
(8) A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with seat safety belts under federal law;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 327/735
(9) A motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier of the United States postal service while
performing duties as a rural letter carrier;
(10) A driver or passenger of an authorized emergency vehicle; or
(11) A back seat passenger of a taxicab.
(c)Failure to wear a seat safety belt in violation of this section shall be considered evidence of
negligence, shall not limit the liability of an insurer, and shall not diminish any recovery for damages
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
(d)A violation of this section shall be a petty offense and subject to a fine not to exceed twenty five
dollars ($25.00). In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may
pay to the city a penalty in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for and in full satisfaction of the
violation.
(e)A law enforcement officer may not search or inspect a motor vehicle, its contents, the driver, or a
passenger solely because of a violation of this section. (Ord. 029-2014, 3-24-2014)
Secs. 10-71-10-85. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY GENERALLY
Sec. 10-86. Definitions 2:
For the purposes of this article:
Legal Guardian : Shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by the
circuit court of this state, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a
minor under the Illinois juvenile court act.
Minor : Shall include a person who has attained thirteen (13) years of age but who has not yet
reached eighteen (18) years of age.
Property : Shall include any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible personal
property. (Ord., § 1, 2-21-1977)
Sec. 10-87. Penalty:
Every person found guilty of an offense under this article shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) A fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00); or
(2) A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year.
a. Conditions : The conditions of conditional discharge shall include that the defendant:
1. Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any jurisdiction.
2. Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the court.
b. Additional Requirements : The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require that
the defendant:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 328/735
1. Pay a fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training.
3. Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism.
4. Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property
and pecuniary loss.
5. If a minor,
(i) Reside with his parent or in a foster home.
(ii) Attend school.
(iii) Attend a nonresidential program for youth.
(iv) Contribute to his own support at home or in a foster home.
c. Payment : When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition of conditional discharge,
the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment
have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of
conditional discharge, may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only the
conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. The court shall retain
all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original
conditions and to revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are
violated during such additional period.
d. Violation, Modification Or Revocation Of Conditional Discharge :
1. When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition, the court may:
(i) Order a summons to the offender to appear; or
(ii) Order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction
or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons.
The issuance of such warrant or summons shall toll the sentence of conditional discharge until
the final determination of the charge, and the term of the conditional discharge shall not run so
long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant.
2. The court shall conduct a hearing on the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender
to bail pending the hearing.
3. The city has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the
preponderance of the evidence. The evidence shall be presented in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel.
4. Conditional discharge shall not be revoked for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence
which imposes financial obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to his wilful
refusal to pay.
5. If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or
termination of the period, it may continue him on the existing period, with or without modifying or
enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of the
initial penalty.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 329/735
6. The conditions of conditional discharge may be modified by the court on motion of the city, on
its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to the defendant and a hearing.
7. A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order. (Ord., § 3,
2-21-1977)
Sec. 10-88. Offenses:
Within the corporate limits of the city, no person shall:
(1) Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without that person's consent; or
(2) Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle,
aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without that person's consent. (Ord., § 2,
2-21-1977)
Sec. 10-89. Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian For Minor Offender:
(a)The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides with such parent or
legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court
upon a minor for violation of this article, provided that the minor has not paid the fine or made
restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that the parent or
legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause as provided
by law.
(b)The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides with such parent or
legal guardian shall be a necessary party to any proceeding under this article. (Ord., § 4, 2-21-1977)
ARTICLE III. TRUANCY
Sec. 10-90. Truancy Prohibited:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person enrolled in grades one through twelve (12) in a public, private or
parochial school within the corporate limits of the city to absent himself or herself from attendance at
school without "valid cause". Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the
offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. "Valid cause" for absence
shall be illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency,
and shall include such other situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the board
of education in each district, or other such circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the
parent for the safety or health of the student.
(b)Any person violating the provisions of this section as a first offense shall be subject to a citation,
which citation shall be paid at the police department in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00); if
paid within seven (7) days of the date issued the amount shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). Any second
and subsequent violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day during which or on which any person violates
the provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c)Any duly appointed and authorized truant officer for the School District #41 or any subdivision thereof,
or any other peace officer, shall have authority to sign all complaints and charge any violations of this
section.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 330/735
(d)Any duly appointed and authorized administrator for the Alleman High School or any subdivision
thereof, or any other peace officer, shall have authority to sign all complaints and charge any
violations of this section. (Ord. 92-120, 9-28-1992; Ord. 92-132, 10-26-1992; Ord. 96-82, 10-28-1996;
Ord. 80-2000, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-2000)
ARTICLE IV. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
Sec. 10-91. Purpose:
This article is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of
the people of the city, and is intended to address situations where parents have failed to act responsibly
and reasonably in the supervision of their minor children to the detriment of the general public. (Ord. 96-
65, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 10-92. Definitions:
Delinquent Acts : Those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes of the state or
the ordinances of the city or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division, the department of children and family services, county court services
or the juvenile court but does not include traffic violations.
Illegal Drugs : Controlled substances obtained without a legal prescription.
Juvenile Delinquent : Those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others or menaces the
welfare of the community.
Minor : For the purpose of this article, "minor" shall include persons who are above the age of seven (7)
years, but not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
Parent : A mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or
any person acting in the parent's stead who has custody or control of the minor.
Recklessly : Conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a substantial and justifiable risk
that circumstances exist or that a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this article and
where such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person
would exercise in the situation. (Ord. 96-65, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 10-93. Parental Duties:
(a)It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor
from committing any delinquent act.
(b)Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable parental control are the following
duties:
(1) To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that
are inaccessible to the minor.
(2) To know the curfew ordinances (section 10-59 of this chapter) of the city, and to require the minor
to observe the curfew ordinance.
(3) To require the minor, if sixteen (16) years of age or younger, to attend regular school sessions
and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission (section 10-90
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 331/735
of this chapter).
(4) To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent.
(5) To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or wilfully destroying
real, personal, or mixed property which belongs to the city or is located in the city.
(6) To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or
associating with known juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental
authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary. (Ord. 96-65, 9-
16-1996)
Sec. 10-94. Parental Violation And Penalty:
(a)No parent or guardian of any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall fail to exercise
reasonable parental control over such minor. An adjudication that said minor has committed a felony,
misdemeanor or violation of an ordinance which is deemed a civil infraction as identified in
subsection 10-93(b) of this article, may be considered as evidence that said parent or guardian failed
to exercise reasonable parental control.
(b)Pursuant to the violation of this article, the parent/guardian of minor shall be held civilly responsible
for the damages caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the city.
(c)Upon the first adjudication of a minor of committing a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation the
notice sent to the parent/guardian shall be considered as a warning.
(d)Upon subsequent adjudication of a minor within two (2) years of his or her first adjudication, as
provided in subsection (c) of this section, following the aforesaid notice to parent/guardian, a first
violation of this article will be deemed to have occurred and the parent/guardian shall receive a fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). If paid
within twenty four (24) hours at police headquarters, this fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
(e)In lieu of any citation payment or any fine mentioned herein for a first offense, a parent/guardian may
notify the chief of police, in writing, of their intention to complete a parenting course provided by an
acceptable organization recognized locally and/or nationally to provide such a course. The cost and
expense relating to attendance at such a course shall be the responsibility of the parent/guardian. If
parent/guardian provides proof of completion to the chief of police, the chief of police shall have the
authority to waive any such citation or fine for the first offense.
(f)Upon the second offense of a violation of this article, the parent/guardian shall be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and, in
addition, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent/guardian participate in,
through completion, a city approved, community based treatment program (such as parenting skills,
family services, employment and training, etc.).
(g)Upon the third or subsequent offense of a violation of this article, the parent/guardian shall be subject
to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 96-65, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 10-95. Notification Of Parents; Record Of Notification:
(a)Whenever a minor is apprehended or detained for a delinquent or reckless act, the parent or legal
guardian shall receive a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 332/735
requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the police
department of the city following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and
(b)A record of such notification shall be maintained by the records division of the Rock Island police
department. (Ord. 96-65, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 10-96. Liability Of Parents; Record Of Notification:
(a)Injuring Or Destroying Property Or Acts Of Vandalism : It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or
maliciously break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the city, whether such property is
owned by the state, county, city or any other governmental body, or owned by any private person. It
shall be a violation of this section for any person to commit an act of vandalism.
(b)Liable For Actual Damages : The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides
with such parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages for the wilful or malicious acts of such
minor which cause injury to a person or property.
(c)Recovery : No recovery under this section may exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) actual
damages for each person or legal entity for each occurrence of such wilful or malicious acts by the
minor causing injury, in addition to taxable court costs. In determining the damages to be allowed in
an action under this article for personal injury, only medical, dental and hospital expenses may be
recovered.
(d)Other Liability : This article shall not effect the recovery of damages in any other cause of action
where the liability of the parent or legal guardian is predicated on a common law or statutory basis.
(Ord. 96-65, 9-16-1996)
Sec. 10-97. Severability:
Should any section, subdivision, clause or phrase of this article be declared by the courts to be invalid or
unacceptable, such holding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the article as a whole or any
part thereof, other than such parts so invalidated or declared unenforceable. (Ord. 96-65, 9-16-1996)
ARTICLE V. GRAFFITI
Sec. 10-98. Purpose:
This article is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of
the people of the City, and is intended to address situations where those individuals under the age of
eighteen (18) have access to containers of spray paint to prevent the use of spray paint and other such
materials to deface public and/or private property, and to provide for the speedy removal of graffiti. (Ord.
98-24, 4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-99. Definitions:
Graffiti: Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter placed
upon the real or personal property of an owner without the owner's express, written permission,
provided, however, it shall not be a defense that the owner or occupant has given permission where this
graffiti tends to incite violence.
Minor: Shall include persons who are under the age of eighteen (18) years, for the purpose of this
article. (Ord. 98-24, 4-13-1998)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 333/735
Sec. 10-100. Purchase And/Or Possession Of Spray Paint:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a minor to possess a spray paint container in cans larger than
three (3) fluid ounces on any public property or any private property except with the express permission
of the lawful owner or manager of said private property. (Ord. 98-24, 4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-101. Placing Of Graffiti:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Place graffiti upon the real or personal, public or private property of another.
(2) For the owner and/or occupant of fixed real or personal property located within the public view to
place or give permission to place "graffiti", as defined above, on said real or personal property if the
graffiti tends to incite violence by referring to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity
or contains defamatory material about a public or private person, except as otherwise allowed by law.
(3) To possess, while in any public building facility, or while on private property, any of the following
materials with the intent to use such material(s) to violate subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this
section: spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking pens containing nonwater-soluble fluid, brushes,
applicators or other materials for marking, scratching or etching. (Ord. 98-24, 4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-102. Notification Of Graffiti Presence:
(a)Upon being notified, in writing, by the Director of the Community and Economic Development
Department, the property owner upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti
within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice.
(b)By written request, this time period may be waived due to weather conditions by the Director of the
Community and Economic Development Department or the Director of the Community and Economic
Development Department's designee.
(c)The property owner may also request assistance, in writing, for the graffiti removal based on the
owner's inability to perform removal.
(d)If the property owner wishes to object to the notification to remove graffiti, they may:
(1) Request a hearing before the Code Hearing Officer by submitting a written
request to the City of Rock Island prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) days
herein provided.
(2) If the Code Hearing Officer finds that there is insufficient evidence to support
the notification, it shall be rescinded.
(3) If the Code Hearing Officer finds sufficient evidence to support the notification,
the owner may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, pursuant to the
Administrative Review Act. (Ord. 013-2018, 4-23-2018)
Sec. 10-103. Failure To Remove Graffiti:
Failure to remove the graffiti within the specified time shall cause the summary abatement of this
nuisance as prescribed in this chapter and the owner shall be assessed the costs therefor. (Ord. 98-24,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 334/735
4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-104. Penalty:
(a)The penalty upon conviction for violation of section 10-100 of this article shall be a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b)Penalty for violating subsection 10-101(a)(1) of this article shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The offender may also be ordered by the
Code Hearing Officer, in addition to fines, to pay restitution to the property owner for the costs of
restoring the property to its condition before the graffiti was applied.
(c)Penalty for violating subsection 10-101(a)(2) of this article shall consist of a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(d)Penalty for violating subsection 10-101(a)(3) of this article shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(e)In the event a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the
time a complaint is issued for the violation, then the person so accused may pay to the City at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of the violation
provided that the graffiti has been removed. (Ord. 98-24, 4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-105. Removal By A City Authorized Agent:
The City shall have the authority to designate and/or authorize an agency to clean graffiti at locations
within the City which may be required by the Community and Economic Development Department, the
Hearing Officer or the court as a result of a violation of this article. (Ord. 98-24, 4-13-1998)
Sec. 10-106. Removal By Public Works Department:
The Public Works Department, in addition to or in lieu of fines or penalties described in subsection 10-
104(b), (c) or (d) of this article, resulting from a violation of subsection 10-101(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of
this article, may recover its costs incurred for cleaning or removing the graffiti from the violator. (Ord. 98-
24, 4-13-1998)
ARTICLE VI. JUDICIARY
Sec. 10-107. Administrative Adjudication Of Violations Of City Ordinances:
Sec. 10-107.1. Purpose:
The stated purpose of this article is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of city ordinances as
may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of
such city ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 99-87 § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.2. Creation:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government to be known as the
Rock Island ordinance enforcement department (hereinafter referred to as "RIOED") and to have the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 335/735
power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time authorized by the city
council, except for any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-
204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. This article may be enforced through the use of an administrative
hearing officer system created by intergovernmental agreement between the city and such other
governmental agency as shall be parties to such agreement. The establishment of the Rock Island
ordinance enforcement department does not preclude the mayor and city council from using any other
method to enforce ordinances of the city. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.3. Administrative Composition:
The Rock Island ordinance enforcement department shall be composed of a hearing officer, and such
support personnel as shall be necessary to effect the purpose of this article, with the power and authority
as hereinafter set forth.
(1) The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following
powers and duties:
a. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the city code
violation;
b. Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing,
upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
c. Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced
at the hearing;
d. Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating whether a city code violation
exists; and
e. Imposing penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with applicable city code provisions
and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charge violation, except however, that in no
event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
(2) Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer
shall have successfully completed a formal training program which includes the following:
a. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the hearing
officer shall preside;
b. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/she will adjudicate;
c. Observation of administrative hearings; and
d. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, a hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for
at least three (3) years.
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the position above set forth. (Ord. 99-87, § 1,
11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.4. Procedure:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 336/735
The system of administrative adjudication of any city ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated
hereunder, shall be in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by persons authorized under this code
and shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the
violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
(2) All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers as well as other specifically authorized
individuals of any city department shall have the authority to issue violation notices.
(3) Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects an ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter or a violation of any section of any city ordinance, is
authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set
forth.
(4) The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
a. The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
b. The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
c. The particular ordinance violated.
d. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
e. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
f. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
g. The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations, the legal authority and
jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the
hearing. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.5. Service:
(a)Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice:
(1) Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance violation;
(2) Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the notice with any person twelve (12)
years of age or older at the residence of the responsible person;
(3) Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person responsible for the
ordinance violation; or
(4) Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found when the person is the owner or
manager of the property.
(b)The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said
notice by:
(1) Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
(2) In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept
by the ordinance enforcement administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by
the device while under his/her control.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 337/735
(c)The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement
administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business.
(d)Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall
be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
notice. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.6. Administrative Hearings:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits shall be granted to
the alleged violator at the date, time and place set forth by the RIOED and by notice given and served
upon the alleged violator. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a
determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or
testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence, including
hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in
the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and
penalties in accordance with section 10-107.11 of this article. Persons appearing to contest the alleged
violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be
on the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation. (Ord. 99-
87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.7. Notices:
Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United
States mail. The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but
not be limited to, the following information:
(1) Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a city ordinance, to appear at the
time and date designated for a hearing stated on said notice, the RIOED shall send or cause to be
sent notices by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the person who received the notice of an
ordinance violation and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
b. Particular ordinance violated;
c. Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
d. Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
e. A section entitled "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the person receiving a
notice of ordinance violation may appear at an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the
violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing;
f. Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be
contested on its merits;
g. Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the
hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final
determination of liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated;
h. Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for the failure, and the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review,
any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 338/735
(2) A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following the conclusion of administrative
hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information
and warnings:
a. A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the city.
b. A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are debts due and owing the
city.
c. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the city within the time
specified may result in proceeding with collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment
entered by any court of competent jurisdiction.
d. Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or ordinance. (Ord. 99-87, § 1,
11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.8. Final Determination Of Liability:
A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing
officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust any administrative
review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to
contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed
notice pursuant to section 10-107.7 of this article, the hearing officer's determination of liability shall
become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the
expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-
1999)
Sec. 10-107.9. Judicial Review:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 99-87, §
1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.10. Enforcement Of Judgment:
(a)Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed,
remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under
the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
(b)After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may
be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c)In any case in which a Hearing Officer finds that a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a Code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of
a Code violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure after they
are fixed by the Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Municipality and may be collected
in accordance with applicable law.
(d)A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both of the defendant in the amount
of any debt due and owing the Municipality under this section. The lien may be recorded and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 339/735
enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the manner
provided by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code.
(e)A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date upon a
petition filed within twenty one (21) days after the issuance of the order of default if the Hearing
Officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any
time if the petitioner establishes that the Municipality did not provide proper service of process. (Ord.
99-87, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.11. Schedule Of Ordinances And Penalties:
The ordinance covered by this article and the minimum penalties to be imposed for violation thereof, is
as follows:
Code
Section No. Offense Penalty
1-13.1(a)(1) Attempted retail theft under $150.00 $50.00-$500.00
1-13.1(a)(2) Attempted criminal damage to property under $150.00 $25.00-$500.00
1-13.1(a)(3) Attempted theft of property under $150.00 $50.00-$500.00
1-13.1(a)(4) Attempted entry into licensed liquor establishment without
presenting identification
$50.00-$500.00
1-13.1(a)(5) Attempted purchase of alcohol by persons under 21 $50.00-$500.00
3-10(b) Sale of alcohol to minor (business only) $150.00-$500.00
3-10(c) Purchase and consumption of alcohol by minors prohibited $200.00-$500.00
3-10(f) Falsification of proof of age prohibited $200.00-$500.00
3-10(g) Employment of minors $150.00-$500.00
3-10(i) Minor on premises prohibited $200.00-$500.00
3-10(l) Solicitation for purchase of alcohol by minor $150.00-$500.00
3-11(g) Closing time $100.00-$500.00
3-11(i) Gambling devices $100.00-$500.00
3-11(m) Indecency/obscenity $200.00-$500.00
3-11(n) Prostitution/pandering $200.00-$500.00
4-1 Violation of the Building Code $50.00-$500.00
4-3 Violation of the Plumbing Code $50.00-$500.00
4-4 Violation of the Mechanical Code $50.00-$500.00
4-21 - 4-25 Violation of the Electrical Code $50.00-$500.00
4-46 - 4-65 Violation of the sign ordinance $500.00
4-111 - 4-122 Violation of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code $300.00
4-136 - 4-
145
Violation of the abandoned building ordinance $300.00
4-175 - 4-
185
Violation of the residential rental property ordinance $50.00-$500.00
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 340/735
6-18 Violation of Fire Prevention Code $500.00
7-115 Cruelty to animals $100.00-$500.00
7-116(b) Running at large generally (dog) $100.00-$500.00
7-117 Vicious animal $75.00-$500.00
7-136 Inoculation required (rabies) $100.00-$500.00
7-140 License - required; amount of fee $100.00-$500.00
7-147(b) Health and cruelty (noisy animals) $75.00-$500.00
7-181 Violation of Housing Code $300.00
7-231 - 7-
235
Violation of nuisance and refuse ordinance $25.00-$100.00
8-59 False alarm $25.00-$500.00
8-86 Youth dance license $100.00-$500.00
8-234 Prohibited activities on Great River Plaza $75.00-$500.00
8-493(a) Sale or delivery of tobacco to minor $200.00-$500.00
8-494(a) Sale of tobacco by minor (business) $200.00-$500.00
8-494(b) Purchase by minors prohibited (tobacco) $75.00-$500.00
8-494(c) Possession by minors prohibited (tobacco) $75.00-$500.00
9-9.1(a) Illegal operation of sound amplification systems $75.00-$500.00
9-9.2 Unlawful use of electronic communication devices $75.00
9-10(c) No bicycle registration $25.00-$100.00
9-12(a)(1),
(a)(2)
Car owner responsibility assignment As provided
9-83 First offense of overtime parking in a 30 minute, 1 hour or 2
hour parking zone
$10.00
9-88 Overtime parking
1st violation
2nd, 3rd and 4th violation, each
Total of 4 violations - maximum
$20.00-$40.00
$25.00-$45.00
$95.00-$175.00
10-4 Indecent exposure; lewd exhibitions $150.00-$500.00
10-9 Firearms, explosives, slingshots, fireworks, bow and arrow,
air gun
$50.00-$500.00
10-10 Obstruction of roadways $100.00-$500.00
10-12 Getting on or holding onto vehicle $50.00-$500.00
10-14 Coasting on streets $50.00-$500.00
10-16 Excavation, openings, etc. - safety $50.00-$500.00
10-18 Abandoned, etc., airtight containers $100.00-$500.00
10-20(b) Assault; battery $75.00-$500.00
10-21 Disturbing the peace $100.00-$500.00
10-21.1 Public urination and defecation prohibited $100.00-$500.00
10-23 Loitering $50.00-$500.00
10-26 Disorderly conduct
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 341/735
subsections (a)(1), (a)(6) and (a)(7)
subsection (a)(5)
$50.00-$500.00
$100.00-$500.00
10-26(a)(2) Disorderly conduct (false fire alarm) $100.00-$500.00
10-26(a)(3) Disorderly conduct (bomb threat) $100.00-$500.00
10-26(a)(4) Disorderly conduct (false police report) $100.00-$500.00
10-27 Disturbing school or assembly $100.00-$500.00
10-28 Time for closing a place of amusement $100.00-$500.00
10-30 Concealed weapon $150.00-$500.00
10-32(a) Resisting or obstructing a police officer $100.00-$500.00
10-32(c) Impersonation of a police officer $50.00-$500.00
10-39 Depositing rubbish in streets; burning rubbish, leaves, etc., in
streets - prohibited
$75.00-$500.00
10-40.1 Leaf burning prohibited $25.00-$500.00
10-47 Destruction of or damage to street signs $100.00-$500.00
10-51 Possession of alcoholic liquors on public right-of-way $200.00-$500.00
10-53 Presence in City parking building and parking lot C $50.00-$500.00
10-54 Retail theft under $150.00 $150.00-$500.00
10-56 Criminal damage to property less than $300.00 $75.00-$500.00
10-57 Criminal trespass to land $100.00-$500.00
10-58 Criminal trespass to vehicles $100.00-$500.00
10-59(b) Curfew hours for minors $100.00-$500.00
10-60 Possession of less than 2.5 grams of cannabis $200.00-$500.00
10-60.1 Possession of more than 2.5 grams but not more than 10
grams of cannabis
$300.00-$750.00
10-60.2 Possession of drug paraphernalia $200.00-$500.00
10-61 Prostitution $0.00-$500.00
10-61.1 Solicitation of a sexual act $0.00-$500.00
10-62 Soliciting for prostitution $0.00-$500.00
10-64 Patronizing a prostitute $0.00-$500.00
10-65 Pimping $0.00-$500.00
10-66 Public indecency $0.00-$500.00
10-67 Theft of property generally (less than $150.00) $100.00-$500.00
10-68 Trespass to restricted area $50.00-$500.00
10-70 Driver and passenger required to use safety belts $25.00
10-90(a) Truancy prohibited $50.00-$500.00
10-94 Parental violation and penalty (curfew) $100.00-$500.00
11-91 - 11-
115
Violation of preservation of historical or architecturally
significant property
$500.00
11-142 - 11-
146
Violation of parking lot ordinance $200.00
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 342/735
13-22 General conditions (solid waste) $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-24 Storage facilities for refuse $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-25 Collection; removal generally $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-26 Collection of brush $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-31 Commercial refuse and garbage containers $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-32 Needles, syringes, lancets and sharp objects $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-33 Commercial rubbish and garbage haulers $5.00-$500.00 per
day
13-38 Removal of weeds and grass $75.00-$400.00
13-101 Painting, etc. $1.00-$200.00 per
violation
14-20 Violation of park rules and regulations $75.00
App. A, IXXVI
Violation of zoning ordinance $500.00
App. D Violation of stormwater control $250.00-$1,500.00
per day
(Ord. 020-2012, 3-19-2012; Ord. 080-2012, 12-17-2012; Ord. 029-2014, 3-24-2014; Ord. 059-2015, 12-
14-2015; Ord. 020-2016, 4-18-2016; Ord. 025-2016, 5-9-2016; Ord. 026-2016, 5-16-2016; Ord. 050-
2017, 12-11-2017)
Sec. 10-107.12. Severability:
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that one or more sections or subsections of this
article is or are invalid, the remaining sections and subsections hereof shall remain in full force and
effect. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.13. Effective Date/Publication:
This article shall become effective ten (10) days after publication. (Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
Sec. 10-107.14. Repealer:
Any and all ordinances, sections or subsections of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 99-87, § 1, 11-1-1999)
ARTICLE VII. AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING
Sec. 10-108. Definitions:
For purposes of this article:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 343/735
Aggressive Panhandling: Panhandling that includes one or more of the following actions:
(1) The touching of the solicited person without the solicited person's consent.
(2) Intentionally blocking the path of travel of the person being solicited.
(3) Intentionally blocking the entrance to any vehicle or building.
(4) The stepping into the main traveled portion of a city street or highway with the intention of
soliciting a donation from a driver of or passenger in an automobile on said roadway, without first
obtaining a permit for such activity from the City Clerk.
(5) Continuing to solicit or request a donation from a person after that person has refused an earlier
request.
(6) Following or remaining alongside a person who, after being solicited, walks away from the person
panhandling.
(7) Making any statement, gesture or other communication that would cause a reasonable person to
feel threatened, fearful or compelled.
Panhandling: Any request for or solicitation of an immediate donation of money. A request or solicitation
to purchase an item for an amount far exceeding its value, and circumstances where a reasonable
person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, constitutes panhandling.
Panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing, sitting or engaging in a musical performance
or other street performance with a sign or other indication that donations are being sought, without any
verbal request for a donation other than in response to an inquiry by another person.
Person: Shall include firms and corporations. (Ord. 109-2005, § 1, 12-12-2005)
Sec. 10-109. Unlawful Acts:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in aggressive panhandling.
(b)It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more people, firms or corporations to intentionally work in concert to
commit acts that would constitute aggressive panhandling if those acts were performed by a single
individual, firm or corporation.
(c)It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in panhandling whether the
panhandler or the person being solicited is located in any of the following places:
(1) At any bus stop.
(2) In any public transportation vehicle or facility.
(3) In a vehicle that is parked or stopped on any public street or alley.
(4) Within twenty feet (20') of an automatic teller machine or the entrance to a bank, credit union or
savings and loan.
(5) On private property, without the consent of the owner of the property.
(d)It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in panhandling between the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the next ensuing day. (Ord. 109-2005, § 1, 12-
12-2005)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 344/735
Sec. 10-110. Penalty:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article, shall be fined:
(1) Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense;
(2) One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the second offense;
(3) Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and each subsequent offense.
Each separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 109-2005, § 4, 12-12-2005)
Chapter 11
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Planning Commission-Creation; Membership 1:
There is created in the city a planning commission consisting of eleven (11) members. The commission
shall elect a chairman from among its membership who shall be a voting member. Six (6) members shall
constitute a quorum, provided that, in the event a matter comes before the commission for decision
which may be reasonably construed to affect the private interests of any member, the member may not
be considered to be among those constituting a quorum, nor shall he be permitted to participate in the
voting on such matter. The mayor shall have the authority with the approval and consent of the city
council, to appoint, from time to time, planning commission members emeritus. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art.
II; Ord., § 1, 2-6-1967; Ord., § 1, 9-18-1967; Ord., § 1, 5-5-1969; Ord., § 1, 8-9-1976)
Sec. 11-2. Planning Commission-Powers:
The planning commission shall have the following powers:
(1) To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan of public improvements
looking to the present and future development of the city, such plan after its adoption by the city
council, to be known as the official plan of the city. The commission may thereafter, from time to time,
recommend any changes in the official plan. The plan may include reasonable requirements with
reference to streets, alleys and public grounds in unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits and
in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (1 1/2) miles from such
limits, and not included in any city, village or incorporated town, such requirements to be effective
whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such official plan.
(2) To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, plans for specific improvements
in pursuance of such official plan.
(3) To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced within the official plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official plan.
(4) To prepare and recommend to the city council schemes for regulating or forbidding structures or
activities which may hinder access to solar energy necessary for the proper functioning of solar
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 345/735
energy systems, as defined in 30 Illinois Compiled Statutes 725/1.2, or to recommend changes in
such schemes.
(5) To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted herein, as may be conferred by
the city council or granted by state statute. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 11-3. Planning Commission-Term Of Office:
The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by
the city council, and shall hold office for three (3) years, ending April 30, or until their successors have
been appointed. In order to initiate an arrangement of staggered terms, the terms of three (3) or more
members shall expire each year. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 11-4. Southwest Area Comprehensive Plan:
(a)The proposed comprehensive plan for the southwest area of the city is adopted as the official
comprehensive plan for the city of Rock Island's southwest area.
(b)A map setting forth said official comprehensive plan marked exhibit A, attached to ordinance 83-23, is
hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 83-23, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-1983)
Secs. 11-5-11-15. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-16. Citizens' Advisory Committee-Created:
(a)There is hereby created the citizens' advisory committee for community development, which shall
consist of twenty one (21) members who are residents of the city. The membership shall be broadly
representative of the community and shall include, but not be limited to, low and moderate income
persons, members of minority groups, residents of areas where a significant amount of activity is
proposed or ongoing, the elderly, the handicapped, the business community and civic groups that are
interested in community development.
(b)The committee shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its membership at its first
meeting and shall adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary.
(c)The city manager shall assign to the committee a secretary and such other part time staff as is
necessary to effectively carry out the objectives of the committee.
(d)The overall purpose of the committee shall be to act as a focal point of citizen participation and to
provide support for public and private efforts in carrying out community improvement programs.
(e)The members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor and the city council. Special
appointments to the committee shall be made by the mayor and city council as vacancies may occur.
(f)For the first term, seven (7) members shall be appointed for three (3) years, seven (7) members for
two (2) years and the final seven (7) members for one year. Each succeeding group of members
shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, thus assuring a balance of twenty one (21) members
at all times.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 346/735
(g)The committee shall meet at the city hall at the call of the chairman of the committee at least four (4)
times each year, and such further times as meetings are called by the chairman or a majority of the
members of said committee.
(Ord., § 1, 10-24-1966; Ord., §§ 1-3, 3-18-1974; Ord., §§ 1-3 6-5-1978)
Sec. 11-17. Citizens' Advisory Committee-Duties And Powers:
(a)The citizens' advisory committee shall gather information and keep citizen groups generally informed
about the workable program for community improvement activities.
(b)The committee shall assist in the coordination of the various community improvement activities.
(c)The committee shall assist official agencies in public relations.
(d)The committee shall advise and consult with the mayor, city manager and city council on all matters
involving overall workable program objectives.
(e)The committee shall establish a minority group housing subcommittee and other subcommittees as
are necessary in order to effectively carry out the overall objectives of the community improvement
programs.
(f)The committee shall lend support to, and seek support for, desirable community programs and
projects.
(g)The committee shall render an annual report to the mayor and city council. (Ord., § 2, 10-24-1966)
Secs. 11-18-11-30. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT
Sec. 11-31. Creation Of Department 2:
There is hereby created a community and economic development department in the city. Said
department shall be administered by a director of community and economic development appointed by
and subject to the direction and control of the city manager. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 12-19-
1966; Ord., § 1, 5-10-1971; Ord., § 1, 1-26-1981; Ord. 87-22, § 8, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 11-32. Duties Of Director:
The director of community and economic development shall supervise and coordinate all activities
relating to inspections, planning and redevelopment, and economic development, and in addition
thereto, shall perform such further duties as may from time to time be directed by the city manager.
(1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III; Ord., § 1, 12-19-1966; Ord., § 1, 5-10-1971; Ord., § 2, 1-26-1981; Ord. 87-22,
§ 9, 3-23-1987)
Secs. 11-33-11-50. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 347/735
Sec. 11-51. Creation Of Commission:
(a)There is hereby created a city beautification commission, referred to in this article as the
"commission", which shall consist of fifteen (15) members who are residents of the city. The
membership of the commission shall be broadly representative of the community, such as
representatives of the various civic groups and clubs that have indicated an interest in the
beautification of the city.
(b)The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the
city council. Special appointments to said commission shall be made as vacancies may occur. (Ord.,
§ 1, 6-14-1965; Ord., 1-15-1968)
Sec. 11-52. Duties Of Commission:
The commission shall plan for the future beautification of the city and help coordinate programs which
are now taking place and shall also encourage private individuals to participate and assist in the
beautification of the city. (Ord., § 1, 6-14-1965)
Sec. 11-53. Chairman:
The members of the commission shall select a chairman from their membership, who shall serve for a
term of one year and shall be entitled to vote. (Ord., § 1, 6-14-1965)
Sec. 11-54. Meetings:
The commission shall meet at the city hall at the call of the chairman of said commission at least six (6)
times each year and at such further times as meetings are called by the chairman or a majority of the
members of the commission. (Ord., § 1, 6-14-1965)
Sec. 11-55. Term Of Appointment:
Each group of three (3) or four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years, thus assuring
a balance of fifteen (15) members at all times. (Ord., § 1, 6-14-1965)
Secs. 11-56-11-70. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. FLOOD HAZARDS
Sec. 11-71. Purpose:
This article is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by the Illinois municipal code 65
ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.1 in order to accomplish the following purposes:
(1) To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
(2) To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
(3) To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens from the
hazards of flooding;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 348/735
(4) To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and
flood rescue and relief operations;
(5) To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight
areas;
(6) To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
(7) To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic
and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 018-2010, § 1, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-72. Definitions:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions are adopted:
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as
defined in section 11-73 of this chapter.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof including
manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
Critical Facility: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded,
would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the
delivery of vital services, cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services
facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and
hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
Development: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
(1) Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building, or any addition to a building, exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in floor area;
(2) Substantial improvement of an existing building;
(3) Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
(4) Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
(5) Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
(6) Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground
surface;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 349/735
(7) Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks; and
(8) Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of
flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or
gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or
buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion To An Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites
by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts
the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate
zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations.
Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Protection Elevation Or FPE: The elevation of the base flood plus two feet (2') of freeboard at any
given location in the floodplain.
Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (These Terms Are Synonymous): Those lands within
the jurisdiction of the city, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city,
that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the city are generally identified as
such on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock Island County prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated April 5, 2010.
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used
to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation.
Floodway: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway for
the floodplains of Coal Creek, Eckhardt Creek, Kyte Creek, Mississippi River, Old Channel of Mill Creek,
Rock River, Sand Creek, Sylvan Slough, and Warren Creek shall be as delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Rock Island County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated April 5, 2010. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the city, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city, shall be according to the best
data available from federal, state, or other sources.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 350/735
Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for
uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions
and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register.
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(3) Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation
agency.
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois
historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of
section 11-77 of this chapter.
Manufactured Home: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
Repetitive Loss: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a
ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average,
equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage
of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see
definition of Repetitive Loss).
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either: 1) before the
improvement or repair is started, or 2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 1) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or 2) any alteration of a
structure listed on the national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
Travel Trailer (Or Recreational Vehicle): A vehicle which is:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 351/735
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the required federal, state
and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as the
documentation is provided. (Ord. 018-2010, § 2, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-73. Base Flood Elevation:
This article's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are listed below.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party may finance the detailed engineering
study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the federal emergency
management agency for approval.
(1) The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Coal Creek, Eckhardt Creek, Kyte Creek,
Mississippi River, Old Channel of Mill Creek, Rock River, Sand Creek, and Sylvan Slough shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance study of Rock Island
County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated April 5, 2010.
(2) The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be
that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock Island
County.
(3) The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an "A zone" on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock Island County shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state, or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed to determine base flood elevations.
(4) The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Rock Island County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Rock Island, or that may be annexed into the city,
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance rate study of Rock Island
County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated April 5, 2010. (Ord. 018-
2010, § 3, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-74. Administration:
(a)In order to ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city
meet the requirements of this article, the planning and redevelopment administrator and the building
official shall be responsible for the general administration of this article. Specifically, the building
official and planning and redevelopment administrator shall jointly:
(1) Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined in section 11-82 of this
chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this article;
(2) Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state, and federal
permits;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 352/735
(3) Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base flood data
and to improve the administration of this article; and
(4) Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal
permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this article.
(b)The building official shall:
(1) Process development permits in accordance with section 11-75 of this chapter;
(2) Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to section 11-77 of this
chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) or floodproof certificate;
(3) Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and
floodplain construction techniques.
(c)The planning and redevelopment administrator shall:
(1) Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the
damage prevention requirements of section 11-76 of this chapter;
(2) Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse;
(3) Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of section 11-78 of this
chapter;
(4) If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section 11-80 of this chapter are met
and maintain documentation of any variances granted. (Ord. 018-2010, § 4, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-75. Development Permit:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any
development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the building official. The
building official shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this article.
(1) The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
a. Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
b. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
c. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
d. The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of section 11-77 of this chapter.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building official shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey data to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements
of this article. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 353/735
the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's
first flood insurance rate map identification. (Ord. 018-2010, § 5, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-76. Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages:
Within the floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock Island County, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no development shall be allowed which,
acting in combination with existing and anticipated development, will cause any increase in flood
heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development
activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
a. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 3;
b. Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 4;
c. Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 5;
d. Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 6;
e. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide
permit no. 7;
f. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide
permit no. 8;
g. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 9;
h. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 10;
i. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no.
11; and
j. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely in a flood fringe area.
(2) Other development activities not listed in subsection (1) of this section may be permitted only if:
a. A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that
an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); and
b. Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA
for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood elevation. (Ord. 018-2010, § 6, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-77. Protecting Buildings:
(a)In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 11-76 of this chapter, all buildings to be
located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation.
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
(1) Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building valued
at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 354/735
(2) Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the
floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent
(50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively, during the life of the building. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
(3) Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively
during the life of the building. If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
(4) Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site
(the building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site
it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage); and
(5) Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
(6) "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section 11-72 of this chapter.
(b)Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the
following methods:
(1) The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation;
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') before compaction and should
extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection
elevation;
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap,
or other structural measure;
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris or refuse materials; and
e. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring
properties and when necessary, stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins
shall be incorporated; or
(2) The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is
permanently open to floodwaters;
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address
hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent
opening on each wall no more than one foot (1') above grade. The openings shall provide a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the base flood elevation;
d. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows
and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current,
waves, ice and floating debris;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 355/735
e. The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished exterior grade;
f. All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage;
g. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service
facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
h. The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or building access
and not occupied as habitable space; and
i. In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
(3) The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood protection elevation
provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects
of buoyancy.
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize
hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of
one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square
foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
c. The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation must not be more than
two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
d. The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the
top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of
the crawl space within a reasonable period of time after a flood event.
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage.
g. Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
(c)Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be installed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
days shall be:
(1) Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Illinois mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to
77 Illinois administrative code 870.
(d)Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that:
(1) Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 356/735
(2) The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice; and
(3) Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
subsection. (Ord. 018-2010, § 7, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-78. Subdivision And Other Development Requirements:
The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official
actions related to land management use and development.
(1) New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit
developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage
prevention and building protection standards of sections 11-76 and 11-77 of this chapter. Any
proposal for such development shall include the following data:
a. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where the base flood elevation is
not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood elevation);
b. The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
c. A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed plat or plan
accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act 765 ILCS
205/2.2.
(2) Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the
requirements of sections 11-76 and 11-77 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
a. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of section 11-77 of this chapter;
b. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric shall be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;
c. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into floodwaters;
d. New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be located
and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
Manholes or other aboveground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be
watertight.
(3) All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or
increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 018-2010, § 8, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-79. Carrying Capacity And Notification:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 357/735
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
In addition, the City shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a
permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 018-2010, § 9, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-80. Variances:
Whenever the standards of this article place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the
applicant may apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
review and act upon the applicant's request for a variance.
(1) No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
a. The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
b. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
c. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
d. There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or creation of a nuisance;
e. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
f. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the
intent of the NFIP; and
g. All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protection standards of section 11-77 of this article that would lessen the
degree of protection to a building will:
a. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
b. Increase the risks to life and property; and
c. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant
acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
(3) Variances to the building protection requirements of section 11-77 of this article requested in
connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a site or building included on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois register of historic places may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of subsections (1)a through (1)e of this section. (Ord. 018-2010, §
10, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-81. Disclaimer Of Liability:
The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply
that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This
article does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 358/735
damage that results from proper reliance on this article or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder. (Ord. 018-2010, § 11, 3-15-2010)
Sec. 11-82. Penalty:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a
permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. Upon due investigation, the
Planning and Redevelopment Administrator or building official may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this article exists. The Planning and Redevelopment Administrator or building
official shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
(1) If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
a. The City shall make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring conformance with
this article or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
article;
b. Any person who violates this article shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and
c. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(2) The Planning and Redevelopment Administrator or building official shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 018-
2010, § 12, 3-15-2010)
Secs. 11-83 - 11-90. Reserved:
(Ord. 018-2010, § 14, 3-15-2010)
ARTICLE V. PRESERVATION OF HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT PROPERTY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-91. Statement Of Purpose:
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
community by:
(1) Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive historic, architectural, and/or
landscape characteristics of Rock Island, which represent elements of the City's cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history;
(2) Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as represented in Rock
Island's landmarks and historic districts;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 359/735
(3) Stabilizing and improving the property value of Rock Island's landmarks and historic areas;
(4) Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of our buildings; and
(5) Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the City to its home buyers, homeowners,
residents, tourists, visitors, and shoppers, and thereby supporting and promoting business,
commerce, industry, and providing economic benefit to the City. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-92. Definitions:
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except when the context
demands otherwise:
Alteration:
(1) Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of the structure,
including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or moving of any structure.
(2) Any act or process that, while not requiring a building permit, significantly changes the exterior of
a regulated structure so as to change one or more features that relates to the regulated structure's
status as a landmark or contributing resource.
Applicant: A person or entity submitting an application for issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness or
a Certificate of Economic Hardship.
Archeological Resource: Any material remains or physical evidence of past human life or activities that
are of archeological interest, including the record of the effects of human activities on the environment.
An archeological resource may be capable of revealing scientific or humanistic information through
archeological research.
Architectural Review Guidelines: A standard of design quality that will preserve the historic and
architectural character of a landmark or a structure within a Locally Designated Historic District.
Area: A specific geographic division of the City.
Building: A house, commercial building, church, hotel, school, or similar construction made to shelter any
form of human activity.
Certificate Of Appropriateness (COA): A certificate authorizing regulated activity involving a regulated
structure issued by the Preservation Administrator pursuant to approval by the commission under the
applicable provisions of section 11-113 of this article.
Certificate Of Economic Hardship (COEH): A certificate authorizing regulated activity involving a
regulated structure issued by the Preservation Administrator pursuant to section 11-114 of this article,
even though a Certificate of Appropriateness previously has been denied.
Certified Local Government (CLG): The Certified Local Government Program is jointly administrated by
the National Park Service and the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; the program certifies
communities that have certain requirements in establishing local historic preservation programs. Once
certified, communities gain access to grants and technical assistance to implement their local
preservation programs.
Commission: Rock Island Preservation Commission.
Commissioners: Voting members of the Rock Island Preservation Commission.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 360/735
Conservation Right: A term that includes easements, covenants, deed restrictions or any other type of
less than full fee simple interest that might be used to protect a landmark or Locally Designated Historic
District.
Construction: The act of building or altering a structure.
Contributing Resource: Any building, object, site, or structure that contributes to understanding the
architectural and historic development within a Locally Designated or Nationally Designated Historic
District. The contributing resource usually retains a high level of integrity.
Council: The City Council of the City of Rock Island.
Cultural/Historic Resource: A cultural resource is an aspect of a cultural system that is valued by or
significantly representative of a culture or that contains significant information if it is greater than fifty (50)
years of age. Cultural resources are categorized as districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects for
the National Register of Historic Places. Archeological sites are also considered cultural resources.
Demolition: Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a cultural/historic resource.
Design Review: The formal process of reviewing proposed projects seeking a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the Preservation Commission.
District: A district possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings, sites,
structures, or objects united historically or architecturally by plan or physical development. A district
derives its importance from being a unified entity, even though it is often comprised of a variety of
resources.
Locally Designated Historic District: An area designated as a "historic district" by ordinance of the City
Council, pursuant to the procedures prescribed in division 3 of this article and subject to the regulations
therein.
Nationally Designated Historic District: An area designated as a "historic district" by being listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
Exterior Architectural Appearance: The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of
a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type,
design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
Integrity: The authenticity of a property's historic identity. The seven (7) qualities of integrity as defined
by the National Register of Historic Places are location, setting, feeling, association, design,
workmanship, and materials.
Inventory: A listing of properties evaluated as contributing or non-contributing to a historic district or
potentially eligible for local landmark designation or for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
Inventories are derived from field surveys.
Landmark: A regulated structure that is designated as a "landmark" by ordinance of the City Council,
pursuant to procedures prescribed in division 3 of this article.
Landscape: The area surrounding a landmark or structure within a historic district. This shall include, but
not be limited to, fences, statues, signs, plantings, paving, and outbuildings, as well as landforms.
National Register Of Historic Places (NRHP): The comprehensive list of cultural resources significant in
American history, architecture, archeology, engineering, and culture. This list is maintained by the
National Park Service under authority of the National Preservation Act of 1966.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 361/735
Noncontributing Resource: Buildings, objects, sites, and structures that did not exist at the time of the
event(s) associated with a Locally or Nationally Designated Historic District or have lost integrity from the
district's period of significance.
Object: The term used to distinguish from buildings and structures those constructions that are primarily
artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale. Objects may include a boundary marker, fountain,
milepost, monument, sculpture, or statuary.
Owner(s) Of Record: The person(s), corporation, or other legal entity in whose name(s) the property
appears on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
Preservation: The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and
material of a historic building, site, structure, or object. Preservation may also entail the act of
designating a historic resource a landmark, getting a historic resource on the National Register of
Historic Places, or establishing a Locally Designated Historic District.
Preservation Administrator: An employee of the Community and Economic Development Department
that has been designated as the Administrator of this article. This individual serves as Secretary to the
Preservation Commission.
Preservation Administrator Of The Interior's Standards: The "Preservation Administrator of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings", revised U.S. 1990,
Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Preservation Assistance Division, Washington, D.C.
Property: A distinct parcel of real property which is assigned a separate tax parcel number by the County
Supervisor of Assessments.
Regulated Activity: Any act or process involving the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair,
relocation, alteration, or demolition of a regulated structure.
Regulated Structure: Any property or structure that is subject to the provisions of this article because it
has been designated as a landmark or because it is located within a Locally Designated Historic District.
Rehabilitation: The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the
property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
Relocation: Any repositioning of a structure on its site or moving it to another site.
Repair: Any change that does not require a building permit that is not construction, relocation, or
alteration.
Replacement-In-Kind: The act of replacing or rebuilding a structural element to correct the deterioration,
decay of, or damage to a building, structure, or site using the same material, construction, and
dimensions. Replacement material shall match the old both physically and visually. Replacement-in-kind
projects do not require a Certificate of Appropriateness, but the commission shall be notified when a
replacement-in-kind project is approved by the Preservation Administrator at the next regularly
scheduled meeting.
Restoration: The process of returning a property to an approximate state of its original construction and
appearance or to a specific time period in relation to its significance as a historic property.
Site: The location of an important event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or
structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possess historic, cultural, or
archeological value. Examples of sites include designed landscapes, parks, natural features, ruins, or
trails.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 362/735
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO): State agency that manages and administrates statewide
preservation planning and cultural resource management programs, including the National Register of
Historic Places and the Certified Local Government Program. In Illinois, the SHPO is the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency.
Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Survey: A survey is a study designed to identify and evaluate properties in a community, area or district
to determine whether they may be of historic, architectural, archeological, engineering or cultural
significance. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-93. Penalties:
Any person, firm, or corporation who alters, demolishes, repairs, or relocates any landmark or any
structure within a Locally Designated Historic District without complying with the provisions of this article
shall be required to restore the building or structure and its site to its appearance prior to the violation.
Any action to enforce this section shall be brought by the City Attorney, their designee, or by designated
representatives of the Department of Community and Economic Development. This civil remedy shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty contained in this section. If there is a
willful violation of the provisions of this article, any person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such herein. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-94. Affirmation Of Existing Zoning:
Nothing contained in this article shall supersede the powers of other local legislative or regulatory bodies
or relieve any property owner of complying with the requirements of any other State Statutes or
Municipal ordinances or regulations. Specifically, this article in no way modifies or negates existing
zoning in the City. Thus affirmation of existing zoning is not an approval of that zoning, nor does it
preclude amendments to zoning district boundaries or categories of uses. The local zoning ordinance
remains in effect unless modified. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Secs. 11-95-11-100. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 11-101. Created:
(a)Membership: There is hereby created the Rock Island Preservation Commission, consisting of nine
(9) voting members, residents of Rock Island, appointed by the Mayor of Rock Island and approved
by the City Council, and one ex officio nonvoting member, a representative of the Department of
Community and Economic Development. At least one member of the commission shall be an
attorney, one an architect, and one shall be an active member of the Rock Island Preservation
Society. Six (6) commission members shall be appointed at large on the basis of expertise,
experience or interest in the areas of architectural history, building construction or engineering,
finance, historical and architectural preservation, landscape architecture, geography, neighborhood
organizing, or real estate.
(b)Compensation: Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 363/735
(c)Terms: Commissioners shall serve terms of three (3) years. Initially, Commissioners shall serve
staggered terms of three (3) persons for three (3) years, three (3) persons for two (2) years, and
three (3) persons for one year. Commissioners may serve only two (2) consecutive terms, but may
be reappointed after a three (3) year waiting period.
(d)Associate Members: The Mayor may appoint non-voting associate members to the commission
whose expertise or interest in specific or generalized areas shall be deemed necessary or desirable
to further the work of the commission. The number of associate members shall not exceed four (4).
(1) Compensation: Associate members shall serve without compensation.
(2) Term Of Office: Associate members shall serve for a period of three (3) years. There shall be no
limit to the number of terms an associate member may serve.
(3) Conduct: Associate members are an important resource to the commission and may be called
upon for input by voting members of the commission or by City staff but they shall not serve on
committees.
(e)Preliminary Determination Subcommittee: Voting members of the commission shall elect no less than
three (3) commission members and two (2) alternates to serve on a Preliminary Determination
Subcommittee for the purpose of conducting a preliminary review of applications for the nomination
of a landmark (see subsection 11-111(b) of this article). The subcommittee shall:
(1) Elect a Chair of the subcommittee. The Chair shall be a voting member of the Preservation
Commission.
(2) Make a preliminary determination via a majority vote as to whether a property, structure, or area
meets one of the seven (7) criteria as defined in subsection 11-111(b)(1) - (b)(7) of this article.
(3) Conduct its meetings a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the proposed public hearing date
of a proposed landmark.
(4) Serve for a period of one year and shall be eligible for reelection.
(5) Conform to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
(6) Serve without compensation.
(7) Take minutes of each Preliminary Determination Subcommittee meeting, originals of which shall
be kept in the Office of the Department of Community and Economic Development. (Ord. 054-2018,
9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-102. Purpose:
The commission is created for the purpose of:
(1) Identifying such property, structures, or areas within the City that are historically significant in that
they exemplify and/or reflect the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the
Nation, State, or City;
(2) Advising the City Council on the designation of such property, structures or areas as either
landmarks or historic districts, as defined herein;
(3) Protecting the distinctive visual characteristics of landmarks or Locally Designated Historic
Districts by reviewing, giving advice and passing upon changes to their exterior architectural
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 364/735
appearances;
(4) Performing such other functions as may be useful or necessary to safeguard and enhance the
community heritage as embodied in property, structures and areas; and
(5) Offering advice to owners of landmark property seeking guidance of a technical nature, including
architecture and design. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-103. Officers:
(a)Generally: Officers shall consist of a Chair and Vice Chair elected by the commission who shall each
serve a term of one year and shall be eligible for reelection. Elections shall be held annually.
(b)Chair: The Chair shall preside over meetings. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall
perform the duties of the Chair. If both are absent, a temporary Chair shall be elected by those
present.
(c)Preservation Administrator: The Preservation Administrator shall serve as the Secretary of the
commission and be a representative of the Department of Community and Economic Development of
the City. The Preservation Administrator shall:
(1) Take minutes of each commission meeting, originals of which shall be kept in the Office of
Community and Economic Development and make these available to the public;
(2) Provide administrative and technical assistance to the commission to assist it in making the
decisions and findings as provided herein;
(3) Publish and distribute to the Commissioners copies of the minutes, reports and decisions of the
commission;
(4) Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings conducted by the commission;
(5) Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the commission and expiring terms of Commissioners;
(6) Prepare and submit to the City Council a complete record of the proceedings before the
commission on all appeals from decisions of the commission and also on any other matters requiring
Council consideration; and
(7) The Preservation Administrator shall have no vote.
(d)Elections And Appointments:
(1) Election Of Officers: The commission shall elect officers at its regular meeting during the month of
April or the next regularly scheduled meeting. The Chair may either appoint a nominating committee
to nominate a slate of candidates for presentation to the commission or hold open nominations at the
annual meeting. Voting shall be by the method deemed appropriate by the majority of the
commission members present. The order of election shall be the Chair first and the Vice Chair next.
(2) Removal Of Officers: The commission may remove any officer after a written statement signed by
a majority of the current members and stating the reasons for removal is formally filed with the
commission and after a formal hearing by the commission at which time said officer is afforded
opportunity to respond to such statement. Such hearing shall be held no later than five (5) weeks
after formal filing of the written statement and only after written notice of the hearing has been given
to all commission members at least two (2) weeks in advance of such hearing. Such notice shall
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 365/735
include a copy of the statement of reasons for removal. Following such hearing said officer may be
removed only upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members.
(3) Replacement Of Officers: In the event any office of the commission becomes vacant, a
replacement shall be elected at the next regular meeting to serve the unexpired term of the vacated
office.
(4) Temporary Absence Of Officers:
a. Temporary Appointments By Chair: In the event of the temporary absence, disability, or
disqualification of any officer, the Chair may appoint other members to serve temporarily in their
capacity and to assume during such temporary period all the powers and duties of such officers as
may be immediately necessary to carry out the duties of that office.
b. Temporary Appointments By The Commission: In the event that the Chair and the Vice-Chair of
the commission should be absent or unable for any reason to attend to the duties of their office,
the members of the commission may at any regular meeting or special meeting called for that
purpose, appoint a Chair Pro-Tem or a Vice-Chair Pro Tem, as the case may be, who shall attend
to all the duties of such officer until such officer shall return to be able to attend to their duties.
(Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-104. Meetings:
(a)A quorum shall consist of a majority of the voting members of the commission.
(b)Designation of landmarks and Locally Designated Historic Districts as herein provided shall require
six (6) affirmative votes by the commission. All other decisions or actions of the commission shall be
made by a majority vote of those members present at any meeting where a quorum exists.
(c)Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of the commission
at the beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the call of the Chair. There shall be a
minimum of six (6) meetings per year.
(d)No Commissioner shall vote on any matter which materially or apparently may affect the property,
income or business interest of that Commissioner.
(e)All meetings shall conform to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act.
(f)No action shall be taken by the commission which in any manner could deprive or restrict the owner of
that property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition or demolition until such owner first
shall have had the opportunity to be heard at public meeting(s) of the commission, as provided
herein.
(g)The Preservation Administrator or delegate thereof has the authority to review and approve
applications involving the replacement-in-kind of structural elements, but the commission shall be
notified when a replacement-in-kind project is approved by the Preservation Administrator at the next
regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-105. Vacancies:
The seat of any voting member of the commission who fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings
without a valid reason, or who fails to attend one-half (1/2) of all meetings scheduled or called during any
one year period shall be declared vacant. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled in the same
manner as for original appointments to the commission. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 366/735
Sec. 11-106. Powers And Duties:
The commission shall have the following powers:
(1) To adopt its own procedural regulations.
(2) To conduct an ongoing survey to identify Rock Island's historically and architecturally significant
properties, structures and areas, including landscapes and archeological areas.
(3) To investigate, hold public hearings, and recommend to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating certain Rock Island sites or structures having special historic, community or
architectural value as landmarks.
(4) To investigate, hold public hearings and recommend the adoption of ordinances designating
certain Rock Island areas as having special historic, community, architectural or archeological value
as Locally Designated Historic Districts.
(5) To keep a register of all property and structures which have been designated under this article,
including all information required for each designation.
(6) To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations for the design and
implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes leading from one landmark or historic
district to another.
(7) To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or structures within Locally Designated
Historic Districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and
reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.
(8) To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National Register of Historic Places.
(9) To inform and educate the citizens of Rock Island concerning the historic and architectural
heritage of the City.
(10) To hold public hearings and to review building permit applications for new construction within
Locally Designated Historic Districts and for additions to, alterations, removal or demolition of
landmarks or structures within Locally Designated Historic Districts, and to issue or deny Certificates
of Appropriateness for such actions. Applicants may be required to submit plans, drawings,
specifications, and other information as may be necessary to make decisions.
(11) To develop criteria for the alteration, construction or removal of landmarks or property and
structures within Locally Designated Historic Districts.
(12) To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special uses, or applications for zoning
variances that affect designated landmarks and Locally Designated Historic Districts. The Planning
Administrator shall send applications for special use or zoning variances to the commission for
comment prior to the date of the hearing by the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals,
or the City Council. The Preservation Commission shall review the special use or zoning variance
request at a regular meeting. The Preservation Commission's comment on the request shall be noted
in the meeting minutes to be transmitted to the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or
City Council for their review and consideration.
(13) To accept and administer on behalf of the City, upon designation by the City Council, such gifts,
grants and money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 367/735
(14) To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning Commission, the Housing
Code Board of Appeals, the Building Code Board of Appeals and the Board of Zoning Appeals on
any matter affecting historically or architecturally significant property, structures and areas.
(15) To confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or property or structures within historic
districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers.
(16) To develop a preservation component in the Comprehensive Plan of the City and to recommend
it to the Planning Commission and the City Council.
(17) To review periodically the Rock Island zoning ordinance and to recommend to the Planning
Commission and the City Council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use
of landmarks or property and structures within Locally Designated Historic Districts.
(18) To assist owners of landmark structures or contributing structures within certified historic districts
to receive certification for repairs and alterations so that the owner will qualify for investment tax
credit.
(19) To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its
powers and duties or to implementation of the purpose of this article. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Secs. 11-107-11-110. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. PROCEDURES
Sec. 11-111. Landmark Designation:
(a)Nomination: Nominations shall be made to the commission on an application form provided by the
Preservation Administrator. Said application shall be accompanied by a filing fee to cover the costs
associated with processing the application and legal notification. Should the application be withdrawn
prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon the written request of the
applicant. Nomination applications shall include the following information:
(1) Property address of proposed landmark.
(2) Name and address of applicant.
If an application is determined to be incomplete by the Preliminary Determination Subcommittee, the
applicant may withdraw the nomination in order to resubmit a complete application.
(b)Criteria: The commission shall consider the following criteria when determining whether to designate
a landmark or Locally Designated Historic District. It shall be the responsibility of the nominator(s) to
provide evidence of suitability for landmark or Locally Designated Historic District status as well as
documentation of the evidence.
(1) Significant value as part of the historic, cultural, artistic, social, ethnic, or other heritage of the
Nation, State or community.
(2) Associated with an important person or event in national, State or local history.
(3) Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural and/or landscape type
inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, craftsmanship, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials and which retains a high degree of integrity.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 368/735
(4) Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or artist whose individual genius has
influenced an era.
(5) Identifiable as an established and familiar visual feature in the community owing to its unique
location or physical characteristics.
(6) Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure, including, but not
limited to, farmhouses, gas stations or other commercial structures with a high level of integrity or
architectural significance.
(7) Areas that have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory.
The preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure or area meets one or more of the
foregoing criteria shall be made within sixty (60) days of the filing of a nomination with the
commission. A filing fee shall be paid by the applicant after a preliminary determination of
significance has been made by the commission.
(c)Notification: Within ten (10) days following a preliminary determination that a proposed landmark
meets one or more of the criteria in subsection (b) of this section, the commission shall so notify by
certified mail the owner(s) of record. The notice shall be accompanied by an owner consent form
requesting the property owner(s) to provide written approval or disapproval of the proposed
designation, provided that owner approval shall not be required for historic landmark designation.
Failure of an owner of record to return the form shall be noted as such.
(d)Public Hearing: The commission shall schedule a public hearing within forty five (45) days following a
preliminary determination that a proposed landmark meets one or more of the criteria in subsection
(b) of this section.
(1) Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by mail to owner(s)
of record and to the nominator(s), as well as to the adjoining property owners, not less than fifteen
(15) nor more than thirty five (35) days prior to the date of the hearing. A like notice also shall be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City. The notice shall state the location of
the property and a brief statement summarizing how the proposed landmark meets the criteria set
forth in subsection (b) of this section. The Inspection Division and the Planning Division of the City
also shall be notified.
(2) At the public hearing, the commission shall take testimony presented by the nominator(s), the
owner(s), and any other interested parties who wish to be heard on the application of the criteria for
designation enumerated in subsection (b) of this section to the proposed landmark. In addition, the
commission shall consider all written comments received by the commission prior to the hearing. It
shall be the responsibility of the nominator(s) to provide evidence of suitability for landmark status as
well as documentation of the evidence.
(3) The commission shall review and evaluate all available information according to the applicable
criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(e)Decision: A decision shall be made within thirty five (35) days following the date of the closing of the
public hearing.
(1) If the commission decides after the hearing that the proposed landmark should be designated, it
shall do so by a resolution passed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the commission (that is, 6
Commissioners). Failure by an owner of record to return the form shall be noted as such.
(2) The commission's decision shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a report summarizing
the evidence presented at the hearing and explaining the decision. The owner(s) of record shall be
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 369/735
notified promptly by a letter containing a copy of the decision.
(3) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution and the accompanying report
to the City Council.
(4) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution to the nominator(s).
(5) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution to the Inspection Division.
(6) The Preservation Administrator shall record the designation with the County Recorder of Deeds,
unless an appeal is filed in accordance with the procedures contained herein.
(7) A decision by the commission denying landmark designation shall be the final administrative
decision. No application relating to the same property may be filed during the twelve (12) months
following such a denial by the commission.
(f)Appeal: A decision by the commission granting landmark designation may be appealed to the City
Council by an owner of the subject property. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the City
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the commission's decision to grant landmark designation. If an
appeal is not filed within such time, the designation of the commission shall be the final
administrative decision.
(1) The City Council, at the earliest possible City Council meeting following the filing of a written
appeal, shall accept or reject the commission's decision. In reviewing the commission's decision the
Council may consider other relevant factors, including economic considerations, not considered by
the commission. Rejection of the commission's decision requires a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire
Council.
(2) If the commission's decision is reversed, the City Clerk shall provide written notification by regular
mail to the nominator(s) and owner(s) of record of the designated landmark of the action taken by the
City Council. The Inspection Division shall be notified of the City Council action. If the designation is
affirmed, said designation shall be recorded at the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(g)Subsequent Alterations Subject To Certificate: A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from the date when the
nomination form is presented to the commission until the final disposition of the petition.
(h) Amendment Or Rescission Of Designation: Designation may be amended or rescinded by the same
procedure and according to the same criteria set forth herein for designation. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-
2018)
Sec. 11-112. Historic District Designation:
(a)Nomination: Nominations shall be made on a form provided by the Preservation Administrator. Said
application shall be accompanied by a filing fee to cover the costs associated with processing the
application and legal notification. Should the application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal
notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon the written request of the applicant. Nominations must
be accompanied by a petition signed by twenty five percent (25%) of the owners of record within a
proposed Locally Designated Historic District.
(b)Criteria: The commission shall consider the following criteria when determining whether an area
merits historic district designation. It shall be the responsibility of the nominator(s) to provide
evidence of suitability for Locally Designated Historic District status as well as documentation of the
evidence.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 370/735
(1) A significant number of structures meeting any of the standards in subsection 11-111(b) of this
division are located within the proposed boundaries.
(2) A traditional Rock Island neighborhood, commercial area, or public activity center is within the
proposed boundaries.
(3) An area of sufficient integrity to convey a sense of time and place.
The preliminary determination as to whether an area meets these guidelines or criteria shall be made
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the nomination of such area to the commission. A filing fee plus
the cost of postage to affected and neighboring properties (determined at time of application) shall be
paid by the applicant after a preliminary determination of significance has been made by the
commission.
(c)Notice Of Proposed Designation: Within ten (10) days following a preliminary determination that a
proposed historic district meets one or more of the criteria in subsection (b) of this section, the
commission shall so notify by mail the owner(s) of record. The notice shall be accompanied by an
owner consent form requesting the property owner(s) to provide written approval or disapproval of
the proposed designation. In the case of a Locally Designated Historic District, the owner(s) of record
of any property in the proposed district shall have one vote on the approval or disapproval of the
designation for each property owned in the proposed district. For purposes of this subsection,
"property" shall be defined as a distinct parcel of real property which is assigned a separate tax
parcel number by the County Supervisor of Assessments. Joint or multiple owners of property shall
not be entitled to separate votes, but shall jointly receive one vote for each property owned in the
proposed district. Failure of an owner of record to return the form with their approval or disapproval
by the date of the public hearing provided for herein shall be noted as such. Approval of at least fifty
one percent (51%) of those owners of record who have returned the form by the date of the public
hearing shall be required for the historic district to be considered for designation by the commission.
(d)Hearing: The commission shall schedule a public hearing within forty five (45) days following a
preliminary determination that a proposed Locally Designated Historic District meets one or more of
the criteria in subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
(1) Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by mail to the
owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s), as well as to the owners of property adjoining the
proposed district, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty five (35) days prior to the date of the
hearing. A like notice shall also be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the City.
The notice shall state the location of a proposed district and a brief statement summarizing how the
proposed historic district meets the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section. The Inspection
Division and the Planning Division of the City shall also be notified.
(2) At the public hearing, the commission shall take testimony presented by the nominator(s), the
owner(s), and any other interested parties who wish to be heard on the application of the criteria for
designation enumerated in subsection (b) of this section to the proposed district. In addition, the
commission shall consider all written comments received by the commission prior to the hearing. It
shall be the responsibility of the nominator(s) to provide evidence of suitability for historic district
status as well as documentation of the evidence.
(3) The commission shall review and evaluate available information according to the applicable
criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(e)Decision: A decision shall be made within thirty five (35) days following the date of the closing of the
public hearing.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 371/735
(1) If the commission decides after the hearing that the proposed historic district should be
designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the commission
(that is, 6 Commissioners).
(2) The commission's decision shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a report summarizing
the evidence presented at the hearing and explaining the decision.
(3) The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a letter containing a copy of the decision.
(4) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution and the accompanying report
to the City Council.
(5) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution to the nominator(s).
(6) The Preservation Administrator shall send a copy of the resolution to the Inspection Division.
(7) The Preservation Administrator shall record the designation with the County Recorder of Deeds,
unless an appeal is filed in accordance with the procedures contained herein.
(8) A decision by the commission denying historic district designation shall be the final administrative
decision. No application relating to the same specific district may be filed during the twelve (12)
months following such a denial by the commission.
(f)Appeals: A decision by the commission granting historic district designation may be appealed to the
City Council by an owner of record of property in the Locally Designated Historic District. Such an
appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the commission's
decision to grant Locally Designated Historic District designation. If an appeal is not filed within such
time, the designation of the commission shall be the final administrative decision.
(1) An appeal shall be considered at the earliest possible City Council meeting. The Council shall
accept or reject the commission's decision. In reviewing the commission's decision the Council may
consider other relevant factors, including economic considerations, not considered by the
commission. Rejection requires a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire Council.
(2) If the commission decision is reversed, the City Clerk shall provide written notification by mail to
the nominator(s) and owner(s) of record of the Locally Designated Historic District. The Inspection
Division shall be notified of the City Council action. If the designation is affirmed, said designation
shall be recorded with the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(g)Subsequent Alteration Subject To Certificate: A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a structure within a proposed Locally Designated
Historic District from the date when the nomination forms are submitted to the commission for the
purpose of making a preliminary determination that a proposed historic district meets one or more of
the criteria outlined in subsection (b) of this section until the final disposition of the petition.
(h)Amendment: Designation may be amended by the same procedure and according to the same
criteria set forth herein for designation. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-113. Certificates Of Appropriateness:
(a)Applicability: A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required before the following actions affecting
the exterior architectural appearance of any landmark or any regulated structure may be undertaken.
(1) Any alteration, construction, or relocation requiring a building permit from the City.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 372/735
(2) Any alteration, construction, or relocation, or replacement of windows or doors, colored, leaded,
etched or beveled glass, fencing or walls, and signs.
(3) Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a permit from the City.
(4) No Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for change in exterior paint scheme or colors,
installation of or change in window air conditioners, installation of or change in television satellites, or
ordinary repair or maintenance of existing architectural features which does not change the basic
structural appearance of the building.
(5) The Preservation Administrator is expressly authorized to issue Certificates of Appropriateness of
in-kind replacement of materials with like materials.
(b)Application: Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness shall be made to the commission on a
form provided by the Preservation Administrator. Applicants may request a consultation meeting with
the commission prior to the review meeting where the commission makes its determination.
(c)Emergency Circumstances: If the emergency circumstances affect a landmark or a structure within a
historic district which requires immediate relief, repair or demolition, the Fire Marshal or chief building
inspector shall certify that such conditions exist and said conditions shall be eliminated as quickly as
is practicable. "Emergencies" are defined as life or health threatening conditions requiring immediate
attention. This subsection shall apply only in cases where it is impractical for the commission to
consider an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness. In the event that the Fire Marshal or chief
building inspector shall require exterior alterations in an existing use to conform to Life Safety or
other codes, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required, provided in the event irreconcilable
conflicts arise between such codes and this article, permission to conform to those codes must be
granted even if a Certificate of Appropriateness would not ordinarily be issued.
(d)Architectural Review Guidelines: In making a determination whether to issue or deny a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the commission shall consider, among other things, the effect of the proposed
construction, alteration, removal or demolition upon the exterior architectural features and upon the
historic, aesthetic or architectural value, characteristics and significance of the landmark or of the
Locally Designated Historic District. The criteria to be used by the commission in making its
determination shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The maintenance of the significant original qualities or character of the structure or property
including, if significant, its landscape. The removal or alteration of any historic or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(2) The compatibility of proposed new additions and new construction to the original architecture of
the landmark or styles within the Locally Designated Historic District shall be evaluated against the
following general guidelines:
a. Height: The height of the proposed structure or additions or alterations should be compatible
with surrounding structures.
b. Proportions Of Structure's Front Facade: The proportion between the width and height of the
proposed structure should be compatible with nearby structures.
c. Proportions Of Openings Into The Facility: The proportions and relationships between doors and
windows should be compatible with existing structures.
d. Relationship Of Building Masses And Spaces: The relationship of a structure to the open space
between it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 373/735
e. Roof Shapes: The design of the roof should be compatible with adjoining structures.
f. Landscape And Appurtenances: Landscaping and the use of appurtenances should be sensitive
to the individual structure, its occupants and their needs. Further, the landscape treatment should
be compatible with surrounding structures and landscapes.
g. Scale Of Structure: The scale of the structure should be compatible with surrounding structures.
h. Directional Expression Of Front Elevation: Street facades should blend with other structures with
regard to directional expression. When adjacent structures have a dominant horizontal or vertical
expression, this should be carried over and reflected.
i. Architectural Details: Architectural details and materials should be incorporated as necessary to
relate the new with the old and to preserve and enhance the inherent characteristics of that area.
(3) Alterations should be made in accordance with the Preservation Administrator of the Interior's
"Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" and other guidelines that may be developed and used
by the commission for Certificate of Appropriateness review purposes as revised from time to time:
a. Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property which requires
minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
b. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site and its
environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
c. All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations
that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
d. Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and
development of a building, structure or site and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
e. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building,
structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
f. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In
the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of
different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
g. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not
be undertaken.
h. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected
by or adjacent to any project.
i. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged
when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural
material and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the
property, neighborhood or environment.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 374/735
j. Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such manner that if
such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of
the structure would be unimpaired.
(e)Review Process:
(1) If the commission finds that the work proposed in the application will not adversely affect any
historically or architecturally significant features of the landmark or structure or property within a
Locally Designated Historic District and is appropriate or consistent with the spirit and purposes of
this article, it shall authorize, by a majority vote, the Preservation Administrator to issue a Certificate
of Appropriateness and forward copies to the applicant and the Inspection Division.
(2) If the commission finds that the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy any significant
historic, aesthetic or architectural feature or value of the landmark or structure or property within a
Locally Designated Historic District or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the spirit and purposes of
this article, it shall deny the application by a majority and shall so direct the Preservation
Administrator to notify the applicant within ten (10) days of the decision.
a. The commission shall state briefly its reasons therefor in writing and it may make
recommendations to the applicant with respect to the appropriateness of design, arrangement,
texture, scale, material, color, location or other elements of appearance of the building or structure
involved.
b. In cases of disapproval accompanied by recommendation, the applicant may be heard again
before the commission if within sixty (60) days of the date of receipt of notice of disapproval of the
application they amend their application to conform to the recommendations or makes application
for a Certificate of Economic Hardship as provided for in section 11-114 of this division. The
applicant shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the commission after receipt of the
amended application and the commission shall approve or disapprove the amended application by
resolution passed by a majority vote.
c. At the request of the applicant, within fifteen (15) days following disapproval of an application,
the commission shall hold a public hearing. The commission shall also hold a public hearing upon
receipt of an application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship pursuant to section 11-114 of this
division.
d. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by regular mail to
the applicant, to property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property for which an
application has been made, and said notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation. The notice shall be sent not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The
notice shall state the location, including the common street address of the property and a brief
description of the proposed alteration for which an application has been made and the differences
of opinion between the applicant and the commission.
e. At the public hearing the commission shall take testimony presented by the owner(s) and any
other interested parties concerning the effect of the proposed alteration, demolition or removal
upon the exterior architectural features and the review criteria in subsection (d) of this section.
f. Within fifteen (15) days following completion of the public hearing, the commission shall issue or
deny the Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship and transmit copies of
its decision to the applicant. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-114. Certificate Of Economic Hardship:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 375/735
(a)Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article to the contrary, the commission may issue a
Certificate of Economic Hardship to allow the perform of work for which a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been denied.
(b)Applicants claiming economic hardship shall be required to apply to the Redevelopment Division to
determine eligibility for rehabilitation assistance. The eligibility for and availability of financial aid shall
be considered by the commission in making its decision.
(c)An applicant for a Certificate of Economic Hardship may submit any or all of the following information
in order to assist the commission in making its determination on the application:
(1) The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased
(including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the
property was purchased).
(2) The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two (2) most recent
assessments.
(3) Real Estate Taxes for the previous two (2) years.
(4) Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2)
years.
(5) All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection
with their purchase, financing or ownership of the property.
(6) Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any.
(7) Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property.
(8) If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous
two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years, and
annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any during the same period.
(9) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-forprofit
corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
(10) Evidence of any substantial decrease in fair market value, unfavorable tax impact, or additional
cost of work resulting from the denial of a COA.
(11) In the case of a proposed demolition, the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse.
(12) Any other information, including the Income Tax bracket of the owner, applicant or principal
investors in the property, reasonably necessary for a determination as to whether the property can be
reasonably used or yield a reasonable return to present or future owners.
(d)If the commission finds that without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot obtain a
reasonable economic return therefrom, then the application shall be delayed for a period not to
exceed three (3) months. During this period of delay, the commission shall investigate plans and
make recommendations to the City Council to allow for a reasonably beneficial use or a reasonable
economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property. Such plans and recommendations
may include, but not be limited to, a relaxation of the provisions of this article, a reduction in Real
Property Taxes, financial assistance, Building Code modifications and/or changes in zoning
regulations.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 376/735
(e)If by the end of this three (3) month period, the commission has found that without approval of the
proposed work, the property cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain
a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the commission shall issue a Certificate of Economic
Hardship approving the proposed work. If the commission finds otherwise, it shall deny the
application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 11-115. Appeals:
(a)When a Certificate of Appropriateness or a Certificate of Economic Hardship is approved or denied
for either a landmark or a structure within a historic district, the applicant or any interested party may,
within thirty (30) days, appeal the commission's decision to the City Council. The Council may
receive comments on the contents of the record but no new matter may be considered by the
Council. The City Council may affirm the decision or recommend changes by a majority vote of the
Council after due consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the Council by the
commission. The Council may overturn the commission's decision by a majority vote of a quorum of
the Council. If the Council decides that a Certificate of Economic Hardship should be issued, the
Preservation Administrator shall notify the applicant and the Inspection Division within seven (7) days
of the Council's decision and the Inspection Division then shall issue the permit within fifteen (15)
days.
(b)If the Council concurs with the commission's decision not to issue a Certificate of Economic Hardship,
the Preservation Administrator shall notify the applicant and the Inspection Division within seven (7)
days. (Ord. 054-2018, 9-24-2018)
Secs. 11-116-11-120. Reserved:
ARTICLE VI. ENTERPRISE ZONE
Sec. 11-121. Boundaries:
The City designates as an enterprise zone the real estate included within the boundaries as described in
exhibit A, as attached hereto and incorporated herein (but not reproduced at length in this Code). (Ord.
84-67, 12-17-1984; Ord. 84-84, 2-25-1985; Ord. 86-04, 2-24-1986; Ord. 86-19, 4-28-1986; Ord. 93-69,
7-12-1993; Ord. 93-70, 7-12-1993; Ord. 95-37, 5-15-1995; Ord. 97-74, 8-11-1997; Ord. 97-79, 9-15-
1997; Ord. 57-2004, 5-10-2004; Ord. 062-2005, 8-8-2005; Ord. 052-2006, 7-24-2006; Ord. 038-2007, 5-
21-2007; Ord. 058-2013, 10-21-2013; Ord. 059-2013, 10-21-2013)
Sec. 11-122. Findings:
The City does now declare and find that the enterprise zone as above described meets the qualifications
of 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 655/4 in that the area is a contiguous area, compromises a minimum
one-half (1/2) square mile, not more than ten (10) square miles in total area, exclusive of lakes and
waterways, is a depressed area, is entirely within the Municipality and satisfies all additional criteria
established by regulation of the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs consistent with the
purposes of the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-123. Zone Administrator:
(a)The position of "Zone Administrator" is hereby created. The Zone Administrator shall be the
Community Development Director, who is an employee of the City. The duties of the Zone
Administrator shall be performed in addition to the regular duties of the Community Development
Director position.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 377/735
(b)It shall be the power and duty of the Zone Administrator to:
(1) Supervise the implementation of the provisions of this article and the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act;
(2) Act as a liaison between the City, the State Department of Commerce and Community Affairs,
designated zone organizations; and other State, Federal, and local agencies, whether public or
private;
(3) Conduct an ongoing evaluation of the enterprise zone program and submit such evaluative
reports on an annual basis to the Mayor or the City Council;
(4) Promote the coordination of other relevant programs, including, but not limited to, housing,
community and economic development, small business, financial assistance and employment
training within the enterprise zone;
(5) Recommend qualified designated zone organizations to the City Council;
(6) Complete and submit reports as required by the Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs; and
(7) Have other such duties as specified by either the Mayor or the City Council. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-
1984; Ord. 84-84, 2-25-1985)
Sec. 11-124. Role Of Community Development Department:
The City will direct and target business assistance and business retention programs through its
Community Development Department. The Zone Administrator will assume the lead role in coordinating
the delivery of existing programs and services and the establishment of new programs and services to
address the needs of the zone. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-125. Designated Zone Organizations:
The Zone Administrator shall recommend to the City Council one or more organizations that qualify as
designated zone organizations under the provisions of the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act. Upon approval of
the City Council, for a term of years set by the City Council, the organization may:
(1) Provide or contract for provision of services including, but not limited to, crime watch patrols
within zone neighborhoods; volunteer daycare centers; or other types of public services as provided
by ordinance or regulation and as provided for in section 8 of the Illinois Enterprise Zone Act;
(2) Provide a forum for business, labor and government action on enterprise zone innovations;
(3) Receive title to publicly owned land;
(4) Solicit and receive contributions to improve the quality of life in the zone area; and
(5) Perform such other functions as the City Council may deem appropriate, not inconsistent with the
Illinois Enterprise Zone Act. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-126. Land Acquisition And Clearance:
The City shall provide technical assistance with commercial and industrial land acquisition and clearance
activities which may be proposed to occur within the enterprise zone. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-1984)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 378/735
Sec. 11-127. "One Stop" Development Review:
The city will establish a "one stop" development review process for commercial and industrial projects
such that the community development department would secure the review and approval of all other city
departments. (Ord. 84-67, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-128. Certain Fees Waived:
(a)The city hereby waives application fees for industrial development revenue bond proposals for
projects which will be located within the enterprise zone.
(b)The city hereby waives application fees for commercial and industrial zoning changes of board of
zoning appeal authorizations for projects which will be located within the enterprise zone. (Ord. 84-
67, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-129. Priority Given To Certain Loan Applications:
The city shall give priority to fundable projects within the enterprise zone for applications to the
commercial industrial revolving loan fund. (Ord. 84-67, § 8, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-130. Rental Rehabilitation:
The city shall give priority for the rental rehabilitation program such that candidate projects from within
the zone would be favored provided said properties are located in residentially zoned areas. (Ord. 84-67,
§ 9, 12-17-1984; Ord. 84-84, § 2, 2-25-1985)
Sec. 11-131. Urban Homesteading:
The city shall give priority for the urban homesteading program such that available homes in residentially
zoned areas of the enterprise zone would be favored for city acquisition and disposition to eligible
households. (Ord. 84-67, § 10, 12-17-1984; Ord. 84-84, § 3, 2-25-1985)
Sec. 11-132. Urban Shopstead:
(a)Pursuant to section 10 of the Illinois enterprise zone act 1, the city hereby establishes an urban
shopstead program. Under the urban shopsteading program, the city may sell to a designated zone
organization a structure or portion thereof it owns for a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00). The designated zone organization shall agree to renovate or remodel the property to meet
the standards and level of maintenance stated in the agreement between the designated zone
organization and the city. The designated zone organization may sell or lease such structure to
commercial or industrial businesses pursuant to the procedures set forth in the sales agreement
between it and the city. The designated zone organization may retain the structure in whole or in part
for its own use. Any proceeds derived from the use, lease or sale of such property shall be used for
cost recovery and for activities entered into pursuant to section 8 of the act.
(b)The urban shopstead program shall be subject to rules and guidelines issued by the zone
administrator, with the approval of the council of the city, provided such rules and guidelines are not
inconsistent with the act. (Ord. 84-67, § 16, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-133. Landmarks And Historic Places:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 379/735
The city shall provide technical assistance within local landmark designations and National Register of
Historic Places nominations pursuant to the use of investment tax credits for rehabilitation of properties
located within the enterprise zone. (Ord. 84-67, § 13, 12-17-1984)
Sec. 11-134. Technical Assistance To Certain Organizations:
(a)The city shall provide technical assistance to the community caring conference in its organization and
support of block clubs within the enterprise zone. (Ord. 84-67, §§ 14, 15, 12-17-1984; Ord. 68-2004,
§ 2, 6-14-2004)
Sec. 11-135. Tax Deduction For Building Materials:
Each retailer who makes a qualified sale of building materials to be incorporated into real estate in the
Rock Island enterprise zone by remodeling, rehabilitation or new construction, may deduct receipts from
such sales when calculating the tax imposed by the Illinois retailers' occupation tax act 2. A "qualified
sale" is defined as a sale of building materials that will be incorporated into real estate as part of a
building project for which a building permit has been obtained and for which a certificate of eligibility for
sales tax exemption has been issued by the zone administrator. (Ord. 84-67, § 4, 12-17-1984; Ord. 68-
2004, § 3, 6-14-2004)
Sec. 11-136. Property Tax Abatement Incentive:
The city of Rock Island authorizes and directs the Rock Island county clerk to abate ad valorem taxes
imposed upon real property, located within the Rock Island enterprise zone area, upon which new
improvements have been constructed or upon which existing improvements have been renovated or
rehabilitated, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Property tax abatement shall apply only to the taxes corresponding to an increase in assessed
valuation attributable to the construction of improvements and the renovation of existing
improvements for which a building permit is required and has been obtained; no portion of tax
attributable to the assessed valuation of land shall be abated.
(2) Tax abatement shall begin with the first tax bill reflecting a full property tax assessment on
improvements. No abatement shall be offered for taxes attributable to a partial assessment.
(3) Tax abatement shall be at the rate of seventy five percent (75%) of taxes due and payable to the
city of Rock Island in the applicable tax year. Said tax abatement shall be granted to improvements
for which a certificate of occupancy is granted on or after January 1, 2005.
(4) Tax abatement shall be offered for a period of three (3) consecutive tax years. Said abatement for
a specific project will cease after the third year of abatement or upon the expiration of the enterprise
zone, whichever is sooner.
(5) Tax abatement shall apply only to nonresidential improvements which result in an increase in
assessed valuation of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more.
(6) No abatement shall be granted to any project within the boundaries of a tax increment
redevelopment project area. (Ord. 86-58, §§ 1, 2, 11-24-1986; Ord. 87-10, § 1, 2-2-1987; Ord. 92-31,
§ 1, 2-24-1992; Ord. 68-2004, § 4, 6-14-2004)
Sec. 11-137. Redevelopment Sales Tax Increments 3:
(a)The city council hereby makes the following findings:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 380/735
(1) The city council adopted tax increment financing pursuant to the provisions of the act 4 in respect
to the redevelopment project area described in attachment A (not set out herein but on file and
available for inspection in the office of the city clerk), and all conditions and provisions of the act 5
and amendment (public act 84-1417), have been complied with since the adoption of tax increment
financing to the date of this section.
(2) The redevelopment project area, described in attachment A would not reasonably be developed
without the use of the incremental revenues arising under the municipal retailers' occupation tax act,
the municipal service occupation tax act, the retailers' occupation tax act, the use tax act, the service
use tax act, and the service occupation tax act.
(3) The increment arising under the act 6 and amendment (public act 84-1417), described in
subsection (a)(2) of this section, will be exclusively utilized for the development of the redevelopment
project area.
(4) The city has imposed the maximum tax allowed by law under the municipal retailers' occupation
tax act, the municipal use tax act, and the municipal service tax act.
(b)The city of Rock Island hereby elects to utilize those incremental revenue arising under the act 7 and
amendment (public act 84-1417), described in subsection (a)(2) of this section, for the purpose of
implementing the redevelopment plan and project for the development of the redevelopment project
described in attachment A.
(c)Pursuant to the act 8 the state department of revenue is hereby authorized to annually certify and
cause to be paid to the city an amount equal to the increase in the aggregate amount of taxes paid
by retailers and servicemen on transactions at places of business located within the redevelopment
project area, pursuant to the retailers' occupation tax act, the use tax act, the service use tax act, and
the service occupation tax act, for as long as the redevelopment project area exists, over and above
the aggregate amount of such taxes as certified by the state department of revenue and paid under
those acts by retailers and servicemen or transactions at places of business located in the
redevelopment project area during the base year, which shall be the calendar year immediately prior
to the year in which the municipality adopted tax increment allocation financing, less one and sixtenths
percent (1.6%) of such amounts, which sums shall be retained by the state treasurer to cover
the costs incurred by the department of revenue in administering and enforcing the amendment
(public act 84-1417).
(d)The city shall deposit in its special tax allocation fund all incremental revenues from the municipal
retailers' occupation tax act, the municipal service occupation tax act, and local real property taxes,
received with respect to property within the redevelopment project area. (Ord. 86-57, §§ 1-4, 11-17-
1986)
ARTICLE VII. SITE PLANS
Sec. 11-138. Administrative Approval Requirements:
If a building or parking lot permit is applied for and no zoning action is required, an administrative site
plan approval will be required. Riverfront corridor overlay district site plan review application information
and performance standards shall apply in making application for administrative site plan review
approval. (Ord. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-1991)
Sec. 11-139. Site Plan Review Committee:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 381/735
An administrative site plan review committee is hereby created consisting of the planning and
redevelopment administrator, city engineer, fire chief, parks director, and chief building inspector, or their
designees. Committee meeting shall be called on an as needed basis for site plans not requiring a public
hearing review. An application for a building or parking lot permit shall be promptly forwarded by the
planning and redevelopment administrator to the site plan review committee. Review must be completed
within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the city of a complete site plan review application. If, in the
committee's judgment, the site plan review application does not contain sufficient information to enable
the committee to properly carry out its responsibilities, the committee may request additional information
from the applicant. In that event, the fifteen (15) day period previously referred to shall be suspended
pending the receipt of all information requested by the committee. (Ord. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-1991)
Sec. 11-140. Appeal Process:
If the site plan review committee approves a site plan, a building or parking lot permit may then be
issued. If the site plan review committee does not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the
committee's decision to the city council. A notice of appeal must be filed with the planning and
redevelopment administrator no later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision
of the site plan review committee. (Ord. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-1991)
Sec. 11-141. Exemption from site plan requirements.
As with Riverfront Corridor Overlay District site plan requirements, one- and two-family residences are
exempt from city-wide site plan review requirements. In addition, site plans shall not be required for the
renovation or expansion of an existing structure or use unless access points would be changed or a
substantial increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
ARTICLE VIII. PARKING LOTS
Sec. 11-142. Penalty.
Every violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender to a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), for each offense.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-143. Permits for off-street parking lots.
No person shall expand an existing parking lot or construct a new parking lot of five (5) or more spaces
without first having obtained a written permit therefor issued by the planning and redevelopment
administrator or his designated representative. No person shall expand any existing parking lot or
construct a new parking lot within the Downtown 2000 area without first having obtained the permit. Prior
to obtaining a permit for such expansion or new construction, the applicant shall submit to the planning
and redevelopment administrator or his designated representative a landscape/site plan as required in
the zoning ordinance and plans showing the construction specifications of surface improvements. The
director of public works or his designated representative shall set construction specifications for all offstreet
parking lots, and he shall provided for proper inspection of construction.
Cross reference--Zoning, App. A.
Sec. 11-144. Construction.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 382/735
All off-street parking lots required to obtain a permit as identified in section 11-143 shall be laid to the
line and grade of, and shall conform to surface thickness and other specifications of the director of public
works or his designated representative.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-145. Landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking lots.
The provisions of this section for the installation and maintenance of landscaping and screening
requirements are intended to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial, industrial and
conservation areas and to enhance the aesthetic and visual image of the city.
(1)Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be set back ten (10) feet from the front property line(s).
Landscaping requirements within the front yard(s) include that the yard be seeded or sodded with
lawn. Rock ground cover may be used but may not exceed twenty (20) percent of the landscaped
front yard setback. In addition, one (1) canopy tree for every five (5) parking spaces and a minimum
five (5) percent ground landscape coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers shall be required.
The ten-foot front yard setback may be reduced to five (5) feet if there is a continuous twenty-six (26)
inch solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge provided. Sodding, rock ground cover, canopy tree and
ground landscape coverage requirements will still be applied if a solid wall/fence is provided. Sodding
and/or rock ground requirements will still be applied if a shrubbery fence is provided.
(2)Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be set back five (5) feet from side and rear property lines.
Landscaping requirements within the side and rear yards include that the yard be seeded or sodded
with lawn. Rock ground may be used, but may not exceed twenty (20) percent of the landscaped side
and rear yard setback. In addition, one (1) canopy tree for every five (5) parking spaces and a
minimum of five (5) percent ground landscape coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers shall be
required.
When a side and/or rear yard is adjacent to a residential use, a continuous four-foot solid wall/fence
or shrubbery hedge shall also be provided within the five-foot setback yard. If a four-foot shrubbery
hedge is provided, canopy tree and ground landscape coverage shall not be required.
(3)Wherever landscaping and screening requirements may interfere with traffic vision, the height and
placement shall be determined by the city engineer.
(4)Trees and other landscaping shall be of a species which are hardy to the area and have measured
diameters of such identified in section 11-150. Prohibited trees are identified in section 11-151.
(5)Subject to the approval of the site plan review committee, alternate landscaping plans may be
submitted for consideration.
(6)A landscape/site plan will be required to be submitted for staff review prior to issuing a parking lot
development permit for parking lots of five (5) spaces or more. The following basic standards should
be set:
a. Drawn to scale.
b. Identify location of landscaping or other feature.
c. Specify nature of material (i.e., species, variety, etc.)
d. Specify number of plants, shrubs, trees, etc. by species.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 383/735
All parking areas abutting to or visible from a public street with the Downtown 2000 area shall be
required to submit a landscaping/site plan for review prior to issuance of a parking lot permit.
(7)Landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris, and
provide a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation. It shall be
the owner's responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-146. Appeal process.
If the site plan review committee approves a site plan, a parking lot permit may then be issued. If the site
plan review committee does not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the committee's decision
to the city council. A notice of appeal must be filed with the planning and redevelopment administrator no
later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the site plan review
committee.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
ARTICLE IX. BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 11-147. Intent.
The provisions of this article are to provide specific landscape and screening buffer yard requirements to
reduce the incompatibility between zoning districts of different intensity and type. These buffer yards will
lessen the adverse impacts of more intense land uses upon residential areas and/or other areas of less
intense land use by reducing noise, visual and other environmental impacts.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-148. Buffer yard requirements.
In addition to landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking areas, buffer yard standards
will also apply for site plans requiring a zoning change, special use permit, and nonexempt site plan
review requirements. The buffer yard requirement is determined by the difference between the zoning
district of the subject property and the zoning district of adjacent properties. The specific requirements
are identified in sections 11-149 and 11-150 and the accompanying table. "Schedule of Buffer Yard
Requirements" in section 11-153. Landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking areas
apply to the sides of the property abutting a public street right-of-way. A list of prohibited tree species is
identified in section 11-151.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-149. Description of buffer yards A through D.
(a)Type A Buffer: The standard buffer within type A is eight (8) feet wide and contains the following
number of required plants per one hundred (100) feet:
a. One (1) canopy tree.
b. One (1) understory tree.
c. Six (6) shrubs.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 384/735
d. One (1) evergreen/conifer.
(2) Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer
widths to provide a type A buffer each with a different amount of required plantings reflected as a
multiplier of the required plant units per one hundred (100) feet. These alternatives include the
following:
a. Twenty-foot wide buffer with fifty (50) percent of the required plant units per one hundred (100)
feet.
b. Sixteen-foot wide buffer with sixty (60) percent of the required plant units per one hundred (100)
feet.
c. Twelve-foot wide buffer with eighty (80) percent of the required plat units per one hundred (100)
feet.
d. Four-foot wide buffer with ninety (90) percent of the required plant units and a continuous hedge
set back three (3) feet from the property line or fence.
(b)Type B Buffer:
(1) The standard buffer with type B is ten (10) feet wide and contains the following number of
required plants per one hundred (100) feet:
a. Two (2) canopy trees.
b. Two (2) understory trees.
c. Six (6) shrubs.
d. Two (2) evergreens/conifers.
(2) Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer
widths to provide a type B buffer each with a different amount of required plantings. Type B buffer
alternatives range from a twenty-five-foot wide buffer with fifty (50) percent of the required plantings
to a five-foot wide buffer with ninety (90) percent of the required plantings and a continuous hedge or
fence.
(c)Type C Buffer:
(1) The standard buffer within type C is fifteen (15) wide and contains the following number of
required plants per one hundred (100) feet:
a. Three (3) canopy trees.
b. Two (2) understory trees.
c. Nine (9) shrubs.
d. Three (3) evergreens/conifers.
(2) Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer
widths to provide a type C buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings. Type C buffer
alternatives range from a twenty-five-foot wide buffer with sixty (60) percent of the required plantings
to a six-foot-wide buffer with ninety (90) percent of the required plantings and a continuous fence.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 385/735
(d)Type D Buffer:
(1) The standard buffer within type D is fifteen (15) feet wide and contains the following number of
required plants per one hundred (100) feet:
a. Three (3) canopy trees.
b. Two (2) understory trees.
c. Fifteen (15) shrubs.
d. Five (5) evergreens/conifers.
(2) Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer
widths to provide a type D buffer each with a different amount of required plantings. Type D buffer
alternatives range from a twenty-five-foot-wide buffer with sixty (60) percent of the required plantings
to an eight-foot-wide buffer with ninety (90) percent of the required plantings and a continuous fence.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-150. Minimum standards for plantings.
(a)Canopy Trees: Two (2) inches diameter, six (6) inches above ground level and ten (10) feet in height
when planted.
(b)Understory Trees: One (1) inch diameter, six (6) inches above ground level, and six (6) feet in height
when planted.
(c)Shrubs: Twenty-four (24) inches in height when planted. Forty (40) percent or more must reach
mature height of six (6) or more.
(d)Evergreens/Conifers: Two (2) inches diameter, six (6) inches above ground level, and six (6) feet in
height when planted; twenty (20) feet minimum height at maturity.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-151. Prohibited trees.
The following weak-wooded and generally undesirable trees, for urban conditions, shall be prohibited for
use in meeting any of the landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking areas and/or
bufferyard requirements:
(1) Ailanthus (tree of heaven).
(2) Box elder.
(3) European mountain ash.
(4) European white birch.
(5) Mulberry.
(6) Poplar.
(7) Purple-leaf plum.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 386/735
(8) Russian olive.
(9) Siberian elm.
(10) Silver maple.
(11) Willow.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-152. Maintenance of landscaping and screening.
Buffer yard landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris,
and provide a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation. It shall be
the owner's responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-153. Schedule of buffer yard requirements.
Zoning of Adjacent Property
R-4
R-1 R-5
R-2 R-6
R-3 R-7 B-1 B-
2
B-
3
B-
4
I-
1
I-
2
C-
1
Subject
Property
R-1,
R-2,
R-3 N N N N N N N N N
R-4,
R-5,
R-6,
R-7 A N N N N N N N N
B-1 B A N N N N N N A
B-2 C B N N N N N N B
B-3 C B N N N N N N B
B-4 C C N N N N N N B
I-1 C C B A N N N N C
I-2 D D B A A A N N D
C-1 N N N N N N N N N
C-2 (see Zoning Ordinance, Appendix
A)
Approximate buffer yard
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 387/735
requirement:
A--8 feet in width
B--10 feet in width
C--15 feet in width
D--15 feet in width
N--No buffer required
Position of property abutting public right-of-way is governed by landscaping for parking lot requirements.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Sec. 11-154. Appeal process.
If the site plan review committee approves a site plan, a building permit may then be issued. If the site
plan review committee does not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the committee's decision
to the city council. A notice of appeal must be filed with the planning and redevelopment administrator no
later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the site plan review
committee.
(Ord. No. 91-87, § 1, 7-22-91)
Chapter 12
POLICE 1
Sec. 12-1. Creation Of Department:
There is hereby created a police department in the city. The department shall be supervised by a police
chief. The police chief shall be subject to the direction and control of the city manager. (1963 Code, Ch.
II, Art. III)
Sec. 12-2. Personnel 1:
(a)Chief Of The Department: Except as provided herein the police department shall consist of the chief
and such personnel as shall from time to time be appointed and dismissed by the board of fire and
police commissioners. The chief of the police department shall be appointed and dismissed by the
city manager with the approval and consent of a majority of the members of the city council. No chief
shall be dismissed without a public hearing before the city council if he requests same.
(b)Appointment Of Deputy Chief Of Police: The chief of the police department shall appoint a deputy
chief of police from the promoted ranks of police captain or police lieutenant. The deputy chief of
police shall be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police. The deputy chief of police
shall serve in such a position until such time as the chief of police determines otherwise.
(c)Removal Of The Deputy Chief Of Police: If the chief of police determines that it is necessary and
desirable to appoint another person to the position of deputy chief of police, then the previously
appointed person shall, to the extent he or she was a sworn officer of the police department prior to
being appointed deputy chief of police, automatically return to his or her prior rank, together with all
authority, responsibility and compensation commensurate with such prior rank. (1963 Code, Ch. II,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 388/735
Art. III and Ch. VII; Ord., § 1, 8-12-1963; Ord., § 1, 3-19-1964; Ord., § 1, 4-27-1970; Ord., § 1, 8-10-
1970; Ord., § 1, 10-12-1970; Ord., § 1, 10-1-1973; Ord., § 1, 7-12-1976; Ord. 044-2009, § 1, 6-15-
2009)
Sec. 12-3. Auxiliary Police:
(a)The mayor may, with the advice and consent of the city council, appoint auxiliary police officers not to
exceed fifty (50) in number from names furnished him by the chief of police.
(b)Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular police department and shall not possess
conservator of the peace powers as defined at 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-15-25.
(c)Auxiliary police officers shall serve at the direction and control of the chief of police and shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) To aid or direct traffic in the municipality;
(2) To aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters;
(3) To aid in case of civil disorder;
(4) To act at the direction and control of the chief of police in any other activity, other than those
activities traditionally reserved to those who are vested with conservator of the peace powers.
(d)Auxiliary police officers may wear uniforms. Uniforms and identification symbols worn by auxiliary
police officers must be different and distinct from those worn by regular police officers.
(e)Auxiliary police officers may, with prior permission of the chief of police, carry firearms while on duty.
(f)All auxiliary police officers shall successfully complete the forty (40) hour mandatory firearms training
course before being permitted to carry a firearm, as specified in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-
30-20. Upon completion of the course of training, the chief of police shall file a certificate attesting to
the auxiliary police officer's successful completion of the required forty (40) hour mandatory firearms
training course.
(g)Auxiliary police officers shall receive no compensation for services rendered. (1963 Code, Ch. VII;
Ord., § 1, 2-13-1978; Ord., § 1, 11-24-1980; Ord. 024-2007, § 1, 3-19-2007)
Sec. 12-4. Pension Fund Board Creation 2:
There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund, consisting of five (5) members,
two (2) members of which shall be appointed by the mayor, serving a term of two (2) years each. Two (2)
members shall be elected from the regular police force of the city by the active members thereof. The
fifth member of the board shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the police pension fund. The
elected members of the board shall serve for a term of two (2) years. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 12-5. Pension Fund Board Duties 3:
The board of trustees shall manage, invest and control the police pension fund and all monies pertaining
thereto in the manner provided by statute. (1963 Code, Ch. II, Art. III)
Sec. 12-6. Fees For Fingerprinting Services:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 389/735
A fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged by the police department for providing the
following services:
(1) To provide, upon request of an individual or business, the fingerprints of an individual for
submission under the conviction information request of the state of Illinois.
(2) For providing fingerprints for any other purpose when requested by an individual or business of a
particular individual. (Ord. 91-137, § 1, 12-16-1991)
Chapter 13
PUBLIC WORKS, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 1 2 3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. Public Works Department Created:
There is hereby created a Public Works Department in the City. This department shall be administered
by a Director of Public Works appointed by and subject to the direction and control of the City Manager.
The Director shall supervise the various divisions of this department, and in addition thereto he shall
perform such further duties as may from time to time be directed by the City Manager. (1963 Code art. 2-
3)
Sec. 13-2. Duties Of Director:
The Director of Public Works shall supervise and coordinate all activities relating to street operations,
garage operations, engineering, sewer operations, and water operations; and in addition thereto, he
shall perform such further duties as may from time to time be directed by the City Manager. (Ord. 87-22,
3-23-1987)
Secs. 13-3-13-20. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. SOLID WASTE 4
Sec. 13-21. Definitions:
The following definitions shall apply in this article:
Commercial Refuse: That rubbish and garbage from commercial establishments and industrial plants.
Containers: Residential refuse containers shall be metal or plastic, waterproof, ratproof and flytight, with
handles. Plastic bags may be used but must be tied closed. Commercial refuse containers shall be
waterproof, ratproof and flytight.
Garbage: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, processing, cooking or
consumption of food; animal waste; and any waste material edible to rats, with the exception of
sewerage and dead animals.
Nuisances: As defined in section 7-234 of this Code.
Refuse: All garbage and rubbish within the City limits.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 390/735
Residential Refuse: That rubbish and garbage accumulated from dwellings.
Residential Solid Waste Disposal Rules: The Public Works Department rules and regulations governing
the collection and disposal of solid waste from residential properties.
Rubbish: Any waste material except that which is defined as "garbage" excluding sewerage, yard waste
and dead animals. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 88-46, 8-22-1988; Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996; Ord. 001-
2006, 1-16-2006)
Sec. 13-22. General Conditions:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any refuse upon any street, alley, lane or public or
private property in the City.
(b)It shall be the responsibility of the owner of record to keep the property in compliance with this article.
(Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-23. Enforcement:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-24. Storage Facilities For Refuse:
(a)Residential, commercial and industrial buildings shall have an animalproof garbage storage area or
animalproof containers.
(b)All rubbish in commercial and residential areas shall be disposed of in containers which prevent
scattering.
(c)It shall be the responsibility of the owner of record and/or tenant to keep the garbage and rubbish
area free from garbage and rubbish on the ground 1.
(d)In residential areas, the garbage and rubbish storage areas shall be located behind the front building
line of the property. Garbage and rubbish storage areas shall not be located on the alley right-of-way.
(e)Garbage shall be stored in animalproof containers or in plastic bags which will be stored in the
animalproof garbage storage area. When garbage and rubbish are mixed, the rubbish must be
handled in the same manner as garbage.
(f)A minimum pick up once a week is required of all commercial and residential garbage and rubbish,
weather permitting. This may be waived in writing by the Director of Public Works or his designated
representative in a case where special equipment is used.
(g)Every outside garbage and rubbish storage container shall be so maintained that no odors permeate
any dwelling unit.
(h)In areas or establishments serviced by private haulers, the containers will be located on the private
property. The Director of Public Works or his designated representative may order a specific location
for the container if the City receives complaints concerning the location of the container. Screening of
this area shall conform to standards found in the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-
22, 3-23-1987; Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996; Ord. 001-2006, 1-16-2006; Ord. 008-2010, 2-8-2010)
Sec. 13-25. Collection; Removal Generally:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 391/735
The Public Works Department shall provide solid waste collection and disposal services to residential
properties in Rock Island with four (4) or fewer dwelling units as described in the residential solid waste
disposal rules. Effective January 1, 2018, the refuse charge shall be eleven dollars ($11.00) per month,
per dwelling unit.
Residential properties with more than four (4) dwelling units may elect to receive solid waste and
disposal services from the Public Works Department or make alternate arrangements. If the services
provided by the Public Works Department are used, effective January 1, 2018, the refuse charge shall
be eleven dollars ($11.00) per month, per dwelling unit. (Ord. 057-2017, 12-18-2017)
Sec. 13-26. Collection Of Brush:
Brush in piles must be removed from a property within thirty (30) days of breaking or cutting. (1963 Code
art. 6-2; Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 001-2006, 1-16-2006)
Sec. 13-27. Sewage; Offal:
(a)Offal and septic tank pumpings will be handled only by written permission of the Director of Public
Works or his designated representative and shall be in approved equipment.
(b)Disposal of sewage in holding tanks of travel trailers and boats shall be done at sanitary dumping
stations or as the public health sanitarian (Director of Public Works) may approve. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-
1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 13-28. Animal Wastes 2:
Animal wastes must be cleaned up twice a week, and no odor is to be present at the property line at any
time. Animal wastes shall be handled as garbage. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982)
Sec. 13-29. Dead Animals:
An owner may bury dead animals twenty four inches (24") below the surface of the ground. (Ord. 82-28,
9-27-1982)
Sec. 13-30. Containers Generally:
(Rep. by Ord. 001-2006, § 4, 1-16-2006)
Sec. 13-31. Commercial Refuse And Garbage Containers:
(a)No person shall own, for use within the corporate limits of the city, any commercial refuse or garbage
container without identifying upon the side of the container the name of the owner in letters at least
four inches (4") in height. Any container not identified by the name of the owner is in violation of this
section.
(b)No damaged containers shall be used for the collection of refuse garbage. The owner of a damaged
container with refuse or garbage in it shall repair it within seven (7) days of written notice from the
director of public works or his designated representative of the city.
(c)The owner of any refuse or garbage container shall keep the container in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall cause the container to be emptied at least every seven (7) days, if not necessary
prior to that time. The owner of the container who receives written notice from the director of public
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 392/735
works or his designated representative of the city that the container requires cleaning shall clean the
container within seven (7) days of the notice.
(d)Any container without identification of the owner on it, which is left on public or private property
(without property owner's permission), becomes city property after seven (7) days. (Ord. 82-28, 9-27-
1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 13-32. Needles, Syringes, Lancets And Sharp Objects:
All sharp objects, including, but not limited to, needles, syringes, and lancets shall be placed in puncture
proof, hard plastic or metal containers with lids reinforced with tape. (Ord. 97-05, 2-17-1997)
Sec. 13-33. Commercial Rubbish And Garbage Haulers 2:
The following regulations apply to all haulers of septic tank pumpings, offal, garbage and rubbish:
(1) Vehicles and containers for hauling garbage shall be watertight and equipped with tight covers
and shall be subject to approval by the director of public works or his designated representative.
(2) Vehicles and containers for hauling rubbish shall be so constructed and equipped as to prevent
loss of contents when the vehicle is being operated on public streets.
(3) No hauler may store waste materials mentioned in this article within the city without written
permission of the director of public works or his designated representative.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the commercial hauler to empty containers when full. The container
must be emptied within twenty four (24) hours after notification by the public works director or
designated representative. A telephone call to the hauler's office is considered to be notification.
(Ord. 82-28, 9-27-1982; Ord. 87-22, 3-23-1987; Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-34. Vector Control-Residential Areas Generally:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-35. Vector Control-Commercial Areas Generally:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-36. Vector Control-Extermination:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-37. Nuisances:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-40, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-38. Removal Of Weeds And Grass; Lien:
(a)The public works director of the city may provide for the removal of weeds and/or grass over ten
inches (10") in height on private property within the city when the owner of such property, after
reasonable notice, refuses or neglects to cut said weeds or grass. "Weeds" shall be defined as all
grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided, however, this term shall
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 393/735
not include cultivated flowers and gardens, including, but not limited to, native planting used for
aesthetic and/or wildlife promotion, to attract and aid wildlife, and/or offset and control any soil loss
problems either occurring or predicted, and/or promote stormwater infiltration into the soil, and/or
transpiration of stormwater by plants. If the cultivated flowers and gardens are within a three foot (3')
distance of the property line, an agreement allowing the construction of cultivated flowers and
gardens must first be obtained from the adjoining property owner nearest the proposed garden
construction. If an agreement cannot be made between adjacent property owners, a three foot (3')
buffer shall be maintained between the property line and said cultivated flowers and gardens.
Reasonable notice shall consist of one publication of this section in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city in addition to the following:
(1) When the property owner has been cited for a violation of this section during the previous growing
season, he shall be notified by letter at the beginning of the current season of his obligation to
provide for the cutting of weeds or grass on the property. The notice shall constitute reasonable
notice for the entire growing season.
(2) When the property owner has not been cited for a violation of this section during the previous
growing season he shall be provided, by letter, a seven (7) day time period in which to provide for the
removal of weeds and grass currently in violation of this section. This letter will also constitute
reasonable notice for the remainder of the growing season. If subsequent violations are observed
during the same growth season, the grass and weeds will be cut immediately and the owner will be
billed for the cost thereof.
(b)Upon refusal or neglect of any person to cut weeds or grass, the public works director may cause the
weeds or grass to be cut and shall collect from the property owner the cost for service. The charge
for that service shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) per man hour it is necessary to complete the
work, with a minimum charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per parcel. These costs shall be billed
to the property owner along with an additional thirty dollar ($30.00) lien charge per parcel. If mowing
charges are fully paid within thirty (30) days, the thirty dollar ($30.00) lien charge will be removed. If
mowing charges are not fully paid within thirty (30) days, a second billing notice will be sent to the
property owner. Upon refusal or neglect of any person to pay such second notice within seven (7)
days, the city clerk may cause a lien to be placed on the parcel, which lien shall be superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances except tax liens if a notice of lien is filed in the office of the
county recorder of deeds within twelve (12) months of the date of completion of cutting weeds or
grass by the city. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service.
(3) The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the city.
(c)However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have
arisen subsequent to the weed or grass cutting prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the
city shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienholder whose rights in and
to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by
the owner of or persons interested in such property after the notice of lien has been filed, the lien
shall be released and the release may be filed on record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
(d)In addition to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, in the event of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, the city may serve a notice of violation requiring violators to appear before
the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 10-107 et seq., of this code. Notice is
adequately served when certified mail is sent to the owner of record for property in question. The
penalty for a first violation of this section shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00). Consecutive violations
within two (2) years at the same property are as follows:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 394/735
(1) Second offense in two (2) years: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
(2) Third offense in two (2) years: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(3) Fourth and all subsequent offenses in two (2) years: Four hundred dollars ($400.00).
(e)The city attorney is authorized to and may initiate litigation in the small claims court of the 14th judicial
circuit to recover weed mowing bills and liens. The city is authorized to contract with any licensed
collection agency for the collection of the sums accruing pursuant to subsection (b) of this section,
and the collection agency may recover from the property owner, in addition to those sums,
reasonable collection expenses, including court costs and attorney fees. (Ord. 85-11, 5-13-1985;
Ord. 87-38, 4-13-1987; Ord. 87-47, 4-27-1987; Ord. 88-28.1, 5-23-1988; Ord. 91-14, 2-11-1991; Ord.
91-53, 5-6-1991; Ord. 34-2001, § 1, 4-23-2001; Ord. 77-2004, § 1, 7-26-2004; Ord. 087-2014, 12-1-
2014)
Sec. 13-39. Use Of Public Works Compactor:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-41, 6-10-1996)
Sec. 13-40. Billing And Collection Procedures:
(a)Billings for refuse charges shall be rendered by the finance department on a monthly or quarterly
basis at the discretion of the finance department.
(b)When refuse charges are not paid on or before the due date stated on the bill, a penalty shall be
added. Failure to receive a bill does not entitle the owner or customer to a remission of penalty.
(c)In the event that the city deems it necessary to refer past due refuse charges to the city attorney or a
collection agency for collection, the city may additionally recover its actual expenses so incurred,
including court costs, collection agency fees and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 008-2010, § 3, 2-8-
2010)
Sec. 13-41. Service Charges Billed In Common:
The refuse charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with other charges. If the
refuse charge is included on a common statement and the customer payment is insufficient to pay the
total of all portions of the statement, the payment will be applied in the following priority:
Refuse charge
Stormwater charge
Sewer charge
Water charge
Water service repair program charge
Sewer lateral repair program charge
(Ord. 008-2010, § 3, 2-8-2010)
Secs. 13-42 - 13-50. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 395/735
ARTICLE III. STREETS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 13-51. Names Generally:
The streets of this city, unless otherwise specifically designated by ordinance, shall be named and
designated as follows: The streets running north and south shall be called "streets", and they shall be
numbered from "one" upward, commencing at First Avenue as the avenue bordering on the Mississippi
River and numbering toward the south. Half-streets and avenues and courts may be specially
designated by the council. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. I)
Sec. 13-52. Street Name Signs:
The names of all streets and avenues as the same have been established by ordinance shall be plainly
designated by suitable metal signs conspicuously placed. There shall be at least one such sign placed at
each street intersection. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. I)
Sec. 13-53. Houses And Lots To Be Numbered:
The following shall be the plan of numbering the houses, lots and parts of lots fronting on any street,
avenue or public place of the city: The numbering of streets running north and south shall commence at
First Avenue; and the numbers shall run from one hundred (100) up to two hundred (200), so far as
necessary, and shall be used consecutively for the distance of the first block or fractional block, the even
numbers for the right-hand or west side of the street, and the odd numbers for the left-hand or east side
of the street. One number shall be left for and applied to each twenty feet (20') of distance; and in any
case where a building or place of business occupies less than twenty feet (20'), a fraction number shall
be used. The numbers from two hundred (200) to three hundred (300) shall in like manner be used for
the second block and in like manner for succeeding blocks, consecutively. The numbering of avenues
running east and west shall be done in like manner, commencing at First Street, even numbers being
used for the right-hand or south side of the avenue and odd numbers for the left-hand or north side of
the avenue. Each lot and part of lot fronting on any street, avenue or public place of the city not already
correctly numbered shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this division. (1963 Code,
Ch. XIII, Art. I)
Sec. 13-54. Numbers To Be Affixed To Buildings:
(a)Each of the figures of every street address number shall be not less than three inches (3") in height
and plainly marked so as to be easily read and be firmly and conspicuously affixed on the front part
of the buildings to which the same are attached.
(b)When notified by the chief building inspector to install house numbers, it shall be the duty of the
owners or occupants of all buildings fronting on any street, avenue or public place of the city to
proceed and number their buildings as herein required within thirty (30) days after such notice has
been given.
(c)No person being the owner or occupant of any building now erected and fronting on any street,
avenue or public place of the city, which is not already correctly numbered, who, after being notified
as aforesaid that the proper street numbers are of record in the city hall, shall for thirty (30) days
refuse or neglect to number any building or buildings owned or occupied by him in conformity with
the provisions of this division, or shall number any such building with any number other than that
designated by the aforesaid record. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 396/735
Sec. 13-55. Permanent Improvements; Water Pipes, Etc.:
(a)Whenever any street or alley in the city is to be permanently improved by paving or otherwise, one
copper water service pipe shall be laid from the water main on such street or alley to one foot (1')
from the lot line for each lot or part of lot having a separate water service, and all iron water service
pipes in the streets so to be improved shall be removed to the lot line on each side of such street or
alley.
(b)The cost of laying such copper water service pipes shall be borne by the owners of the property to be
served; and if after a reasonable notice from the city to lay such copper service pipe any property
owner shall neglect or refuse to lay the same, the city may proceed to lay it and collect the cost
thereof from the property owner. The city may order the installation of copper service pipes as a
separate improvement, by special assessment, in the judgment of the council. All connections with
water, sewer or gas pipes and all other supply and outlet pipes of whatever kind or nature along the
streets so to be improved must be made and laid when the streets, alleys, etc., are open and
excavated for the improvements, or prior thereto. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I)
Sec. 13-56. Railroads 1:
(a)Not To Obstruct Streets: No railroad corporation, railroad engineer, railroad conductor or other person
shall obstruct any public highway in the city, by stopping any train upon or by leaving any car or
locomotive engine standing on its tracks where the same intersects or crosses such public highway,
for a period longer than ten (10) minutes.
(b)Sewers Under Tracks: No railroad company operating within the limits of the city shall, in the
construction of its roadbed or the maintenance of its line or lines of railway, hinder or obstruct any
waterway, sewer or gutter, but shall provide, in accordance with specifications approved by the city
council, construct and maintain sufficient sluice ways, extensions of sewers or gutters under its
tracks and right of way at its own expense; and if the company fails to do so, the city shall construct
the same at the expense of the company.
(c)Speed: No railroad corporation, by itself or its agent, shall run any passenger train within the limits of
the city at a greater speed than ten (10) miles per hour, nor any other train, locomotive, engine or car
at a greater rate than six (6) miles per hour.
(d)Penalty: Any railroad corporation that shall of itself, or by any agent or employee, violate or fail to
observe any of the provisions of this section, and any agent or employee of any railroad corporation
or other person who shall violate or fail to observe the same, shall for each violation or failure to
observe the same, where no other penalty is imposed, be fined in the sum of not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (1963 Code, ch. XIII,
art. III)
Secs. 13-57-13-70. Reserved:
DIVISION 2. EXCAVATIONS 1, 2
Sec. 13-71. Application For Permit:
(a)No person shall dig, excavate, remove, cut or in any manner tunnel under or break the surface of any
part of any street, highway, avenue, alley or right of way unless an excavation permit to do so has
been issued by the city engineer or his designated representative, according to the conditions of this
division. The excavation permit shall show the date of application, the place of the excavation, the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 397/735
estimated date when the same will be made, the permit fee and name of the applicant, who shall
state that the person has filed with the city engineer a bond as required in this division.
(b)The excavation permit shall be void ten (10) days after the date of issue if the initial work has not
been started, and the person granted the permit shall perform the work with all possible speed. From
the time the public right of way is excavated, the permit holder shall have seven (7) workdays
(weather permitting) to complete all work, including the permanent pavement patch. The permit shall
always be in the possession of the person in charge of the work allowed, or in the possession of the
individual working at the location so that the permit may be produced for inspection at any time upon
request by authorized city officials.
(c)A separate excavation permit shall be required for each uninterrupted alteration of the surface or
undersurface of any street, avenue, highway or alley; provided that when multiple cuts are made at
approximately the same time for purposes of repairing or servicing the underground utilities, one
permit fee shall apply for each three hundred foot (300') section of gas main over which such multiple
cuts are made. Similarly, minimum charges for resurfacing, provided for hereinafter, shall apply to
each such three hundred foot (300') section.
(d)The fee for each permit issued shall be eighty dollars ($80.00), which shall be paid to the engineering
division of the public works department at the time the permit is issued. No refunds shall be made on
excavation permits.
(e)In case of a break of a gas main or of other emergency which might in the opinion of the city engineer
prove harmful to the public health or welfare or cause serious damage, the city engineer or his
representative may grant an "emergency" permit verbally, to be entered subsequently as a written
permit as hereinabove provided.
(f)The city engineer shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to exercise his judgment in the public
interest, in the issuance of excavation permits, with respect to the size, location, specifications and
timing of excavations or other qualifications affecting same. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I; Ord., §§ 1 - 3,
4-12-1976; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987; Ord. 87-34, § 17, 4-6-1987; Ord. 88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988; Ord.
13-2003, § 1, 2-10-2003; Ord. 013-2009, § 1, 2-2-2009; Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-72. Bond:
(a)No person shall be issued an excavation permit unless a bond has been executed to the city, with a
certificate that the bond is presently in full force and effect, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the city engineer and conditioned
on the faithful performance of all duties required by ordinances, rules and regulations of the city
engineer and the city. It shall be a further condition of the bond that the obligors will hold the city
harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetence on the part of
such person in the performance of work done or careless or improper guarding of excavations made
or trenches dug, or by reason of any other cause whatsoever, growing out of the negligence or
carelessness of such person for the issuance of a permit provided for in this division. The bond shall
be further conditioned that such person will promptly pay the city any and all sums or amounts due or
that may become due or owing by reason of, and under the terms and conditions of this division, and
in the manner and at the time or place as provided for herein.
(b)No person shall be issued an excavation permit whose bond shall not have been filed and approved
as herein set forth, provided, that a plumber who has executed a bond as provided in the plumbing
ordinance and which contains all of the conditions set forth in this division, shall be considered to
have met the requirements for bond. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987; Ord.
88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 398/735
Sec. 13-73. Notification Before Improvement:
Whenever improvement of any street, avenue, highway or alley is ordered by the city council, it shall be
the duty of the city engineer or his designee to notify all pertinent utility companies and all property
owners abutting the improvements and other interested persons of such order advising them to take
steps, prior to the construction of said improvement, to perform all desired or necessary excavations for
placing pipes, conduits, sewers, wires or other facilities in such public ways under, over, on or adjacent
to the improvement. Such persons so notified shall make such excavations before the improvement
work is begun, or at such time deemed convenient by the city engineer prior to completion of the
improvement. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987; Ord. 88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988)
Sec. 13-74. Backfilling And Resurfacing-By Private Utility Companies:
Private utility companies shall be responsible for backfilling, resurfacing and safeguarding excavations
made by these companies in street rights of way, and also backfilling and safeguarding excavations
made on boulevards or other city property. These companies shall be liable for the maintenance of
backfilling and resurfacing for a period of four (4) years after the date the permit is issued for the
excavations, and shall hold the city harmless for all claims for damages that may result because of
excavations during that period. Backfilling and resurfacing shall be done in accordance with
specifications provided by the city engineer. The sinking or deterioration within the aforesaid period of
years shall be held to be the responsibility of the utility company, who shall upon direction of the city
engineer reexcavate and properly refill and resurface the street cut. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I; Ord. 87-
22, § 21, 3-23-1987; Ord. 88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988; Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-75. Backfilling And Resurfacing - By Others:
The excavation permit holder shall be responsible for backfilling, resurfacing and safeguarding
excavations in the city right of way, and also backfilling and safeguarding excavations made on
boulevards or other city property. The excavation permit holder shall be liable for the maintenance of
backfilling and resurfacing for a period of four (4) years after the date the permit is issued for the
excavations, and shall hold the city harmless for all claims for damages that may result because of
excavations during that period. The excavation permit holder shall be responsible for the permanent
repairs for a period of four (4) years after the date the repair is completed. This responsibility shall
include all costs for reopening the street/excavation, correcting the cause of the problem and replacing
the permanent repair. Backfilling and resurfacing shall be done in accordance with specifications
provided by the city engineer. Permanent repairs may only be conducted by a licensed, bonded
contractor in accordance with article V of this chapter.
(1) Inspection Request: The excavation permit holder shall notify the engineering department twenty
four (24) hours in advance of any work to be done in order that an inspection may be scheduled.
(2) Temporary Repairs: All temporary pavement patch repairs shall be completed as follows:
a. Backfill Within Two Feet Of Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks, Driveways And Other Paved Surfaces:
With the exception of the top eight inches (8") of the excavation, the backfill material shall be sand
meeting Illinois department of transportation gradation FA-6 or an equivalent approved by the city
engineer. The backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted by methods approved by the city
engineer.
b. Backfill For Areas More Than Two Feet From Paved Surfaces: The entire excavation should be
backfilled with earthen material free from broken concrete, asphalt, large rocks or other debris. The
backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted by methods approved by the city engineer.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 399/735
c. Surface Restoration; Paved Surfaces: The excavation permit holder shall be responsible for
placing a temporary pavement patch and/or permanent pavement patch on all pavement
excavations as soon as the repair has been completed. The temporary patch shall conform to the
following minimum standards:
1. Street and alley patches: Two inches (2") of well compacted, cold mix asphalt placed on six
inches (6") of well compacted stone.
2. Driveways and sidewalks: Two inches (2") of well compacted, cold mix asphalt.
3. All temporary pavement patches completed between December 1 - April 1 should be
completed using six inches (6") of PCC pavement placed on six inches (6") of well compacted
stone.
The excavation permit holder is responsible for maintaining the temporary patches until the
permanent patch has been completed. During this maintenance period, the permit holder shall
make any repairs as soon as possible after notification from the city. If the permit holder fails to
make the necessary repairs within twenty four (24) hours, the city will make the repairs and charge
the permit holder for all the costs, including any barricading and signing necessary to protect the
public.
d. Surface Restoration Outside Paved Areas: All areas disturbed by the construction shall be
resodded or reseeded at the discretion of the adjacent property owner. Unless other arrangements
can be documented, the permit holder is responsible for watering the restored area until the new
growth is well established. (Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-76. Service Classification:
(a)There shall be a charge by the city for the following services rendered for the repair of excavations at
rates to be set from time to time by the city council:
(1) Saw cutting.
(2) Pavement removal and PCC replacement.
(3) Pavement removal and PCC replacement with bituminous surface.
(4) Pavement removal and brick replacement.
(5) Pavement removal and seal coat replacement.
(6) Pavement removal and PCC sidewalk replacement.
(7) Pavement removal and PCC driveway replacement.
(8) Adjust castings.
(9) Construction inspection.
(b)The public works department shall compute the amounts to be billed based on the above schedule of
charges and shall promptly mail invoices to the persons named on the excavation permits, itemizing
the services rendered in behalf of each permittee and the charges therefor.
(c)Services rendered in behalf of the city's sewer and water utilities shall be charged against the sewer
and water operation and maintenance funds respectively at the same rates as provided for above
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 400/735
with the amounts credited to the engineering fund. Such payments and credits shall constitute
interfund transfers. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. I; Ord., § 1, 9-3-1964; Ord., § 4, 4-12-1976; Ord., § 1, 2-
9-1981; Ord. 87-22, § 13, 3-23-1987; Ord. 88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988)
Sec. 13-77. Barricades And Signs, Etc.:
The excavation permit holder shall ensure that the work is performed with minimal inconvenience and
safety hazard to the public. The permit holder shall provide, erect, and maintain all barricades and signs
necessary to protect the work and the public. If the signing and barricading at any excavation is found to
be inadequate and the permit holder is unable or unwilling to correct the problem immediately, the city
will make the necessary corrections; and all the costs for this work will be charged to the permit holder.
No street or alley may be closed without the permission of the city engineer. Fire hydrants, gutters, and
storm inlets adjacent to the work may not be obstructed without the permission of the city engineer. (Ord.
88-18, § 1, 4-4-1988)
Secs. 13-78-13-79. Reserved:
DIVISION 3. ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS
Sec. 13-80. Application For License:
(a)No person shall place a roll-off box, storage cube or similar container on the property of the city of
Rock Island without a license issued by the city engineer.
(b)No person shall be issued a license to place containers on the property of the city of Rock Island until
the city engineer has received a certificate of insurance indicating that the owner of the container has
liability insurance coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident for accidents
involving containers placed on the property of the city of Rock Island and the city of Rock Island is
identified as an additional insured on the insurance policy.
(c)The fee for the license shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per calendar year.
(d)The placement and condition of containers placed on the property of the city of Rock Island must
comply with the city of Rock Island roll-off container policy in section 13-82 of this division. (Ord. 051-
2006, § 1, 7-24-2006)
Sec. 13-81. Correction Of Deficiencies:
(a)In the event that a container is located on the property of the city of Rock Island in violation of this
division or the city of Rock Island roll-off container policy, the public works department may correct
the deficiency or remove the container without prior notice to the container owner.
(b)Within thirty (30) days after correction of the deficiencies or container removal, the city engineer shall
notify the owner of the container of the costs of the deficiency correction or container removal,
including administrative costs, and the deadline for payment.
(c)The city attorney is authorized to and may initiate litigation in the small claims court of the 14th judicial
circuit to recover costs. In addition, the city may contract with any licensed collection agency for the
collection of the costs and the collection agency may recover from the property owner, in addition to
those sums, reasonable collection expenses, including court costs and attorney fees. (Ord. 051-
2006, § 1, 7-24-2006)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 401/735
Sec. 13-82. Roll-Off Container Policy:
Effective September 1, 2006, roll-off boxes, storage cubes and similar containers ("container") may be
placed on city property under the following conditions:
(1) The owner of the container must have a valid license to place containers on city property issued
by the city engineer.
(2) The container must have legible markings indicating the name and business address of the owner
and a twenty four (24) hour emergency contact telephone number.
(3) The container may not impede use of a sidewalk, alley or driveway.
(4) The container may not be placed within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant.
(5) The container may not be placed within twenty feet (20') of an intersection.
(6) If placed on a street, the container must be placed in a legal parking area within one foot (1') of
the curb or edge of the roadway.
(7) The container must have reflective stripes and/or reflectors on all corners that are clearly visible
at night to approaching motorists.
(8) The outside of the container must be clean and free of graffiti.
(9) The container may not create a safety hazard.
(10) Containers may not remain on city property for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days
without the written approval of the city engineer.
In the event that a container on city property violates this policy, the public works department may
correct the deficiency or remove the container and the container owner will be responsible for the costs.
(Ord. 051-2006, § 1, 7-24-2006)
Sec. 13-83. Criminal Penalties:
Any person violating this division shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a
minimum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00). Each separate day on which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 051-2006, § 1, 7-24-2006)
Secs. 13-84-13-90. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. SIDEWALKS 3
Sec. 13-91. Penalty:
Every violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender to a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00), and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), for each offense. (1963 Code, ch. XIII,
art. II)
Sec. 13-92. Permits For Sidewalks, Drives, Curb Cuts 4:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 402/735
(a)No person shall construct a sidewalk, driveway entrance or curb or cut a curb on a public right of way
in the city without first having obtained a written permit therefor issued by the director of public works
or his designated representative, and unless such person shall hold a valid concrete flat work license
in accordance with article V of this chapter. The fee for a permit for construction of driveway
entrances or sidewalks shall be three cents ($0.03) per square foot with a minimum fee of sixty five
dollars ($65.00). The fee for a permit for cutting a curb shall be sixty five dollars ($65.00) for each
twenty five (25) continuous feet of curb or fraction thereof. Prior to obtaining a permit for such
construction the applicant shall submit to the director of public works or his designated representative
a rough sketch showing the contemplated construction with dimensions and measurements
indicating proposed location, extent and type of work to be done. The director of public works or his
designated representative shall set line, grade and specifications for all sidewalks, driveway
entrances and curbs on public property, and he shall provide for proper inspection of construction of
sidewalks, driveway entrances and curbs and of curb cutting.
(b)No permit or fee shall be required for the construction of sidewalks in new subdivisions, provided such
sidewalks are shown on the approved subdivision plans and are located on property to be dedicated
to the city in conjunction with such subdivision approval, and provided further that such sidewalk or
driveway entrances are actually constructed at the same approximate time that the other street
improvements are constructed, pursuant to the city's regulations governing new subdivisions.
(c)When a driveway entrance is constructed, or a curb is cut to permit a driveway entrance, any existing
sidewalk must be removed, and the area where the sidewalk existed shall be repaved according to
specifications of the director of public works or his designated representative and it shall then be
considered as part of the driveway entrance. In such case, a sidewalk permit shall not be required
but only a permit for a driveway entrance. (1963 Code, ch. XIII, art. II; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987;
Ord. 87-34, § 18, 4-6-1987; Ord. 91-14, §§ 4, 5, 2-11-1991; Ord. 99-08, § 1, 2-15-1999; Ord. 13-
2003, §§ 2, 3, 2-10-2003; Ord. 013-2009, § 2, 2-2-2009; Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-93. Concrete Flat Work Bonds See § 13-117 of this chapter.2:
(Rep. by Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-94. Construction:
All sidewalks shall be laid to the line and grade of, and shall conform to, the specification of the director
of public works or his designated representative. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-
1987)
Sec. 13-95. Width:
Sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall be of cement or concrete and shall have the following
minimum widths in the territory described:
(1) In areas zoned for single-family residence four feet (4').
(2) In areas zoned for multiple-family use, five feet (5').
(3) In areas zoned for commercial or business use, ten feet (10').
Whenever the right of way so permits in residential zones, the sidewalks shall be constructed so that
the edge nearest the property line is not less than one foot (1') from the property line. (1963 Code,
Ch. XIII, Art. II)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 403/735
Sec. 13-96. Location Of Gutters, Shade Trees:
All gutters hereafter constructed shall be located on the lines between that part of the street devoted to
vehicle travel and that part set off for sidewalk purposes. No trees shall be planted or placed in any
street, boulevard or parkway in the city unless authorized by the city. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II)
Sec. 13-97. Damage To Sidewalks:
If any person shall break or otherwise damage any tile, concrete, brick, plank or any part of any
sidewalk, footpath or curbing, he shall within twenty four (24) hours thereafter cause the same to be well
and sufficiently repaired and mended; and no person shall break, damage or remove any concrete,
brick, tile, stone or plank, or any part or portion of any walks in the city, except for the purpose of
replacing the same with new material, under the direction of the director of public works or his
designated representative and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII,
Art. II; Ord. 87-22, § 21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 13-98. Stoops, Platforms, Railings, Cellar Doors:
No stoop, porch, platform, railing, cellar door or steps shall be allowed to extend from any building or lot
into or upon any sidewalk; nor shall any cellar door rise or project above the surface of the sidewalks;
however, upon good cause shown, the city council may grant a permit to owners of commercial buildings
to make an opening on the sidewalks adjacent to their property if the opening is adequately covered and
sufficiently protected when open in a manner that is satisfactory to the director of public works or his
designated representative and the owner makes a written agreement to hold the city harmless for any
liability arising out of the opening and has insurance coverage for the liability in an amount satisfactory to
the director of public works or his designated representative. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II; Ord. 87-22, §
21, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 13-99. Windows, Showcases, Steps:
No bay window or other window shall extend into, upon or over any sidewalk, nor shall any sign, except
as provided in this code, nor shall any show bill, showcase or other thing be placed upon or project over
the sidewalk in front of or from the wall of any building, nor shall any steps be hereafter constructed or
placed upon or over any sidewalk, street or other public way. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II)
Sec. 13-100. Personal Property On Public Sidewalks:
(a)No person shall place upon or suspend over any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise, or cause or
permit the same to be done or place or deposit on any sidewalk, or cause or permit the same to be
done, any personal property of any nature whatsoever.
(b)Newspaper vending machines may be allowed on sidewalks after the owner thereof receives prior
authorization from the city clerk subsequent to the submission of a liability insurance policy with limits
approved by the city attorney. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II; Ord. 83-25, § 1, 7-11-1983)
Sec. 13-101. Painting, Etc.:
No person shall paint, paste, post, print or nail any handbill or sign, poster, advertisement or notice of
any kind, or other matter or thing whatever, on, nor in any manner whatever deface any curbstone, or
any part or portion of any sidewalk, or any tree, lamppost, telegraph pole, electric light pole, hydrant,
public building or any other thing or any private wall, door, building, gate or fence. The owner of any
sign, poster or advertisement placed in violation of this section shall also be guilty of the violation if he
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 404/735
knew or should have known that the sign, poster or advertisement was placed on his behalf in violation
of this section. (1963 Code, Ch. XIII, Art. II; Ord. 058-2005, § 1, 7-11-2005)
Secs. 13-102-13-115. Reserved:
ARTICLE V. FLAT WORK LICENSES
Sec. 13-116. Licenses For Sidewalks, Driveways, Curb Cuts, Excavation Repairs:
No person shall construct a sidewalk, driveway entrance or curb, cut a curb, or conduct a permanent
excavation repair on a public right of way in the city unless such person shall hold a valid concrete flat
work license, which may be obtained from the director of public works or his designated representative
by filing a concrete flat work license application along with a current concrete flat work bond and a
license application fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
Sec. 13-117. Concrete Flat Work Bonds:
Every person engaging in the business of the construction of concrete walks, driveway entrances or
curbs, conducting permanent utility repairs, or any property owner installing his own sidewalks, driveway
entrances or curbs before entering upon the construction of any such concrete flat work in or upon any
public street or avenue in the city, shall file with the director of public works a bond in the penal sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) running to the city with sureties to be approved by the director of
public works, conditioned upon obligated satisfactory performance of all duties required by the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city council, and that he will suitably guard and protect any
excavation or obstruction and defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the city from all actions, costs,
damages and expenses whatsoever, including attorney fees, which shall or may at any time happen to
come to it for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person or persons,
caused by any negligence in either the execution or protection of the work being done, and guarantee
the material and workmanship of the concrete flat work for a period of four (4) years ensuing after the
date of its acceptance by the public works department. The bond shall be approved by the director of
public works or his designated representative before being filed. The bond shall be on file in the public
works department and shall be renewed from year to year during the time of work of concrete flat work
as above referred to. (Ord. 011-2016, 3-7-2016)
ARTICLE VI. RESPONSIBLE BIDDER
Sec. 13-118. Defining Responsible Bidder:
The definition of responsible bidder is expanded in the case of bidders for construction projects, new
facilities or renovation of current facilities and road projects over twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
In determining who is the lowest responsible bidder, the city may consider those factors set out in 55
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1022(b). Additionally, the city may also consider the following factors in
determining who is the lowest bidder:
(1) Certificate/proof to transact business within the state of Illinois.
(2) Evidence of compliance with:
a. Federal employer tax identification number or social security number (for individuals).
b. "Equal opportunity employer" provisions.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 405/735
(3) Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages: general liability, workers'
compensation, automobile, hazardous occupation, product liability and professional liability.
(4) Participation in apprenticeship and training programs applicable to the work to be performed on
the project which are approved and registered with the United States department of labor's office of
apprenticeship and training. The required evidence includes a copy of all applicable apprenticeship
standards and agreements for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the public works project.
(5) Compliance with all the provisions of the Illinois prevailing wage act, including wages, medical
and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those trades as covered in the act.
(6) Disclosure of the names and addresses of each subcontractor from whom the contractor has
accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of this project.
(7) A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse.
a. The bidder shall certify that only workers that are enrolled and tested in company based
controlled substance and alcohol testing programs will be allowed to participate on the project.
(8) Statements as to past performances, which shall give an accurate and complete record of all
work projects completed in the last three (3) years by the contractor.
(9) The contractor and officers of the contractor disclose any tax lien or delinquency in the last five
(5) years.
(10) Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on the project have completed a
ten (10) hour or greater OSHA safety program within the last five (5) years. Only workers that have
satisfactorily completed a ten (10) hour or greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate
on the project. The bidder must have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the city may
request the bidder provide copies of employees' OSHA cards; failure to produce an employee's
OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder is not a responsible bidder.
(11) Bidder shall demonstrate the efforts taken to employ local workers with strong consideration
given to bidders employing residents of the city of Rock Island.
(12) Bidder provides written record of compliance with state of Illinois DBE requirements for public
works projects, including the hiring of women and minority workers to perform the contracted work.
(13) Any other factors which are relevant to the determination of a bidder's ability to carry out the
requirements of the project in accordance with what may be expected or demanded under the terms
of the contract.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor to comply with all the submission requirements at the
time it submits its bid to the city of Rock Island. (Ord. 052-2016, 11-21-2016)
Chapter 14
RECREATIONAL AND CULTURAL FACILITIES 1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1-14-15. Reserved:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 406/735
ARTICLE II. PARK AND RECREATIONAL SYSTEM
Sec. 14-16. Establishment:
There is hereby established in the city a recreation system in the lands, public parks or buildings
heretofore designated or set apart by the city for use as playgrounds or recreation centers. (1963 Code,
ch. III, art. I)
Sec. 14-17. Park And Recreation Board 1-Creation:
There is hereby established in the city a park and recreation board to be known as the Rock Island park
and recreation board, which board shall consist of six (6) members to be appointed by the mayor by and
with the consent of the city council, to serve without compensation. The board shall have the power to
provide, maintain, improve and conduct parks, playgrounds and recreation centers in the city. Any
money appropriated by the city council for such purposes shall be expended under the board's direction.
At the close of each fiscal year, and at any other time when requested by the city council, the board shall
make a report to the council of all monies received and expended by the board. The board shall use the
central accounting facilities provided by the city clerk's office. (1963 Code, ch. III, art. II; Ord. 001-2017,
1-23-2017)
Sec. 14-18. Park And Recreation Board-Term Of Office 2:
The term of office of the members of the park and recreation board shall be for a period of five (5) years
or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members of the board first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. If any vacancy occurs in the office of any member, the mayor shall appoint a successor to
serve for the unexpired term. (1963 Code, ch. III, art. I)
Sec. 14-19. Park And Recreation Board-Oath And Bond 3:
Each member appointed to the park and recreation board shall before entering upon the duties of his
office take the oath of office required by law and shall execute to the city a bond in a sum not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), with one or more sureties, to be approved by the city council, conditioned
as required by law. (1963 Code, ch. III, art. I)
Sec. 14-20. Park And Playground Rules:
(a)No person, in any park or playground in the city, shall:
(1) Permit unleashed and/or unaccompanied animals on any such premises.
(2) Throw stones or missiles by hand, slingshot or otherwise.
(3) Carry or discharge firearms or set off fireworks. This prohibition against discharge of a firearm as
provided herein shall not apply to the hunting of deer with a bow and arrow in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 10-9(d) of this code.
(4) Cut, mark, break, climb upon or in any way injure or deface trees, shrubs, plants, flowers,
buildings, fences, bridges or other structures or property, whether real or personal, on any such
premises.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 407/735
(5) Remove from any such premises sod, trees, plants or other movable property, or pick flowers of
any kind on any such premises.
(6) Race with horses, bicycles, automobiles, motorcycles or similar vehicles; drive or ride on drives
on any such premises at more than fifteen (15) miles per hour; nor shall horseback riding be
permitted except on established bridle paths.
(7) Sell, consume or be in possession of beer, wine or other intoxicating liquor, or enter or be upon
the premises of any park or playground while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The sale and
possession of beer, wine or other intoxicating liquor is permitted if it is purchased from employees of
the Rock Island park and recreation department or from a qualified vendor or licensee issued a
temporary liquor license, and only in those areas previously so designated by the Rock Island park
and recreation board. The Rock Island park and recreation board may also approve the "gifting" of
liquor for private rentals at previously designated park and recreation areas or facilities as stipulated
by operational policy. After receiving approval by the park and recreation board, all applications for
"gifting" of liquor at a private rental must be received by the liquor commissioner's office no later than
seven (7) days in advance of the scheduled event. Upon approval, an approval letter from the liquor
commissioner will be sent to the applicant and the policy department.
(8) Lie or sleep on tables or benches on any such premises.
(9) Tell fortunes or play any games of chance.
(10) Distribute circulars or advertisements or post notices, bills or other paper upon any structures or
tree on any such premises, or advertise by any other means.
(11) Take any bird eggs or bird nests; fish in the lagoons, unless permitted at such times as
designated by the park and recreation board; kill or disturb any waterfowl, birds or wildlife.
(12) Light any fires on any such property other than in established fireplaces.
(13) Place ashes, garbage, papers or rubbish of any kind on any such premises other than in
containers provided for that purpose.
(14) Drive or park motor vehicles on the grass areas.
(15) Wear inappropriate clothing. Bathing clothes are permitted in established bathing pool areas.
(16) Be on any premises between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.,
unless authority is granted and the party is under proper supervision. The playgrounds will be open
and closed for use at the direction of the playground supervisor, and anyone in the playgrounds
when they are closed will be considered as trespassing on such property.
(17) No golf shall be played in any of the parks, nor shall practicing of golf be permitted, except in
areas designated by the park board.
(18) No baseball or softball games shall be permitted, except in areas established for the playing of
such games.
(19) Conduct himself in a disorderly manner in any building or within any such premises.
(20) Allow any boats with motors in or operated in Lake Potter in Sunset Park north of a line across
the neck of the lake, which is marked with buoys and a rope, other than in areas specifically
designated therefor.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 408/735
(21) Waterski, water plane, swim or ride a surfboard within Lake Potter in Sunset Park or in the
channel connecting the lake with the Mississippi River except for events approved by the Park Board.
(22) Operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of eight (8) miles per hour within Lake Potter or in the
channel connecting the lake with the Mississippi River.
(23) Drive a tractor or tractor and semitrailer through any park in the City nor park any tractor or
tractor and semitrailer in any park in the City without the specific authorization of the City Council.
(24) Operate a bicycle or motorized vehicle on the Sunset Park "walk-jog" path.
(25) Allow a dog to litter on the Sunset Park "walk-jog" path.
(26) Fish off any of the docks in Sunset Marina or Schwiebert Riverfront Park.
(27) Be in or upon that portion of Sunset Marina in Sunset Park as described on exhibit A on file with
the City Clerk and made a part of this section by reference, except those persons who have boats
and have leased docking area in Sunset Marina or their invited guests and suppliers and customers
of the City's lessees.
(28) Dock overnight, or use a courtesy dock for more than a four (4) hour period, except for marina
facilities designated for that purpose.
(29) Boats may not be left unattended for more than ten (10) minutes at boat ramp docks.
(30) Sell merchandise, goods, services, food or other articles in any City park without the written
permission of the Park and Recreation Director.
(31) Enter any secured, enclosed structure owned or controlled by the Park Board, or under the
supervision of the Park Board without the written permission of the Park and Recreation Director.
(32) Hold any boating event, fishing tournaments, contest or competition which uses boats, sailboats,
or other craft on Potter Lake without written permission of the Park Board.
(33) Park for more than three (3) hours at a time at the Lincoln Park tennis court lot, the Webber Park
parking lot, or other lots designated with specific time limits.
(34) Disobey posted parking requirements, unless otherwise authorized by the Park and Recreation
Director or the Park and Recreation Board.
(35) Raft boats together while tied to a dock or ramp.
(36) Drink alcoholic beverages while on the docks or ramps.
(37) Grill or cook on the docks or ramps.
(38) Swim or dive off of any docks or ramps.
(39) Congregate, sunbathe, picnic or loiter on the docks.
(40) Allow unattended children on the docks.
(41) Block access on the docks.
(42) Dock a boat after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight at Schwiebert Riverfront Park without first
obtaining permission to do so from the Park Board.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 409/735
(43) Use the docks during Park Board approved special events.
(44) Fish off of Potter's Lake boat ramp docks. Fishing is only allowed off of Potter's Lake pedestrian
docks.
(b)The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
In the event a person is accused of a violation of this section and does not wish to contest the
allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the violations, the person so accused may pay to
the City, at police headquarters, a penalty in the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for and in full
satisfaction of the violation. (1963 Code, ch. III, art. I; Ord., 7-12-1976; Ord., 10-25-1976; Ord., 1-12-
1981; Ord., 2-8-1982; Ord. 83-57, 2-6-1984; Ord. 87-65, 8-10-1987; Ord. 88-03, 1-4-1988; Ord. 99-
88, 11-8-1999; Ord. 025-2007, 4-9-2007; Ord. 034-2009, 5-4-2009; Ord. 083-2011, 11-7-2011; Ord.
063-2013, 11-18-2013; Ord. 030-2014, 3-24-2014; Ord. 056-2018, 9-24-2018)
Sec. 14-21. Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance designating the
names and boundaries of City parks, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. (1963 Code, ch. III, art. I)
Sec. 14-22. Special Use Activity:
No special use activity shall take place in any park, playground, special facility or other property under
jurisdiction of the Park and Recreation Board without the issuance of a special use permit by the Park
and Recreation Board. Any person or organization desiring to have a special use activity shall submit a
special use application to the Park and Recreation Board for review and final disposition. The board
shall consider the special use application at its first meeting held after the filing of said application. The
board shall have the authority to establish a fee for the special use facility commensurate with their costs
to the Rock Island Park and Recreation Department. For the purpose of this section, a "special use"
activity shall be defined as any activity, event, speech, gathering, observance, ceremony or
entertainment event not sponsored by the Rock Island Park and Recreation Department. This type of
activity is distinguished from "routine use" by:
(1) The use of the facility is not within the intended use of the facility and such use restricts or limits
the intended use of a park facility by the general public;
(2) The use of additional mechanical equipment, portable generators, staging, tentage, food
dispensing equipment, loudspeakers, or other items not available on the site; or
(3) The advertising and promotion of the activity, identifying the park location as the site of the event.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 88-39, 7-11-
1988)
Secs. 14-23-14-35. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. LIBRARY 1
Sec. 14-36. Establishment 2:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 410/735
The establishment of the Public Library and Reading Room of this City, and the acceptance by the City
of the donation of the books, pamphlets, papers, fixtures and other property of the Young Men's Library
Association, upon the condition of such donation, as set forth in the ordinances of the City passed
August 12, 1872, are hereby approved and confirmed; and the Public Library and Reading Room shall
henceforth be kept up and maintained as such for the use of the inhabitants of the City and shall be
called the "Rock Island Public Library and Reading Room". (1963 Code, ch. III, art. II)
Sec. 14-37. Board Of Directors-Created 3, 4:
There is hereby created a board of directors to consist of nine (9) members for the Rock Island Public
Library. The board of directors shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council as
provided by state statute, and shall be chosen from the citizens at large, with reference to their fitness
for such office, and not more than one member of the city council shall be at any one time a member of
the board. Directors shall hold office for three (3) years as provided by law. The mayor may remove any
board member on any formal charge as provided by law. Vacancies in the board of directors occasioned
by removals, resignation or otherwise shall be reported to the mayor and be filled in like manner as
original appointments. No director shall receive compensation as such. (1963 Code, ch. II, art. III)
Sec. 14-38. Board Of Directors-Duties 5:
The board of library directors shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own
guidance and for the government of the Rock Island Public Library as may be expedient and not
inconsistent with the state statutes or ordinance. They shall also perform such other duties as are
imposed by statute or ordinance. (1963 Code, ch. II, art. III)
Sec. 14-39. Penalty For Injury To Or Failure To Return Library Materials 1:
Any person who shall carelessly, wilfully or maliciously cut, tear, write upon, deface, injure or destroy any
book, pamphlet, periodical, newspaper, plate, picture, engraving or any other property or thing of value
belonging to or under the control of the Rock Island public library and reading room or who shall fail to
return thereto any book, pamphlet, periodical, newspaper, plate, picture, engraving or any other thing of
value belonging to or under the control of the library and reading room, according to the requirements of
the bylaws and rules thereof, or after a notice so to do, shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). All such fines shall, when collected, be paid
to the city treasurer and by him credited to the library fund. (1963 Code, Ch. III, Art. II)
Secs. 14-40-14-50. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. ARTS COMMISSION 2, 3
Sec. 14-51. Creation; Composition:
There is created in the city an arts commission consisting of twelve (12) members, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council from nominees submitted by the arts
commission. Seven (7) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. At least one member of
the commission shall be selected from membership of the board of the Rock Island art guild and one
member from the board of the Quad Cities Arts Council. All members of the commission shall be
residents of the city. (Ord., § 1, 6-7-1976)
Sec. 14-52. Purpose; Powers:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 411/735
The purpose of the arts commission is to select and acquire works of art for exhibition and/or permanent
display in the city. The commission shall raise and disburse funds (private and public) for the acquisition
of artworks. The commission shall select sites for the artworks and shall oversee any maintenance to the
works and sites. (Ord., § 3, 6-7-1976)
Sec. 14-53. Appointment Of Executive Director 4:
Upon recommendation of the arts commission and with approval of the mayor and city council and at a
time when sufficient funds are available, an executive director of the commission shall be hired. (Ord., §
4, 6-7-1976)
Sec. 14-54. Officers:
The officers of the arts commission shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, recording secretary and
treasurer, all of whom shall be elected by simple majority of the commission members. The duties of the
chairman shall consist of calling meetings and directing the activities of the commission and appointing
committees. The duties of the vice chairman shall be to act in the place of the chairman in the event the
chairman is unavailable or incapacitated to perform his or her duties. The duties of the recording
secretary shall consist of informing members of all meetings and keeping minutes and records of the
meetings. The duties of the treasurer shall consist of maintaining the account of the commission,
submitting financial reports at each meeting and approving a yearly financial statement. (Ord., § 5, 6-7-
1976; Ord., § 1, 7-26-1976)
Sec. 14-55. Meetings:
There shall be six (6) regular meetings of the arts commission during each year, with the annual meeting
to be held in May of each year, at which time the officers of the commission shall be elected. Special
meetings of the commission may be called at any time at the discretion of the chairman. A change of
procedure for calling and holding meetings shall be made at any time by a vote of a simple majority of
the commission members, with the vote to be taken at least thirty (30) days prior to the effecting of the
proposed change or changes. (Ord., § 6, 6-7-1976)
Sec. 14-56. Term Of Office:
The members of the arts commission shall be appointed for two (2) year terms with six (6) members
being appointed in each year providing that in order to initiate arrangements of staggered terms, the
terms of the six (6) members initially appointed as aforesaid shall be for one year, which shall be
determined by lot. Members who serve two (2) consecutive terms can be reappointed after a one year
absence from the commission. (Ord., § 2, 6-7-1976)
Secs. 14-57-14-70. Reserved:
ARTICLE V. HAUBERG CIVIC CENTER 1
Sec. 14-71. Establishment; Name:
There is hereby established in the city the Hauberg Civic Center, situated on the Hauberg homestead in
the city, and conveyed by Catherine H. Sweeney and John H. Hauberg, Jr., to the Hauberg Civic Center
Corporation, the stock of all of which corporation is now owned and possessed by the city. The real
estate is situated in the city, bounded and described as follows:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 412/735
Beginning at the northeast corner of Section 2, Township 17 North, Range 2 West of the Fourth Principal
Meridian; then south on the section line 965.4 feet, more or less to the centerline of Thirteenth Avenue,
formerly known as Twelfth Avenue extended east; thence west 334.9 feet more or less to the centerline
of Twenty-third Street produced southerly; thence north 408.2 feet, more or less, along said centerline,
so produced, to the intersection thereof with the centerline of Twelfth Avenue, formerly known as
Eleventh Avenue; thence east along the centerline of Twelfth Avenue, 178.25 feet; thence north 530.9
feet along the centerline of alley to township line first abovementioned; thence east along said township
line 168.25 feet to the place of beginning.
Also a parcel in the city, bounded and described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the east side of Twenty-second Street, 541.8 feet south of the intersection of
the township line between Section 35, Township 18 North, Range 2 West of the Fourth Principal
Meridian and Section 2, Township 17 North, Range 2 West of the Fourth Principal Meridian; thence
south 408.2 feet to the centerline of Thirteenth Avenue, formerly known as Twelfth Avenue extended
east; thence east at right angles 324 feet more or less to the centerline of Twenty-third Street
extended south; thence north at right angles 408.2 feet to the centerline of Twelfth Avenue; thence
west to the point of beginning.
Also Lots 41 and 42 in Hale's Addition to the city, excepting the south 25 feet thereof, in the county.
Subject to a perpetual easement from John H. Hauberg and Sue D. Hauberg to the city to lay, maintain,
operate, repair and remove a twenty four inch (24") water pipe in a strip of land ten feet (10') in width, as
described in a deed recorded in book 224 of mortgages on page 187 in the office of the recorder of
deeds in and for the county.
(1963 Code, Ch. III, Art. III)
Sec. 14-72. Purpose:
The Hauberg Civic Center shall be used and maintained to promote citizen activity in the fields of
graphic arts, music, literature, dramatics, local and Indian history, natural history, horticulture, social
sciences and such other cultural, patriotic and educational purposes as may from time to time be
deemed advantageous, and shall be used for meetings of groups interested in the same, particularly
groups that have no headquarters of their own. (1963 Code, Ch. III, Art. III)
Sec. 14-73. Governing Body 1:
The Hauberg Civic Center shall be governed by the Rock Island park board who shall oversee
programming, set fees, policy and maintain the building. (1963 Code, Ch. III, Art. III; Ord. 99-88, § 1, 11-
8-1999)
Secs. 14-74-14-75. Reserved:
Chapter 15
TAXATION 1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 15-1. Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 413/735
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance establishing a special
service area, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this code. (1984 Code)
Sec. 15-2. Retailers' Occupation Tax:
(a)(1) Effective July 1, 2010, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered
with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of one and twenty
five one-hundredths percent (1.25%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business, while this section is in effect; and
(2) Effective July 1, 2010, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in
the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one and twenty five one-hundredths percent
(1.25%), effective July 1, 2010, of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such serviceman as an incident to sale of service.
(3) Such "home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax" and the "home rule municipal service
occupation tax" shall not be applicable on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food
which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used
by diabetics.
(4) The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the provisions of 5/8-11-1 and
5/8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois municipal code 65 ILCS, as amended.1.
(b)The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall
be collected and enforced by the department of revenue of the state. The department of revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 011-2010, § 1, 3-
8-2010)
Sec. 15-3. Service Occupation Tax:
(a)A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this city in the business of making sales of
service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred
by those servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as
an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
11-5. The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the "service occupation tax act" approved July 10,
1961, as amended 35 ILCS 115/1.2, shall not apply to property within the city. The farm machinery and
equipment exclusion contained in section 3-5 of said act, as amended 35 ILCS 115/3-5.3, shall not
apply to persons engaged in the business of making sale of service within the city.
(b)Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit
of this city shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act" approved July 10,
1961, as amended 35 ILCS 115/9.4.
(c)At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed. (1963 Code, ch. X; Ord., 7-14-1967; Ord., 7-18-1967; Ord., 4-8-1968; Ord., 8-
25-1969; Ord., 2-19-1979; Ord., 1-26-1981)
Sec. 15-4. Use Tax:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 414/735
(a)A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon
the privilege of using in the city any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's
government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible
property with "selling price" to have the meaning as defined in section 2 of the use tax act, approved
July 14, 1955 35 ILCS 105/2.5.
(b)Such tax shall be collected by the state department of revenue for the city and shall be paid, or an
exemption determination must be obtained from the state department of revenue, before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
(c)The farm machinery and equipment exclusion contained in section 3 of the "use tax act" approved
July 14, 1955, as amended 35 ILCS 105/3-5.6, shall not apply to the privilege of using in the city any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government. (Ord., 10-14-1974; Ord., 1-26-
1981)
Sec. 15-5. Automobile Renting Occupation Tax 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.7:
(a)A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this city
at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such
business, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7.
(b)Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "an act
in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended 35 ILCS 120/2, 120/3.8.
(c)At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord., 1-4-
1982)
Sec. 15-6. Automobile Renting Use Tax 2:
(a)A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this city an automobile which is rented from a
renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile, in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8.
(b)The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from persons whose Illinois address for titling or
registration purposes is given as being in this city.
(c)The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the state department of revenue. (Ord., 1-4-1982)
Sec. 15-7. Fire Insurance Tax 3 4:
(a)All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of this State and which
are engaged in the City in effecting fire insurance shall pay to the Treasurer of the City a tax or
license fee amounting to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received by their agency in the City;
and at that rate such corporations, companies and associations shall pay upon the amount of all
premiums which during the year ending on every July 1, shall have been received for any fire
insurance effected or agreed to be effected on property situated within the City by or with such
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 415/735
corporations, companies or associations, respectively, in accordance with an act of the general
assembly of the State entitled "An act to enable cities, towns and villages, organized under any
general or special law to levy and collect a tax or license fee from foreign fire insurance companies
for the benefit of organized fire departments".
(b)The money paid over to the City as a result of the tax levied by this Section shall be set aside and
appropriated for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. The City Treasurer shall
pay the funds received from the aforementioned tax to the treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Tax Revenue Administration Board. The Board treasurer will deposit the funds in the Foreign Fire
Insurance Fund, and such funds shall be invested in the same manner and under the same
guidelines as the City investment policies. The funds shall be under the care and supervision of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Revenue Administration Board as hereinafter created and shall be
expended for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department. The Board shall, in
accordance with City budget and appropriations procedures, annually prepare a budget for the funds
which shall be considered by the City Council together with the Fire Department budget, and the
approved expenditures shall be included in the annual budget ordinance.
(c)There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Revenue Administrative Board which shall
consist of five (5) members. The Board shall consist of the Fire Chief, a battalion or assistant chief, a
captain or lieutenant, and two (2) firefighters. The battalion or assistant chief, captain or lieutenant,
and firefighters shall be elected by secret written ballot of all the commissioned members of the Fire
Department held on the third Tuesday of April in even-numbered years. The term of Boardmembers
shall be for two (2) years and shall commence on May 1 following election; however, the original
Boardmembers shall have an abbreviated term commencing thirty (30) days following passage
hereof (February 25, 1991). The original Board shall be elected at an election to be held within
twenty one (21) days following passage hereof. If a vacancy occurs in office because a member
terminates his service with the Fire Department for any reason, is promoted out of the ranks he
represents, or resigns, the Fire Chief shall appoint a person to fulfill the remaining term. If there is no
exclusive bargaining agent recognized, the Chief shall appoint a person to fill the remaining term of
the remaining ranks' representatives.
(d)The Board shall select from its members a person to serve as secretary of the Board. The secretary
shall serve in accordance with the bylaws adopted by the Board. The Board shall select a person to
serve as treasurer of the Board, or in the alternative, appoint the Finance Director to serve as its
treasurer. If no person is selected to serve as treasurer or in the event of any vacancy in the office of
treasurer of the Board, the Finance Director shall serve as its treasurer until the vacancy is filled.
Nothing herein shall prevent a person serving on the Board from serving as treasurer, but no
additional compensation shall be paid to such person or to the Finance Director.
(e)The Board shall have the power to expend money provided by the foreign fire insurance tax in
accordance with written bylaws and to make gifts to the City of property, supplies or money for the
use, maintenance and benefit of the Fire Department and to adopt bylaws establishing the manner of
selection of a chairman and the other officers of the Board; the rules of procedure for the conduct of
its meetings, the establishment of regular meeting times and places and the manner of calling special
meetings; the authority of its officers; and other necessary matters dealing with the administration of
the Fund; however, the bylaws may not violate the following:
(1) A quorum shall not exist without either the Fire Chief or the battalion or assistant chief
representative being present; however, if both the Fire Chief and the battalion or assistant chief
representative are absent for three (3) consecutive meetings, a quorum can exist without either the
Fire Chief or the battalion or assistant chief representative being present so that regular business
may be conducted.
(2) No bylaw or amendment thereto shall be effective until same has been on file with the City Clerk
for at least ten (10) days.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 416/735
(3) The purposes for which funds may be expended shall not include purposes other than the
following:
a. Expenditures for safety devices.
b. Expenditures for training or training materials.
c. Expenditures for health or physical fitness devices, education, or screenings, but no member of
the Fire Department shall be entitled to additional paid leave, pension, insurance, or other welfare
benefits as a result of expenditures authorized by subsection (e)(3)a, (e)(3)b or (e)(3)c of this
Section.
d. Furniture, appliances, and other materials necessary to equip and operate the firehouses.
e. Department supplies and equipment, including specialized equipment such as cardiopulmonary
resuscitation dolls, jaws of life, etc.
f. Bonding for the treasurer.
g. Pension contributions to the Fire Pension Fund, but not contributions required of individual
members of such Fund.
(f)The Board shall have the duty to submit to the City Council on or before April 30 of each year a report
detailing meetings, actions, funds received and funds dispersed for the previous year ending on
March 31. In addition, the Board shall require that accounts be kept in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles for government entities and use a centralized accounting system
provided by the City Finance Department. Further, no purchase of equipment, supplies or other
property shall be made unless upon the order of the Fire Department.
(g)The Board shall have the duty to require its treasurer to post a surety bond acceptable to the City in
the penal sum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) each conditioned on the faithful
performance of the duties of office and the payment of all monies received by such officer according
to law and ordinance. (1963 Code, Ch. X(I), §§ 1, 2; Ord. 91-19, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-1991)
Secs. 15-8-15-20. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. RESERVED 1
Secs. 15-21-15-35. Reserved:
ARTICLE III. UTILITY TAX 2
Sec. 15-36. Definitions:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Gross Receipts : The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas and
electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all service rendered
in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash,
credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of service, product or commodity
supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 417/735
Person : Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon bills for utility service rendered to the
municipality itself.
Person Maintaining A Place Of Business In This State : Any person having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other
affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed
or qualified to do business in this state.
Purchase At Retail : Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption,
and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-
11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 1, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or
sale of electricity.
Purchaser : Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the city, electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail, other than from an exempt purchaser.
Tax Collector : The person delivering electricity to the purchaser. (Ord. 82-48, § 4, 11-22-1982; Ord.
85-19, § 1, 7-8-1985; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998; Ord. 70-2002, § 2, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-37. Imposed:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
(1) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the city and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%)
of the gross receipts therefrom. For bills issued on or after March 1, 2001, up to and including August
31, 2001, said five percent (5%) tax rate shall be reduced to three and two-tenths percent (3.2%).
Thereafter the five percent (5%) tax rate shall resume, unless extended by action of the city council.
(2) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use
or consumption within the corporate limits of the city and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts therefrom, excluding, however, from those gross receipts, receipts
collected for street lighting at the municipal rate. The tax imposed under this section shall not apply
with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of
electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under
subsection (3) of this section.
(3) a. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 2 and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase
at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
1. For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.4539 cents per kilowatt-hour;
2. For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2977 cents per kilowatthour;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 418/735
3. For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2679 cents per kilowatthour;
4. For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2604 cents per kilowatthour;
5. For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2530 cents per kilowatthour;
6. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2381 cents per kilowatthour;
7. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2344 cents per kilowatthour;
8. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2307 cents per kilowatthour;
9. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2270 cents per kilowatthour;
10. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month; 0.2232 cents per kilowatt-hour.
b. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the city, the state
or any other political subdivision of the state.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the
extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United
States or the constitution of the state.
d. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential
customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after October 1, 1998; and with respect to the use
or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the public utilities act 3, or the
first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
(Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 86-48, 9-15-1986; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998; Ord. 98-72, § 1, 9-28-
1998; Ord. 09-2001, § 1, 2-5-2001; Ord. 20-2001, § 1, 2-26-2001; Ord. 70-2002, § 2, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-37.1. Collection Of Tax:
(a)Subject to the provision of section 15-37.3 of this article regarding the delivery of electricity to
resellers, the tax imposed under this article shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity.
(b)Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt
owed to the city by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written
off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 419/735
(c)Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross
charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request. (Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-37.2. Tax Remittance And Return:
(a)Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return on a form prescribed by the city. The return
and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the
month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under section 15-37.1 of this
article.
(b)If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from
collecting the tax under section 15-37.3 of this article, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form
prescribed by the city and pay the tax directly to the city on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. (Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-37.3. Resales:
(a)Electricity that is delivered to a person in the city shall be considered to be for use and consumption
by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the
city clerk and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that
person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
(b)If a person who receives electricity in the city claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that
person shall apply to the city clerk for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such
additional information as the city clerk may reasonably require.
(c)Upon approval of the application the city clerk shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall
certify the number to the applicant.
(d)The city clerk may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable
under this article for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained
through misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued
making resales.
(e)(1) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller
shall pay the tax imposed by this article directly to the city pursuant to subsection 15-37.1(b) of this
article on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to section 15-37 of this article and remit the tax pursuant to subsection 15-37.2(a) of this
article on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
(2) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying
with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any
portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the city the total
amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the city may reasonably
require. (Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-37.4. Books And Records:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by subsection 15-37(3) of this
article shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 420/735
books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day. (Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-38. Certain Businesses Exempt:
No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord.
98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998; Ord. 70-2002, § 2, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-39. Tax Additional To Franchise Fee, Etc.:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this
municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public place, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment
used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-40. Returns:
(a)On or before February 28, 1983, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city finance director for the
month of January 1983, stating:
(1) His name.
(2) His principal place of business.
(3) His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
(4) Amount of tax.
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city finance
director for a corresponding one month period.
(b)The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the
city finance director the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the
taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such bills and
the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-41. Credit For Overpayment:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this
article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a
claim therefor, shall be so credited. If a taxpayer under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized
by this section solely because the tax imposed by this chapter has been replaced by the tax imposed
under subsection 15-37(3) of this chapter then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due
under subsection 15-37(3) of this chapter. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 421/735
Sec. 15-42. Statute Of Limitations:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 98-61, § 1,
8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-43. Penalties:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any
other provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition
shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 82-48, 11-22-1982; Ord. 98-61, § 1, 8-24-
1998)
Secs. 15-44-15-50. Reserved:
ARTICLE IV. HOTEL-MOTEL TAX
Sec. 15-51. Definitions:
For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used
herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
Hotel Or Motel Room : A room within a structure offered for rental on a daily basis and containing
facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be
considered as a single hotel or motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall
be computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
Owner : Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a hotel or motel
room or receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room.
Person : Any natural person; trustee; court-appointed representative; syndicate; association;
partnership; firm; club; company; corporation; business trust; institution; agency; government
corporation; municipal corporation, district, or other political subdivision; contractor; supplier; vendor;
vendor operator; user or owner; or any officers, agents, employees, or other representatives of any of
the above, acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity; or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is
included in any circumstances. (Ord. 84-68, 12-27-1984)
Sec. 15-52. Tax Imposed:
(a)There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of six percent (6%) of the rent charged for the privilege of
renting and use of a hotel or motel room within the city for each twenty four (24) hour period or any
portion thereof for which a daily room charge is made; for any hotel or motel which has sixty (60)
rooms or less available for rental. For any motel or hotel with sixty one (61) or more rooms available
for rental there is hereby levied and imposed a tax of seven percent (7%) of the rent charged for the
privilege of renting and use of a hotel or motel room within the city for each twenty four (24) hour
period for which a daily room charge is made. The previously described hotel and motel tax shall not
be levied and imposed upon anyone who rents a room for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or
to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 422/735
(b)The ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of such tax is to be borne by the person who seeks
the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room such person hereafter referred to as "renter".
(c)The tax herein shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of
the owner of every hotel or motel to secure the tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and to
pay over to the finance director of the city the tax under procedures prescribed by the finance
director, or as otherwise provided in this article.
(d)Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall secure said tax from the renter at
the time he collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel room. (Ord. 84-68, 12-27-1984; Ord. 91-
12, 2-11-1991; Ord. 003-2010, § 2, 1-18-2010; Ord. 011-2010, § 2, 3-8-2010)
Sec. 15-53. Books And Records:
The finance director may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of
records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this article, and to assure the enforcement of
the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the finance director in the discharge of his duties in the performance of this article. It shall be the duty of
every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the finance director shall at all
times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
(1) The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24) hour period, including
multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room where such shall occur; and
(2) The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collection for the date in question. (Ord. 84-68, § 1(3), 12-
27-1984)
Sec. 15-54. Transmittal Of Tax Revenue:
(a)Commencing on March 1, 1985, the owner or owners of each hotel or motel room with the City shall
file tax returns showing tax receipts and will file tax monies collected with respect to each hotel and
motel room during each month commencing on or after February 1, 1985. The return shall be due on
or before the last day of each succeeding calendar month and the return shall indicate for what
period the return is filed, i.e., the return filed on or before the last day of February shall indicate that it
is for tax receipts for the period January 1 to January 31, inclusive. If the owner's average monthly
tax receipts do not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) when using as a minimum the last six (6)
consecutive months for a database, the Finance Director may authorize the owners to file the return
on a quarterly basis, with the return for January, February, and March of a given year being due on or
before April 30 of such year; with the return for April, May and June of a given year being due on or
before July 31 of such year; with the return for July, August and September of a given year being due
on or before October 31 of such year; and the return for October, November and December of a
given year being due on or before January 31 of the following year.
(b)If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent
(5%) of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that the late payment
penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed. (Ord. 84-68, 12-27-1984; Ord. 058-2018, 10-8-
2018)
Sec. 15-55. Collection:
Whenever any person fails to pay any tax as herein provided, the City Attorney, upon the request of the
Finance Director, shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on
behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 84-68, 12-27-1984)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 423/735
Sec. 15-56. Penalties:
(a)Any person found guilty of failing to pay, collect, report, or transmit the Hotel or Motel Tax to the
Finance Director in accordance with the terms of this article shall, except when otherwise specifically
provided, be guilty of an offense, and upon the first conviction therefor within a two (2) year calendar
period be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two
hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00) and upon the second and third convictions therefor within the
same period be punished by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b)Repeated offenses of this article in excess of three (3) within any two (2) calendar years shall
constitute misdemeanors and upon conviction therefor shall be punished by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), incarceration in a place other than a penitentiary for a term not to
exceed thirty (30) days, or both.
Secs. 15-57 - 15-59. Reserved:
ARTICLE V. MOTOR FUEL TAX
Sec. 15-60. Definitions:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein,
they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
Bulk User: Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage facilities located within the
City, which facilities are owned, leased or controlled by that person, for subsequent dispensing into the
supply tanks of internal combustion engines operated by that person.
Gasohol: A fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which is comprised chiefly of gasoline and
ethyl alcohols in variable quantities.
Gasoline Or Diesel Fuel: A volatile, highly flammable or combustible, liquid mixture of hydrocarbons
produced by the fractional distillation of petroleum and used chiefly as a fuel in internal combustion
engines, but shall not include mixtures commonly known as kerosene and aviation fuel, or mixtures used
in the heating of buildings.
Motor Fuel: "Gasohol" and gasoline and diesel fuel as defined in this section.
Person: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership,
firm, club, company, corporation, business, trust, institution, agency, contractor, supplier, vendor,
vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other representative acting either
for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstances.
Retail Gasoline Dealer: Any person who engages in the business of selling motor fuel in the City to a
purchaser for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
Sale, Resale, Selling: Any transfer of ownership or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional
or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a valuable consideration. (Ord. 87-21, 3-
23-1987)
Sec. 15-61. Tax Imposed:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 424/735
(a)There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor fuel, or fraction
thereof, sold at retail within the corporate limits of the City, irrespective of the unit of measure in
which it is actually sold, a tax at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per gallon effective February 1, 2019.
The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
(b)The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the retail purchase of
motor fuel. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of persons
engaged in the retail sale of motor fuel.
(c)It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure the tax from the purchaser at the time the
dealer collects the purchase price for the motor fuel and to pay over the tax to the City Finance
Department, as provided in this article except in the case of a sale to a bulk user, in which case the
bulk user shall pay over the tax to the Finance Department as provided in this article.
(d)A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales with respect to which he is otherwise required to
collect the tax when the sale is made to the Federal government, the State, any municipality, or any
unit of local government as those terms are defined by section 1 of article VII of the Constitution of
the State of Illinois, 1970, or any school district. (Ord. 87-21, 3-23-1987; Ord. 003-2010, 1-18-2010;
Ord. 011-2010, 3-8-2010; Ord. 053-2017, 12-18-2017; Ord. 075-2018, 12-17-2018)
Sec. 15-62. Tax And Report Transmittal:
(a)Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the Finance Department for receipt by that department,
no later than the last day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the amount of Motor Fuel
Tax collected for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by the report upon forms supplied by
the Finance Department indicating the gross gallons of motor fuel sold for the preceding calendar
month, and such other information as the Finance Department may require for enforcement of this
article.
(b)Every bulk user shall transmit to the Finance Department for receipt by that department, no later than
the last day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the amount of Motor Fuel Tax owning
for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the Finance
Department indicating the gross gallons of motor fuel purchased for the preceding calendar month,
and such other information as the Finance Department may require for enforcement of this Article.
(Ord. 87-21, § 1, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 15-63. Records, Inspections:
(a)Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and accurate records, including a daily sheet
showing the gross gallons of motor fuel sold for each day, and the amount of motor fuel tax collected
on each day.
(b)Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases, the gross gallons purchased
on each of those dates, and the names and addresses of the retail gasoline dealers from whom each
of the purchases were made.
(c)For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Article, the Finance Department shall have the
right to inspect all books, records and reports of retail gasoline dealers and bulk users during their
normal business hours. (Ord. 87-21, § 1, 3-23-1987)
Sec. 15-64. Accounting:
The Finance Department shall deliver the proceeds of the motor fuel tax imposed by this Article to the
Finance Director for deposit to the General Fund. (Ord. 87-21, § 1, 3-23-1987)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 425/735
Sec. 15-65. Penalty, Interest On Delinquent Taxes, Enforcement:
(a)Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
the first offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each
subsequent offense committed within any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Each day during
which such violation continues shall be regarded as a separate punishable offense.
(b)If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent
(5%) of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that the late payment
penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed.
(c)Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, or otherwise violates any provision
of this article, the City Attorney shall bring or cause to be brought an action on behalf of the City in
any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this article and collect any delinquent tax, interest and
penalties. (Ord. 87-21, 3-23-1987; Ord. 058-2018, 10-8-2018)
Sec. 15-66. Effective Date, Severability:
(a)The motor fuel tax shall be levied, imposed and collected from and after the effective date of this
Article.
(b)If any one or more provisions of this Article, or any clause, sentence or paragraph thereof, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Article and
the application of such provisions or clause, sentence or paragraph thereof as to other persons, or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 87-21, § 1, 3-23-1987)
Secs. 15-67-15-69. Reserved:
ARTICLE VI. GAS USE TAX
Sec. 15-70. Title:
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Rock Island Gas Use Tax Ordinance". The tax shall
be known as the "Rock Island Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
City, the State, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State. (Ord. 98-62, § 1,
8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-71. Definitions:
When any of the following words or terms are used in this Article, it shall have the meaning ascribed to it
in this Section:
City : City of Rock Island, Illinois.
Department Or Department Of Revenue : The Department of Finance of the City.
Director Or Director Of Finance : The Director of Finance of the City.
Manager : The City Manager of the City.
Person : Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 426/735
State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by the order of any court.
Public Utilities Act : The Public Utilities Act, as amended, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et
seq.
Public Utility : A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
Retail Purchaser : Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
Rock Island Utility Tax : The tax imposed by Section 15-36 et seq. of this Chapter on persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas.
Sale At Retail : Any sale by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this
purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-72. Tax Imposed:
(a)Except as otherwise provided by this Section, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming
in the City gas that is purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at the rate of $0.015 per therm.
(b)The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in
this Article shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
selling or transporting gas.
(c)The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's
premises: 1) to the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section 15-74 of this Article
on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or 2) directly to the
Department on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas
is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant
to Section 15-74 of this Article or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
(d)The tax shall not apply to the use or consumption of gas by: 1) a person purchasing the gas for use in
operating or propelling a vehicle, or vehicle fuel, as that term is defined by this Code, or 2) a public
utility engaged in the business of distributing gas.
(e)To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the City by a retail purchaser properly subject to a tax
imposed by any state or by the City or any other municipality with respect to the sale at retail of such
gas, whether such tax is imposed: 1) upon the retail purchaser, or 2) upon the seller and separately
charged to the retail purchaser by the seller, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Article. For
purposes of this subsection only, any charge imposed on a retail purchaser pursuant to section 9-221
or section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act with respect to a sale at retail shall be treated as a tax
properly imposed on the retail purchaser by the State or by this City or other municipality.
(f)A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this article
with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the
gas, shall pay the tax directly to the department on or before the fifteenth day of the second month
following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
(g)Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which,
under the constitution of the United States or state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation
by the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 427/735
(h)The tax shall apply to a gas for which the delivery to the customer is billed by a public utility after
August 31, 1998. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-73. Complementary Relation To Rock Island Utility Tax:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not apply to the use or consumption of
gas if the gross receipts from the sale of the gas would not be taxable under the Rock Island utility tax
despite all elements of the sale occurring in the city. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-74. Collection Of Tax:
(a)The director is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this article with
any public utility providing gas service in the city. The contract shall include and substantially conform
with the following provisions: 1) the public utility will collect the tax with respect to gas delivered by it
to its customers as an independent contractor; 2) the public utility will remit collected taxes to the
department no more often than once each month; 3) the public utility will be entitled to withhold from
tax collections a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely remitted
to the department; 4) the public utility will treat partial payments received from a customer as
payments made pro rata for each item or charge billed to the customer, including the tax imposed by
this article; 5) the obligation of the public utility to collect and remit the tax shall not apply to gas billed
by the public utility to a retail purchaser prior to a date two (2) months subsequent to the execution of
such contract; 6) the public utility shall not be liable to the city for any tax not actually collected from a
retail purchaser; 7) the public utility shall report to the city at least monthly a list of customers from
whom the tax is collected, the number of therms delivered and the weighted average cost of gas
calculation; and 8) such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
(b)A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this article from its customers shall bill each
customer for the tax on all gas delivered to the customer unless: 1) the customer's use or
consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant to section 15-72 of this article because the customer's
purchase of the gas is subject to a charge authorized by section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities
Act, or 2) the public utility has received a written certificate issued by the city authorizing the public
utility not to collect tax on deliveries to the customers. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-75. Books And Records:
(a)Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and
books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any
tax liability or exemption under this chapter. All such books and records shall be kept in the English
language and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the department.
(b)City shall have the right to audit the records of MidAmerican at reasonable times mutually agreeable
to MidAmerican and city concerning the customers from whom the tax is collected and the number of
therms delivered thereto. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-76. Rules And Regulations:
The director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this article. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
Sec. 15-77. Penalty Provision:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 428/735
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of
the provisions of this article or failing to remit the tax owed shall upon conviction thereof be punished by
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or five (5)
times the amount of tax imposed, whichever is greater. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded
as committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 98-62, § 1, 8-24-1998)
ARTICLE VII. TAX INCREMENT FINANCE
Sec. 15-78. Interested Parties Registration Rules:
(a)Definitions : As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth
below:
Act : The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
City : The city of Rock Island, a home rule unit of government under section 6(a) article VII of the
1970 Constitution of the state of Illinois.
Interested Party(s) : 1) Any organization(s) active within the city of Rock Island, 2) any residents of
the city of Rock Island, and 3) any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to register in
a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose registration has not been
terminated in accordance with these registration rules.
Redevelopment Project Area : A redevelopment project area that: 1) is intended to qualify (or has
subsequently qualified) as a "redevelopment project area" under the act; and 2) is subject to the
"interested parties" registry requirements of the act.
Registration Form : The form appended to these registration rules or such revised form as may be
approved by the city of Rock Island consistent with the requirements of the act.
Registry Or Registries : Each interested parties registry and all such registries, collectively,
established by the city of Rock Island pursuant to section 11-74.4-4.2 of the act for the
redevelopment project area.
(b)Establishment Of Registry : The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of these rules or
hereinafter established. The city shall establish a new registry whenever it has identified an area for
study and possible designation as a redevelopment project area. In any event the process of
establishing the new registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices
required by subsection (j) of this section or any other notices required by the act with respect to the
proposed redevelopment project area.
(c)Maintenance Of Registry : The registries shall be maintained by the community and economic
development director or his designee. In the event the city determines that a person other than the
community and economic development director should maintain registries the city may transfer the
responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other department provided the city gives prior
written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer and
publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(d)Registration By Residents : An individual seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the community and
economic development director or his designee. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 429/735
driver's license, lease, utility bill, financial statement or such other evidence as may be acceptable to
establish the individual's current city of Rock Island residency.
(e)Registration Of Organizations : An organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect
to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the community and
economic development director or his designee. Such organization must also submit a copy of a onepage
statement describing the organization's current operations in the city of Rock Island.
(f)Determination Of Eligibility : All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the applicable registry
within ten (10) business days of the community and economic development director's receipt of all
such documents. The community and economic development director shall provide written notice to
the registrant confirming such registration. Upon registration interested parties shall be entitled to
receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under these rules or as otherwise
required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the community
and economic development director determines that a registrant's registration form and/or supporting
documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the community and
economic development director shall give notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The
registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation.
(g)Renewal And Termination : An interested party's registration shall remain effective for a period of
three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period the city may provide written notice by
regular mail to the interested party stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested
party renews such registration within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the written notice. To renew
such registration, the interested party shall within a thirty (30) day period complete and submit the
same registration form and supporting documentation as required of initial registrants in order to
permit the community and economic development director to confirm such person's residency or
such organization's operations in the city of Rock Island. The registration of all individuals and
organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner
and complies with these registration rules shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three (3)
year period. If the community and economic development director determines that a registrant's
renewal registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with
these registration rules, the community and economic development director shall give written notice
to the registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such
registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defect(s) and
resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days of the interested party's receipt of the
community and economic development director's notice, the interested party's registration shall be
terminated. Any interested party whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as
if a first-time registrant.
(h)Amendment To Registration : An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice
to the community and economic development director by certified mail of any of the following: 1) a
change in address for notice purposes; 2) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the
contact person; and 3) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such notice, the community and
economic development director shall revise the applicable registry accordingly.
(i)Registries Available For Public Inspection : Each registry shall be available for public inspection during
normal city business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone number of
each interested party and for organizations the name and telephone number of the designated
contact person.
(j)Noninterference : These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the
ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of information to which they are
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 430/735
entitled under the act.
(k)Amendment Of Registration Rules : These registration rules may be amended by the city of Rock
Island subject to and consistent with the requirements of the act.
(l)Registration Forms :
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION
FORM
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE
REGISTRATION FORM FOR
ORGANIZATION
If your organization is active in the City of Rock Island and would like to register on the
Interested Parties Registry for one or more tax increment financing (TIF) redevelopment project
areas, please complete this form. Please attach a one-page statement which describes the
organization's current operations in the city to this form.
Complete the following (please print):
Organization Name
Contact Person Name
Street Address
City State Zip Code
Telephone Fax
Please check the TIF's you are interested in:
 TIF District #1 - Downtown
 TIF District #2 - 11th Street South
 TIF District #3 - 11th Street North
Signature Date
This form can be mailed, faxed or delivered to:
TIF Interested Parties Registry
Community and Economic Development Department
City of Rock Island
1528 3rd Avenue
Rock Island, IL 61201
FAX 732-2930
Should you have questions or need additional information please call 732-2920.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION FORM
REGISTRATION FORM FOR RESIDENTS
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 431/735
If you are a City of Rock Island resident and would like to register on the Interested Parties Registry for
one or more tax increment financing (TIF) redevelopment project areas, please complete this form. Proof
of residency is required. Please attach a photocopy of one of the following: driver's license, lease, utility
bill, financial statement, or such other evidence as may be suitable to establish your current city
residency.
Complete the following (please print):
Name
Street Address
Zip Code Home Telephone
I have attached a copy of as proof that I am a resident of the City of Rock Island as of the date of this
registration form.
Please check the TIF(s) you are interested in
 TIF District #1 - Downtown
 TIF District #2 - 11th Street South
 TIF District #3 - 11th Street North
Signature Date
This form can be mailed, faxed or delivered to:
TIF Interested Parties Registry
Community and Economic Development Department
City of Rock Island
1528 3rd Avenue
Rock Island, IL 61201
FAX 732-2930
Should you have questions or need additional information please call 732-2920.
(Ord. 22-2000, § 3, 4-3-2000)
ARTICLE VIII. LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS
AND RESPONSIBILITY
Sec. 15-79. Title:
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE . (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-80. Scope:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 432/735
The provisions of this article shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's locally
imposed and administered taxes. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-81. Definitions:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
Act : The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
City : The city of Rock Island, Illinois.
Corporate Authorities : The city's mayor and city council.
Hearing Officer : Is as defined in section 4-147 of this code.
Local Tax Administrator : The city's finance director is charged with the administration and collection
of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article to give full effect to this
article. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
article and the act.
Locally Imposed And Administered Tax Or Tax : Each tax imposed by the city that is collected or
administered by the city not an agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes
imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the city other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
Notice : Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection
with each of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes.
Tax Ordinance : Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
Taxpayer : Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to
consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-82. Notices:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed
not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
(1) First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons'
last known address, or
(2) Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-83. Late Payment:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax
ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: 1) physically received by the city on or before the due
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 433/735
date, or 2) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 88-2000,
§ 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-84. Payment:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 1) first to the
tax due for the applicable period; 2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 3) third to
the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-85. Certain Credits And Refunds:
(a)The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of
payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the
taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(b)The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year in which payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
(c)The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or
penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
(1) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund
together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the
payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection
with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount
of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid;
provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the city.
(2) Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit,
the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or
the partial grant and denial.
(3) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the
amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum,
based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 434/735
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 88-
2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-86. Audit Procedure:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice
requirements of this article.
(1) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
a. The tax;
b. The time period of the audit; and
c. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
(2) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by
the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested
by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
(3) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be
conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In
the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the
taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
(4) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given
rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
(5) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for
inspection by the city. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on
the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
(6) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax
as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days of the city's determination of the amount of overpayment.
(7) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax
administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-
2000)
Sec. 15-87. Appeal:
(a)The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
(1) The reason for the assessment;
(2) The amount of the tax liability proposed;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 435/735
(3) The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
(4) The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
(b)A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due
or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for
hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written
notice of the tax determination and assessment.
(c)If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time
and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the
taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(d)If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
(e)Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax
liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may
reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90)
days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-88. Hearing:
(a)Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under
section 15-87 of this article, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct the hearing rather than the local tax
administrator.
(b)No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(c)At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
(d)At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector
shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-89. Interest And Penalties:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or
other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
(1) Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment,
underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of
three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
(2) Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 436/735
to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of
the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling
tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a
failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment
penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 88-
2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-90. Abatement:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment
penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for
delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-91. Installment Contracts:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the
controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered
unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax
administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14)
working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen
(14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 88-
2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-92. Statute Of Limitations:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner
and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after
receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due
and owing.
(1) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of
the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
(2) If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of
the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
(3) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 88-
2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-93. Voluntary Disclosure:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of
an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an
application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one
percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4)
years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 437/735
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application
was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be
deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90)
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest
previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-94. Publication Of Tax Ordinances:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing
requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city clerk's office.
(Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-95. Liens For Unpaid Taxes:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against
any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid,
the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax
administrator shall:
(1) Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
(2) Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
(3) Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-96. Application:
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the city's tax ordinances.
To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be
controlling. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-97. Severability:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this article shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any
reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of
the remaining provisions of this article. (Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
Sec. 15-98. Effective Date:
This article shall be in full force and effect, after passage, approval and publication as required by law.
(Ord. 88-2000, § 1, 12-18-2000)
ARTICLE IX. SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Sec. 15-99. Definitions:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 438/735
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Amount Paid: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of
where such amount is billed or paid.
Department: The Illinois department of revenue.
Gross Charge: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in
this municipality and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued
in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense
whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
"Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within this
municipality, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within this municipality, and
charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross
charge" shall not include:
(1) Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: a) the tax
imposed by this article, b) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, c) the tax
imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, d) 911 surcharges, or e) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as
amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate
regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities
or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
(2) Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
(3) Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content.
Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers
under a time sharing agreement;
(4) Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the
customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from
other charges;
(5) Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities
act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the department of
commerce and community affairs;
(6) Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to
the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not
the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
(7) Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible,
as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be
bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting
period in which the payment is made);
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 439/735
(8) Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
(9) Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee act.
Interstate Telecommunications: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this
state.
Intrastate Telecommunications: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
Purchase At Retail: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined
in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the
satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax.
Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this
state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of
business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
Retailer Maintaining A Place Of Business In This State (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
Sale At Retail: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and
state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or
consumption and not for resale.
Service Address: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications
services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event
this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground systems and the like, "service address"
shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
Taxpayer: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax
liability as authorized by this article.
Telecommunications: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without
limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange
services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 440/735
paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this article,
"private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the
customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or
more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications"
shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications
resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling
arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this
article. For purposes of this article, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined
in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-100. Tax Imposed:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
(1) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
(2) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due
and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or
local tax in this state.
(3) The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or
privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the municipality. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-101. Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
(a)The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place
of business in this state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state.
Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed
by the department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the
retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
(b)Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item
separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 441/735
Sec. 15-102. Returns To Department:
On or before the last day of February 2003, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the
tax imposed under this article on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms
and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and
regulations created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-103. Resellers:
(a)If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such
telecommunications, such person shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such applicant
shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the
department may reasonably require.
(b)Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and
shall certify such number to the applicant. The department may cancel any number which is obtained
through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free
when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person having
discontinued the making of resales.
(c)Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the grounds of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because
of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-104. Severability:
If any provision of this article, or the application of any provision of this article, is held unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this article, or their application, that
can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each
unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise
provided by this article. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-105. Effective Date:
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as
required by law, provided, however, that: 1) sections 2 and 3 shall take effect for all bills issued on or
after January 1, 2003, 2) the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all bills issued on or after
January 1, 2003, and 3) any amounts due or payable to the municipality for any tax periods ending prior
to January 1, 2003, shall nevertheless remain payable as if this article had not been adopted. Copies of
ordinance 70-2002 shall be certified and sent to the Illinois department of revenue prior to October 1,
2002. (Ord. 70-2002, § 4, 8-26-2002)
Sec. 15-106. Repealer:
If the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason,
or if this article is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then the provisions repealed in
ordinance 82-48, 11-22-1982, ordinance 85-19, § 1, 7-8-1985, ordinance 86-48, 9-15-1986, ordinance
97-81, 10-6-1997, ordinance 98-61, § 1, 8-24-1998, ordinance 98-72, § 1, 9-28-1998, ordinance 09-
2001, § 1, 2-5-2001, ordinance 20-2001, § 1, 2-26-2001, as they apply to telecommunications taxes,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 442/735
shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the date the simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act or this article is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 70-2002, §§ 2, 3, 8-26-2002)
ARTICLE X. PREPARED FOOD AND LIQUOR TAX
Sec. 15-107. Definitions:
For the purpose of this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or terms shall
have the meanings respectively applied to them:
Liquor : Any "alcohol", "spirits", "wine" or "beer" as defined, set forth and regulated in chapter 3 of this
code, which is sold at retail either for consumption on the premises where sold or is sold in its original
package for consumption off the premises.
Prepared Food Facility : Establishments subject to the licensing requirements of chapter 7 of this code
as a food service establishment which sells prepared food at retail for immediate consumption and which
provides for on and/or off premises consumption whether or not such facility is conducted along with any
other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment.
(a) "Prepared food facility" does not include food store (except facilities therein which sell prepared
food and liquor), churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, daycare centers, nursing
homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities or programs for the central preparation
of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of invalids or the elderly, coin operated
automatic food item dispensing machines, hospital (except facilities therein, subject to the state of
Illinois retailer occupation tax pertaining to food sales) and facilities of not for profit associations or
corporations.
Prepared Foods : Any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic liquid), powder or other
food substance used, or intended to be used, for human consumption, and which has been prepared for
immediate consumption on and/or off the premises.
Purchase At Retail : To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in the
form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale.
Retailer : Any person who sells or offers for sale, prepared food and/or liquor for use and not for resale.
Retailer Liquor Facility : Any establishment licensed under the provisions of chapter 3 of this code. (Ord.
10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-108. Tax Imposed:
Commencing on April 1, 2011, a tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the
purchase of prepared foods and liquor at retail at any prepared food facility or liquor facility within the city
of Rock Island, at the rate of 1.5 percent of the sales price of such prepared food and liquor, the ultimate
incidence of any liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser. (Ord. 009-2011, 2-14-
2011)
Sec. 15-109. Collection Of Tax By Retailer:
The owner and operator of each prepared food facility and each liquor facility within the city of Rock
Island shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and account for the tax from each purchase at
the time that the consideration for the purchase is made. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 443/735
Sec. 15-110. Books And Records:
The owner and operator of each prepared food facility and each liquor facility within the city of Rock
Island shall jointly and severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and
accounts, showing the gross receipts for sale of prepared food and liquor and the taxes collected each
day, which shall be made available to the city for examination and for audit by the city upon reasonable
notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-111. Transmission Of Tax Collection:
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each liquor facility within the city shall
jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed, a sworn return with the finance director for each
facility and for each licensed premises located in the city. The return shall be prepared and submitted on
forms prescribed by the city and filed on or before the last day of the calendar month next succeeding
the month for which the return is made. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the city of
all taxes imposed by this article, which are due and owing for the period covered by the return. The
return shall also be accompanied by a copy of the return filed with the Illinois department of revenue for
sales within the city of Rock Island covering the same reporting period. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-112. Late Payment Penalty:
If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent (5%)
of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that the tax remains unpaid and
the late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-113. Transmittal Of Excess Tax Collections:
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is
purported to be the collection of the tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the
amount of the tax imposed herein and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid it
before filing the return for the period in which it occurred, that person shall account for and pay over
those amounts to the city of Rock Island along with the tax properly collected. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-
2004)
Sec. 15-114. Enforcement License Suspension, Revocation:
Payment and collection of the tax and any late payment penalty may be enforced by action in any court
of competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over the tax and any late payment
penalty shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any city license issued for the prepared food
facility or liquor facility applicable to the premises thereof, all in addition to any other penalties in this
chapter. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-115. Rules And Regulations:
The finance director of the city of Rock Island may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this article concerning the enforcement and application of this article. The term
"rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination whether or not the
tax imposed by this articles applies. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Sec. 15-116. Penalty:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 444/735
Any person operating a prepared food facility or a liquor facility within the city failing or omitting to pay
the tax when due, or failing or omitting to collect, or to account for, or to pay over the tax and any late
payment penalty, or failing to maintain or allow examination of the books and records provided herein or
elsewhere by law or ordinance, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 10-2004, § 1, 1-26-2004)
Chapter 16
UTILITIES 1 2 3 Annotation-Where a water utility ordinance was strictly
enforced against one person but not against others of the same class, and
there was no irreparable injury, the property remedy was at law and not in
equity. City of Rock Island v. Wagner , 45 Ill. App. 444 (1892).
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Ordinances Not Affected By Code:
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any ordinance pertaining to specific
locations which requires a hookon charge for water or sewer service, which provides for the installation
of utilities underground or which authorizes a private sewer, and all such ordinances are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
(1963 Code, Ch. IX, Art. I)
Secs. 16-2-16-20. Reserved:
ARTICLE II. WATER 1
Sec. 16-21. Rules And Regulations For City Water Service:
The rules and regulations in this article shall be considered a part of the contract with every consumer of
city water and each consumer of city water shall be governed by and subject to the rules and
regulations; and it is hereby made the duty of the director of public works to enforce the same. (Ord. 18-
2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-22. Application For Water Service Connection:
(a)Application For Water Service: An application for water service connections and the installation of
water meters must be made at the office of the finance department of the city in the city hall, by the
owner or agent of the property to be served, upon forms furnished by that office. Such application
shall state the official house number or number of the premises and the size of the pipe required.
Every application for water supply shall state that the same is made subject to all rules and
regulations then in force or that may thereafter be adopted by the city.
(b)Owner To Sign All Applications: All applications for water service shall be signed by the owner of the
premises, or an agent or designee thereof, and such application shall contain an agreement to pay
all water service charges. Such application when accepted by the city collector shall constitute a
contract between the applicant and the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 445/735
(c)Contract Sale: The contract holder in contract sale of property shall be considered the owner of the
property and ultimately responsible for delinquent charges.
(d)Rental Property: The landlord of a property shall ultimately be responsible for delinquent charges
even if the service is in the name of the tenant. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002; Ord. 029-2008, § 1, 4-
21-2008)
Sec. 16-23. Connections To Be Made Under City Supervision:
The making of all service connections, laying pipes and setting of water service fixtures in streets and
public grounds shall be made by duly licensed plumbers working in compliance with the requirements of
permits issued by the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-24. Alteration Of Or Addition To Service Pipes:
No additions or alterations whatsoever in or about any service conduit, service pipe or water cock shall
be made by any person without a plumbing permit issued by the city. Whenever water service through
an existing service pipe is to be permanently discontinued for any reason, the existing service pipe shall
be disconnected at its connection to the water main and the curb box and stop must be removed at the
expense of the service owner. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-25. Separate Connections:
There shall be a separate service pipe laid from the main to each building. Such service pipe shall be
laid on a straight line at right angles to the water main and connections made within two (2) lines drawn
parallel to the sides of the building to be served. In the event that there is more than one water main
available to serve the building, the public works department will decide which water main to use. If the
city council determines a strict enforcement of this requirement to be unreasonable, a special permit
may be issued to the owner authorizing a variance to the provisions of this section. Where services are
laid to premises, where there are no water mains available for direct connection, a small temporary main
will be permitted to be laid as provided in section 16-33 of this article. In all cases each building served
must have an independent service shutoff. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-26. Service Outside City Limits:
Water service may be provided outside the city limits. In such cases that the property to be served is not
part of an incorporated municipality, water service may only be provided upon the approval of the city
council and the applicant therefor shall pay the cost of the extension of the water main and shall pay
double the water rate for all water furnished. In addition thereto, the plumbing to be serviced thereby
must be inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-27. Service Curb Cocks:
(a)A curb stop box, shutoff and related appurtenances within the building for controlling the supply of
water to consumers shall be placed on every service in accordance with the standard drawings
provided by the public works department. Any variation in the location for setting of such stop boxes,
as herein provided for, shall be made only when authorized by the director of public works.
(b)Whenever a meter cannot be set on the premises without danger of freezing, difficulty of reading or
other cause detrimental to service by the public works department, the director of public works may
demand the installation of an outside meter box and shutoff, the type to be designated by him.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 446/735
(c)The outside shutoff and stop box shall be under the sole control of the city public works department
and no person except an employee or person specifically authorized by the city public works
department shall open the cover of such box, turn on or off water or interfere with a service curb cock
in any way. However, licensed plumbers may turn on or off the water for testing plumbing or making
repairs, but whenever so used the shut off must be left closed if found closed and open if found open
by the plumber who uses it.
(d)The valves, curb box and shutoff must be kept in good condition and ready for use at all times by the
property owner. Should the property owner neglect to maintain such valves, curb box and shutoff in
proper condition to be used, and if the stop box is found to be filled up, or the stop box or shutoff is
found to be out of repair at any time, the city public works department shall have the right to clean or
repair the same when needed without giving notice, and charge the cost thereof to the owner, and if
payment is refused, may turn off the water in the service until the same is paid. The city will not be
responsible for any damage due to the breaking of a service or stopcock, done while setting,
resetting or repairing a water meter, or turning water off or on.
(e)Owners of premises having water services which do not have separate curb stopcocks and boxes for
each building, or which otherwise do not conform to the requirements in this section at the time of its
passage, shall be required to put in such curb stopcock or make such other changes as are
necessary to conform to these requirements when so instructed by the public works department.
(Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-28. Service Pipe:
The water service pipe from the water main to the water meter shall be constructed in accordance with
the standard drawings provided by the public works department. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-29. Connection Between Different Services:
When there are two (2) or more services on premises, the piping from each service must be kept
separate, and no connection made from one to the other. If the city council determines that the strict
enforcement of this requirement is unreasonable, a special permit may be issued to the owner
authorizing a variance. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-30. Maintenance Of Service Pipes:
All service pipes and fixtures from the street water main to the premises, including the corporation cocks
at the mains and the valves on each side of the meter, shall be installed and maintained at the expense
of the property owners, and any leaks or other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by them. If
the defects are not properly repaired within ten (10) days after written notice, the water may be turned off
by the public works department until such repairs have been made and the expense thereof shall be
charged against such owner and must be paid before water shall be turned on again. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1,
3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-31. Breaks In Service Or Fixtures:
The city shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, water
coil or for failure in the supply of water. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-32. Right To Shut Off Or Turn On Water:
The city may, when necessary, without notice, shut off or turn on the water in its mains for any purpose
and no claims shall be made against the city by reason of the breakage of any service pipe, service
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 447/735
cock, or from any other damage that may result from improper fixtures, open or improper connections or
for any other causes. The public works department shall give notice of shutting off water if conditions are
such that it is reasonably possible to do so. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-33. Temporary Mains:
No temporary water mains shall be allowed in the city except as provided by special ordinance passed
by the city council. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-34. Water Rates Established:
(a)Generally: The rates for water used by every person using water from or through the city waterworks
shall be as determined from time to time by the city council, and shall be paid by the owner of the
premises where the water is taken.
(b)Unmetered Water Rates: The quantity of use of unmetered water shall be estimated by the building
official and the rate paid for such use shall be the same as that charged general customers. It shall
be the duty of the building official to collect fees for water used by builders in all building operations.
(Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-35. City Collector To Have Charge Of Collections:
The city collector shall have charge of the collection of all water and/or sewerage service bills. The city
collector shall give a receipt for all monies so paid to him. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-36. Bills And Collection Policies:
(a)Billings For Water Service: Billings for water service shall be rendered by the finance department on a
monthly or quarterly basis at the discretion of the finance department.
(b)When A Bill Is Delinquent: If a bill for water service remains unpaid for thirty (30) days or more after it
is rendered, the city may shut off water service to the property. If the city thereafter records a lien with
the recorder of deeds for the delinquent charges incurred, any subsequent purchaser who takes title
to the property after the lien is recorded, is responsible for payment of all the delinquent charges and
penalties. If water service has been shut off and a lien has been recorded prior to the new purchaser
taking title to the property, water service shall not be restored to the property until all delinquent
charges and penalties, including shutoff charges, have been paid in full and arrangements for
restoring service has been made with the city. If a subsequent purchaser of the property takes title
after the delinquent charges have been incurred by the prior owner, but before the city records a lien
for these unpaid charges, the subsequent purchaser shall not be responsible for payment of the
delinquent charges and, if applicable, water service shall be reinstated to the property. Any unpaid
charges for water service incurred by a prior owner where a lien has not been filed before the
property is sold or transferred to a bona fide purchaser are the responsibility of the prior owner, and
the city retains the right to seek repayment of those charges by means available to it by law.
(c)Notice Of Shutoff For Nonpayment: When city records reflect that premises are occupied, the water to
those premises shall not be shut off for nonpayment without giving at least five (5) days' notice to the
persons residing therein. The notice shall be given by contacting the persons occupying the premises
personally, or by posting on the front door or in a public hallway of the property, notice of the
proposed shutoff action by the city. The notice shall comply with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
735/1.2 et seq. A fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall be charged for each shutoff notice.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 448/735
(d)Monthly Bills: The city collector may put any water service on a monthly payment basis, if it is judged
to be in the best interest of the city to do so. In such cases the bills shall be due not less than fifteen
(15) days following the date of the statement.
(e)Late Fee: When water bills are not paid on or before the due date stated on the bill, a penalty of five
percent (5%) shall be added. Failure to receive a bill does not entitle the owner or customer to a
remission of penalty.
(f)Billing To Address Other Than Service Address: Written notice must be given by the owner or
authorized agent if it is desired that bills be forwarded to any other address than the premises
supplied.
(g)Payment In Advance: The city shall have full power and authority to require payment in advance for
the use of water furnished by it in and upon any building, place or premises, and in case prompt
payment for the same shall not be made, it may shut off the water from such building, place or
premises and shall not be compelled again to supply the building, place or premises with water until
arrears together with the costs and expense of turning the water off and on shall be fully paid.
(h)Special Service Bill: All bills for installation of special water service connections or service repairs,
special meter reading services and for the installation and repair of meters shall be payable to the
city collector as soon as such work is completed and the bill is rendered, and if the bills are not
promptly paid, the city water supply may be turned off by the city until all such bills have been paid.
(i)Combined Bill; Partial Payment: The water charge may be billed on a common statement and
collected along with other charges. If the water charge is included on a common statement and the
customer payment is insufficient to pay the total of all portions of the statement, the payment will be
applied according to the priority shown in section 13-41 of this code.
(j)Issuance Of Bills: All water and sewer accounts will be billed as soon as possible after readings are
obtained. Each bill will be due not less than fifteen (15) days after its issuance.
(k)Average Bills: If a current reading is not obtained, an average bill will be issued, based upon the
consumption history of the account. If for any reason adequate history is not available, a bill will be
issued for two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet of consumption. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-
2002; Ord. 029-2008, § 2, 4-21-2008; Ord. 009-2010, § 1, 2-8-2010; Ord. 065-2012, 10-15-2012;
Ord. 091-2014, 12-15-2014)
Sec. 16-37. Adjustment Of Water Charges:
In any case of a dispute over the amount of a bill, or over the accuracy of a meter, the city shall at the
request of the consumer test the meter, in the presence of the consumer or his agent. If it is found upon
such test that the meter registers a greater amount of water than has actually passed through said meter
(allowing 2 1/2 percent for accuracy) the bill will be adjusted to conform with the correct amount passing
through the meter. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-38. Responsibility In Turning On Water Services:
In turning on water services, the city shall not be responsible for any damage that may occur by reason
of improper fixtures, open or improper connections or for any other causes. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-
2002)
Sec. 16-39. Discontinued Use Of Water:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 449/735
Owners or customers desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give notice thereof to the city
collector, who shall cause the water to be turned off and the meter removed. When water service is
discontinued, all water and sewer charges for such service shall become due and payable. A service
charge shall be made at the time service is discontinued, either at the customer's request, or for
nonpayment of charges. A charge fixed by the city council from time to time shall be made for every
special reading requested by a customer. The city may withhold water supply until all unpaid bills against
the property have been paid. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-40. Water Meters:
(a)All water furnished consumers shall be metered other than water used for construction purposes paid
for pursuant to subsection 16-34(a) of this article. All meters shall be furnished and set by the city or
a licensed and registered plumber but owners must provide a suitable location in the piping system
for same. Meters shall be placed on service pipes in accordance with the standard drawings provided
by the public works department. There shall be a suitable place provided for the meter so as to keep
it dry and clean, protected from freezing, and readily accessible at all times to the city. All valves and
fittings necessary to comply with the requirements and to provide connection to the meter, except a
coupling or flange at each end of meter, shall be provided by the owner of premises to be served.
(b)For services larger than two inches (2") in diameter, the city reserves the right to install two (2) or
more meters of smaller size. Where meters are so placed, each meter shall have a valve or shutoff
on both inlet and outlet pipe in addition to the basement shutoff.
(c)Where a service pipe larger than two inches (2") in diameter is used, the plumber shall call at the
public works department for instructions regarding the fittings and space to be provided for the water
meters.
(d)In case two (2) or more meters are desired for measuring water to different tenants in the same
building from one service connection, they shall be so placed that no one of them shall measure
water which has passed through another one. Each meter shall be equipped with a separate locking
shutoff.
(e)Water meters shall be of the size and type necessary to ensure accurate registration of the water
requirements of the premises. Size of meters for large buildings, apartments or flats shall be
designated by the city at the time of application for water supply, the size of meters so specified by
the city being always subject to change, from time to time, thereafter as the demand or other
conditions may develop to be out of accord with the provisions of this article. The city reserves the
right to require an increase in the size of the meter, as in these rules provided, in any case where, in
the discretion of the city, the use of water in larger quantities places any meter under undue or
unusual strain. The size of the meter which shall in either event be required shall be determined by
the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-41. Owners To Protect Meters:
(a)The owner or occupant of premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care
and protection from freezing or hot water and from other injury or interference from any person or
persons. In case of any injury to the meter, or in case of its stoppage or imperfect working, he shall
give immediate notice to the office of the finance department. In all cases in which meters are broken
or damaged by negligence of owners or occupants on premises, or by freezing, hot water or any
other injuries, the necessary repairs to all city owned meters shall be made by the city, and the costs
of such repairs paid for by the owner or occupant. The charge shall be based on the amount of
damage at the current parts and labor cost, not to exceed the cost of a new meter. If the meter is
found to be damaged beyond repair, it shall be billed at the current price of a new meter; the cost of
such repairs shall be paid for by such owner or occupant, and in case payment thereof is neglected
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 450/735
or refused, the water supply shall be turned off and shall not be turned on until full payment has been
made, including a fee fixed by the city for turning on the water again. Damaged meters may be
repaired by the city without first giving notice thereof to the owner of the premises served by such
meter.
(b)No person shall in any way interfere with the proper registration of a water meter, and no person
except an authorized employee of the city shall break a seal of a meter; however, in case of
emergency a plumber registered in the city may break such seal for draining pipes or stopping water
leaks. The plumber shall notify the public works department of this action the next regular business
day after breaking the seal and explain the nature of the emergency.
(c)Whenever a water meter is installed on a water service on premises that are to be remodeled,
removed or destroyed, or where the service is discontinued so that the water meter is no longer
needed, the owner of such premises shall give notice to the finance department to remove such
meter, and free access to such meter must be provided at least twenty four (24) hours after notice is
given so that the meter may be removed. The owner of the premises shall be held responsible for the
meter until such written notice is given, and if the meter is covered or lost, he shall be required to pay
for the same at the actual value. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-42. Repairing Meters:
(a)Right Of Entry: The city reserves the right at any reasonable time to enter any premises supplied by
the city water and exchange any meter, for repairs or other cause, as may be deemed necessary by
the city.
(b)Meters Out Of Order: If any meter, at any time, fails to register the quantity of water consumed, the
same shall be determined and charges made based on the average quantity registered during the
last preceding year prior to the date of failure, as the city collector shall order and direct. If an
average is not available, a bill will be issued for two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet of
consumption.
(c)Leakage: No deduction shall be made on account of leakage after the water has passed through and
been registered by the meter. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-43. Unlawful To Obstruct Meters, Etc.:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the access of any stopcock, hydrant, water meter, dial or valve
connected with any water pipes within the city by means of any rubbish, refuse, building material, fuel or
any other article, thing or hindrance, particularly the obstruction of meters that will interfere with the
ready access to a meter at any and all times. Neglecting to comply with this provision, the consumer at
once becomes liable and the city water supply will be turned off at the street, after notice has been
given, until the obstruction shall be removed. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-44. Water Lien For Unpaid Water Fees:
Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the
unpaid charges can result in the city taking steps to file a lien with the recorder of deeds reflecting
nonpayment of those charges. Prior to filing a lien, the city shall prepare and send in accordance with
state law, a delinquency notice to the owner of record of the property receiving the water service,
advising the owner that the water fees have become delinquent and that nonpayment of the outstanding
charges and penalties may create a lien on the property. Said notice of delinquency shall advise the
owner that he or she has seven (7) days from the date of mailing of the notice to pay all amounts owed
or else a notice of lien will be filed with the recorder of deeds. Said lien shall include any unpaid fees for
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 451/735
services rendered to the property after the mailing of the notice of delinquency. (Ord. 066-2012, 10-15-
2012)
Sec. 16-45. Molestation Or Injury To Water Mains:
(a)Any person who may be working in any street of this city who may molest or in any way damage the
city water mains, or appurtenances thereto, shall be responsible to the city for any and all such
damages, and he, or his heirs, representatives or assigns shall bear all expense of such replacement
or repair made necessary thereby, and he shall also be responsible for damage to surrounding
properties on account of the damage to water mains.
(b)Whenever any construction is taking place or where digging for any reason is being done, the public
works department shall estimate the location of underground utility facilities owned by the city in
accordance with the JULIE (joint utility locating information for excavators; Illinois one call system)
obligations mandated by Illinois law. A reasonable charge for any such service after the initial
location above provided for shall be paid by the person requesting such service. The city shall not be
responsible for any costs incurred by any person or party due to the inaccuracy of estimated
locations provided by the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-46. Fire Hydrants:
(a)All fire hydrants except those that are connected directly to an internal fire protection system that is
not owned by the city are hereby declared to be public hydrants and shall be tested, maintained,
repaired and replaced as needed by the city. If a public fire hydrant is located on private property, the
owner of the private property shall allow the city unrestricted access for the purpose of testing,
maintaining, repairing and replacing the hydrant.
(b)Fire hydrants that are directly connected to an internal fire protection system that is not owned by the
city must be tested and maintained by the owner of the internal fire protection system in accordance
with the requirements of the fire department.
(c)If a public fire hydrant is attached to a water main that is not owned by the city, the water main shall
be maintained at the expense of the owner in accordance with the requirements of the public works
department. If any leaks or other defects are not properly repaired at the expense of the owner within
ten (10) days after written notice from the public works department, the water may be turned off by
the public works department until such repairs have been made. The expense of turning off the water
shall be charged against such owner and must be paid before water shall be turned on again.
(d)No person other than the members of the fire department, the public works department or those
specially authorized by the public works department shall open any of the public fire hydrants or
attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere with or injure any of the public fire
hydrants in the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-47. Waste Of Water:
No person shall allow the water to run to waste through defective pipes, faucets or other fixtures;
however, a reasonable time, not exceeding forty eight (48) hours, shall be allowed to repair the same. In
case of neglect or refusal by the person to cause the fixtures to be repaired, the public works department
may withhold the water supply. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-48. Stopcock And Valve Services:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 452/735
The city shall not be responsible for any accidents caused by stopcocks or valve boxes that stand above
the surface of the ground, pavement or sidewalks and the property owners shall keep all stopcocks or
valve boxes flush with the surface at their location. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-49. Inspections Generally:
(a)Inspectors, foremen, meter readers or any other employee or agent of the city whose duty it may be
to enter upon private premises to make inspections and examinations of water meters, pipes, fixtures
or appurtenances thereto, for any reason whatsoever in connection with the city water supply will be
provided with a badge or other credentials to identify them as authorized agents and representatives
of the city.
(b)Any officer, inspector, foreman, meter reader or authorized agent or employee of the city upon
presentation of his badge or other credentials provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be
given free access at any and all reasonable hours to any premises supplied by the city water, for the
purpose of making any inspection thereof pertaining to the water system.
(c)In case any authorized agent or employee of the city is refused admittance to any premises, or being
admitted is hindered or prevented in making such examination, the city may cause the city water
supply to be turned off from the premises after giving twenty four (24) hours' notice to the owner or
occupant of said premises.
(d)No person not an authorized agent or employee of the city shall have, wear or exhibit any badge or
credential of the city. It shall be the duty of every such officer, agent or employee of the city upon
resignation or dismissal forthwith to surrender and deliver to the director of public works all badges
and credentials of the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-50. Connection Between City And Other Supply:
No person shall cause a connection to be made or allow one to exist with the city water supply for
commercial, domestic, sanitary, fire protection or boiler feed purposes, or for any other purpose
whatsoever, where water foreign to the city water supply is used for a second source of supply. (Ord. 18-
2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-51. Connections With Other City Systems:
Any water connections now existing between the city and any adjoining city, and those connections now
existing in the industrial district, i.e., the double check valve connections, shall be allowed to remain until
a demand is made by the city to sever or alter these connections, at which time they shall be
disconnected or changed as directed by such department or departments. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-
2002)
Sec. 16-52. Installation Of Water Mains:
(a)Water mains shall be installed under the standard specifications of the city for laying water mains and
under the supervision and inspection of the director of public works or his designated representative.
(b)All water mains of four inch (4") size or larger now in place or that may be placed in public right of way
or public utility easements, so dedicated, excluding service and fire protection lines of four inch (4")
size and larger, shall become the donated property of the city. The responsibility, jurisdiction and
maintenance thereof shall thereafter be administered by the city public works department.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 453/735
(c)The city water mains hereafter installed shall be inspected and tested by the director of public works
or his designated representative. Any water mains installed without inspection shall be opened by the
contractor or plumber for inspection, at his own expense, at the request of the director of public
works or his designated representative.
(d)No contractor or plumber shall turn on or off any valve of four inches (4") or over, on any city owned
water mains without the permission of the public works department. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-53. Extensions; New Subdivisions:
The following is the policy adopted by the city council in regard to the extension of water lines to and into
new subdivisions of the city:
(1) The city council will consider the extension of water and/or sewer service to the project area,
provided a project of adequate magnitude is proposed to assure a fair return on the city's investment
within a reasonable period of time.
(2) Where the line is brought to the project area by the city, the developer will be expected to extend
the line within the project area. Such extensions must be in accordance with city specifications, must
be looped in accordance with sound hydraulic practices, in all aspects, including pipe sizes and other
approvals, to be under the jurisdiction of the director of public works or his designated representative.
The minimum size of water line extensions will be eight inch (8") diameter. In those instances in
which pipe sizes specified by the director of public works or his designated representative exceed
eight inches (8"), such requirement will be submitted to the city council, and if the city council agrees
with the need for the larger diameter line, the city will bear the cost of the difference between an eight
inch (8") line and the larger sized line specified.
(3) In the case of all subdivisions and line extensions, the city has the right to authorize other
subdividers to hook onto water lines extended and installed by another subdivider if, in the opinion of
the city engineer, the lines are adequately sized to handle the added load. If the hook on is to a line
size larger than eight inches (8") in diameter, the city will follow the same policy with respect to
extending the line, as pertains under subsection (2) of this section.
(4) Where the city extends a line at city expense, and at a later time, properties fronting on the line
request permission to hook on, the cost of the line will be apportioned as follows:
a. The city will bear the cost of the line in excess of eight inch (8") diameter.
b. The cost of the eight inch (8") line will be apportioned (1/2 to each side) to properties fronting on
the line. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-54. Water Shortage-Definition:
For the purpose of this article an inadequate supply of water shall be deemed to exist when the city is
unable to refill the reservoirs and storage tanks on a daily basis because of the high demand for water
due to weather conditions or because the city's water facilities are inadequate to provide the refilling as
aforesaid due to other causes. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-2002)
Sec. 16-55. Duties Of Manager:
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make a determination that an inadequate supply of water
exists in the city when the refilling process described in the preceding section is not completed on a daily
basis. After making said determination, the provisions of sections 16-54 and 16-56 of this article shall not
be enforced until the city manager informs the news media of the city of the determination so that the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 454/735
residents of the city will be notified of the determination. If conditions permit a delay in enforcement, a
notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-
2002)
Sec. 16-56. Use Of Water:
No person shall use the city water supply for the watering of lawns or noncommercial washing of motor
vehicles during that period of time when there exists in the city an inadequate supply of water in the
city's reservoirs and storage tanks due to weather conditions or other causes. (Ord. 18-2002, § 1, 3-11-
2002)
Sec. 16-57. Backflow Prevention Device:
All plumbing installed within the city of Rock Island shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code section 90. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code
in the judgment of the public works director, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for
the safety of the public water supply system, the public works director will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing
code, Illinois environmental protection agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have
inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and annually thereafter, at a
minimum. The owner of the premises shall maintain records to document that testing, servicing and
repairs are conducted as required.
(1)No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be
maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the
regular public water supply of the city of Rock Island enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection
and use of such supply shall have been approved by the public works director and the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
(2)It shall be the duty of the public works director to cause surveys and investigations to be made of
industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the
public works director shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
(3)The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the city of Rock Island for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and that the public works director or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the city of Rock Island for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the owner,
lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the public works director any
information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the public
works director, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
section.
(4)The public works director of the city of Rock Island is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any
connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 455/735
public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and
until a reconnection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) is paid to the city of Rock Island. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the director of public works is assured that
imminent danger of harmful contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the public works director or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such
action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the public water supply, the director of public works, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to
any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination
was with or without notice.
(5)The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if
contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 90-37, § 1, 5-21-1990; Ord. 79-2002, §
1, 9-16-2002)
ARTICLE III. SEWERS 1, 2
Sec. 16-81. Management Of Sewer:
The management and supervision of the sewer division of the city and any and all property pertaining
thereto shall be under the direction of the director of public works. In addition to the foregoing, the
director of public works shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city manager.
(1963 Code, Ch. IX, Art. I; Ord. 87-22, § 16, 3-23-1987; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-82. Definitions:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as
follows:
(a)Federal Government:
(1) Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended (Pub. L. 95-217).
(2) Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
(3) Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment
works as provided for by title II, grants for construction of treatment works, of the act and
implementing regulations.
(b)State Government:
(1) State Act: The Illinois antipollution bond act of 1970.
(2) Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
(3) State Grant: The state participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as
provided for by the state act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
(c)Local Government:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 456/735
(1) City: The city of Rock Island.
(2) Approving Authority: The director of public works.
(d)Person: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or
private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
(e)NPDES Permit: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or,
where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the federal clean water act to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
(f)Clarification Of Word Usage: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
(g) Wastewater And Its Characteristics:
(1) Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a
combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
(2) Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
(3) Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
(4) Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
(5) Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
(6) ppm: Parts per million by weight.
(7) Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001
gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit
formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analysis.
(8) Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water,
sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA
division of laboratories "Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
(9) BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
(10) pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by
one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of laboratories "Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
(11) Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
(12) Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 457/735
(13) Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
(14) Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a
treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 0.13 ccf of sewage per day, containing 0.20
pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids.
(15) Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
(16) Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or
from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
(17) Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that:
a. Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; or
b. Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving
the waste; or
c. Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section
307(a) of the federal act; or
d. Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to
the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
(18) ccf: The flow measurement unit of hundred cubic feet.
(h)Sewer Types And Appurtenances:
(1) Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including stormwater,
surface water and ground water drainage.
(2) Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include
sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge
into the city sanitary (or combined) system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with city funds.
(3) Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and
into which stormwaters, surface waters, and ground waters or polluted industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
(4) Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
(5) Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, stormwater,
surface water and ground water drainage.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 458/735
(6) Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
(7) Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
(8) Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
(9) Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and
pumping of sewage.
(10) Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(i)Treatment:
(1) Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater
treatment works.
(2) Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater,
industrial wastes, and sludge; sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
(j)Wastewater Facilities: The structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and
treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
(k)Watercourse And Connections:
(1) Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(2) Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or
ground water.
(l)User Types:
(1) User Class: The type of user "residential", "institutional", "governmental", "commercial", or
"industrial" as defined herein.
(2) Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent
multi-family dwellings.
(3) Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments, or places
engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
(4) Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions, and users
associated with federal, state, and local governments.
(5) Industrial Users: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into products.
(6) Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged.
Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to
provide access for the city representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
(m)Types Of Charges:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 459/735
(1) Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in section 16-85 of this article
and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge and the capital charge.
(2) User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation, maintenance
and replacement.
(3) Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
(4) Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal
and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding debt.
(5) Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the
sewage treatment works.
(6) Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement
costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement costs.
(7) Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation
and maintenance" includes replacement.
(8) Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will
be operated.
(9) Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation
of the sewerage system. (Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-83. Sewer Service To Extend Across Entire Frontage:
No person shall extend a City sewer to service his property unless the sewer line is extended across the
entire frontage of the property at the property owner's expense. In the event compliance with this
provision is impossible because of physical conditions or impractical because of unique circumstances,
the property owner may apply to the City Council for exemption from the requirements of this section.
(Ord., 10-13-1969; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-84. Sewer Charges Generally:
Each user of the City's sewer service shall be charged for usage of the sewage system at rates
established under this article. Where the sewer user is also a City water user, billing for sewage usage
shall be coincidental with the billing for water usage. In cases where a sewer user is not a water user,
billing shall be made monthly or quarterly as determined by the City Collector. (1963 Code art. 9-1-3;
Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990; Ord. 001-2005, 1-17-2005)
Sec. 16-85. Rates Generally:
Sec. 16-85.1. Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for the use of and
for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the City shall consist of a service charge and a
volume charge.
SERVICE CHARGE PER METER
Meter Size Effective
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 460/735
February 1, 2019
Quarterly Monthly
5/8" $ 49.44 $ 21.98
3/4" 65.88 32.91
1" 98.80 38.42
1 1/2" 175.66 65.88
2" 247.02 93.33
3" 603.85 214.08
4" 988.14 362.31
6" 2,003.75 1,081.29
VOLUME CHARGE PER 100 CUBIC FEET
Effective
February 1, 2019
Quarterly billing period:
First 15,000 cubic feet $4.35
Over 15,000 cubic feet 2.79
Monthly billing period:
First 5,000 cubic feet 4.35
Over 5,000 cubic feet 2.79
Elderly or handicapped users discount per billing period 5.62
Sec. 16-85.2. Three-Part Rate: A three-part rate may be levied to those users whose wastewater varies
significantly from normal domestic concentrations for BOD and SS. The three-part rate would consist of
a service charge plus a unit charge for volume, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and total
suspended solids (TSS).
Service charges for customers paying based upon the three-part rate will be calculated by the Public
Works Department on a case by case basis.
The concentration of wastes used for computing BOD and TSS charges shall be established by waste
sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the City and
shall be binding as a basis for the BOD and TSS charges. In the event a customer requests to be placed
on a three-part rate schedule, the cost of performing the necessary waste sampling shall be charged
directly to the customer.
INDUSTRIAL THREE-PART RATE
Current February 1, 2019
Volume, per 100 cubic feet $0.93 $0.96
BOD, per pound 1.04 1.07
TSS, per pound 0.52 0.54
(Ord. 006-2014, 1-20-2014; Ord. 056-2016, 12-19-2016; Ord. 056-2017, 12-18-2017; Ord 001-2019, 1-14-2019)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 461/735
Sec. 16-86. Special Rates:
(a)Criteria: These special rates may include, among others, where the nature of the use of City water is
such in the opinion of the Director of Public Works that the resulting sewage or industrial waste has
characteristics making it more or less difficult to treat or purify than ordinary domestic waste.
(b)Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing volume charges shall be the metered
water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one cubic foot.
(1) If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from
sources other than the public waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
City for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
(2) Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the City if these
volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
(3) Metering devices for determining the volume of waste, if other than a City owned water meter,
shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of the City.
(c)Dangerous Waste: No sewage or industrial waste having characteristics tending, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Works, to jeopardize the successful and/or continued operation of the sewage
treatment plant or any of its units, including sewers leading to the same, shall be discharged into the
sewer system. Such waste may be pretreated by the user at his own expense and discharged into
the system. Plans, specifications and design data for the pretreatment of waste shall be submitted to
and approved by the Public Works Department and by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
before any construction work on the waste treatment plant is begun. (1963 Code art. 9-1; Ord. 87-22,
3-23-1987; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990; Ord. 001-2005, 1-17-2005)
Sec. 16-87. Delinquencies:
Sec. 16-87.1. Lien 65 ILCS 5/11-139-8, 5/11-141-7.1 - Notice Of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for sewer
service remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the unpaid charges will result in a
lien for those charges in favor of the City against the property where service was provided. This lien will
include all charges incurred subsequent to the period covered by the delinquent bill.
The City Collector shall file with the Recorder of Deeds of the County a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a
notice that the City claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for sewer service incurred
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
The failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid
bills as stated in this section.
Sec. 16-87.2. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same; and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after
deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The City Attorney is authorized to
institute such proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters
against any property for which a lien has been recorded. (1963 Code art. 9-1; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990;
Ord. 029-2008, 4-21-2008)
Sec. 16-88. Disconnection Of Service:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 462/735
If the charges for sewer service are not paid within thirty (30) days after the rendition of the bill for
service, service shall be discontinued without further notice. (1963 Code art. 9-1; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-89. Private Sewers And Sewer Connections:
No person shall construct, cause or permit to be constructed any private drain, or sewer leading into any
City sewer or drain laid in any street, alley or public ground, unless approved by special ordinance of the
City Council. (1963 Code art. 9-1; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-90. Payment Of Equitable Proportion Of Cost:
No person shall connect with any "private sewer", meaning a sewer which is laid in part in the City
streets, heretofore built or hereafter to be built, or to flow therein any liquid or other matter, without first
paying to the City Collector his equitable proportion of the cost of the construction thereof up to the date
of connection, the amount so paid to the City Collector to be divided between the subscribers thereto in
proportion to the amount originally paid by them, respectively, for the construction thereof, under a
penalty of five dollars ($5.00) and further penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day he shall maintain
such connection after such conviction. (1963 Code art. 9-1; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-91. Ownership Of Private Sewer:
Any private sewer laid or constructed by authority of a private sewer ordinance and in accordance with
the terms of this chapter shall, on completion, be and become the property of the City to be used by the
City as a public sewer, subject, however, to the conditions imposed in section 16-90 of this article. (1963
Code art. 9-1; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-92. Sewage In Storm Water Drain-Prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying any toilet,
sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool or industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting
substances, to any storm water drain in the city. This prohibition shall not apply where the discharge
entering the storm sewer consists of nonpolluting substances and permission to connect is granted by
the city council. In such a case the user shall furnish and maintain all meters providing for the metering
of water from privately owned wells or sources other than the city water supply. Rates for such use shall
be set as authorized in section 16-86 of this article. (1963 Code, Ch. IX, Art. I; Ord., 10-16-1967; Ord., 9-
16-1974; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-93. Sewage In Storm Water Drain-Penalty:
Any person violating section 16-92 of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and in addition, shall be fined
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each day such violation exists. (Ord., 9-16-1974; Ord. 90-33, 5-
14-1990)
Sec. 16-94. Maintenance Of Sanitary Sewer Service Pipes:
All service pipes and fixtures from the sanitary sewer, combined or storm sewer mains to the premises,
including the connection to the main, shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the property
owner; and any leaks or other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by them. If not repaired
within ten (10) days after written notice, the sewer service and/or water service will be discontinued until
such repairs have been made; and the expense thereof shall be charged against such owner and must
be paid before service is restored. In the event the Public Works Director determines that the sewer
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 463/735
malfunction is creating a severe public nuisance or health hazard, the sewer and/or water service can be
discontinued immediately. (Ord. 88-42, 7-25-1988; Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-95. Sewer Use Generally:
(a)Building Sewers And Connections :
(1) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Plumbing Inspector.
(2) A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can
be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and
wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle
the additional anticipated waste load.
(3) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(4) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Plumbing Inspector, to meet all requirements of this Article.
(5) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(6) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved by the Plumbing Inspector and discharged to the building sewer.
(7) No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which
in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(8) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Public Works
Director before installation.
(9) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing Inspector when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector or his representative.
(10) New construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be designed to minimize and/or
delay inflow contribution to the combined sewer system.
(11) Inflow sources on the combined sewer system shall be connected to a storm sewer, within a
reasonable amount of time, if a separated storm sewer becomes available.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 464/735
(12) New building domestic waste connection shall be distinct from the building inflow connection, to
facilitate disconnection if a separate storm sewer becomes available.
(b)Use Of The Public Sewers :
(1) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Public Works Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the City Council or IEPA, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
(2) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 16-300 et
seq. of this Chapter, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40
CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Public
Works Director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Public
Works Director may:
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges.
If the Public Works Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Public
Works Director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(3) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works
Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Plumbing Inspector, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(4) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(5) Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole; and, when required by the Public
Works Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(6) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this
article and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 465/735
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the city; but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the city at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall
bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analyses by an
outside laboratory service.
(c)Powers And Authority Of Inspectors :
(1) The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The public works director or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.
(2) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (c)(1) of this
section, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois environmental
protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company; and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to city employees; and the city shall indemnify the company against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain conditions as required in subsection (b)(6) of this section.
(3) The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within
that easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990; Ord. 97-96, 12-8-1997)
Sec. 16-96. Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge:
The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:
CW = CU + CC
Where CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.
CU = Service charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (section 16-85.1 of this
article)
CC = Volume charge (section 16-85.1 of this article)
(Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990; Ord. 001-2005, § 1, 1-17-2005)
Sec. 16-97. Revenues:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 466/735
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the wastewater system shall be deposited in the
sewerage account of the wastewater fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the city
treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
city; and all of that sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the city treasurer not
more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to
time be directed by the city council.
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the wastewater system and all other funds and
monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the sewerage fund.
The city treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq., the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-98. Accounts:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
wastewater system; and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the wastewater
system. (Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
Sec. 16-99. Access To Records:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) or its authorized representative shall have access
to any books, documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to the City system of user
charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant and Federal
regulations and conditions of any Federal grant. (Ord. 90-33, 5-14-1990)
ARTICLE IV. INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Sec. 16-100. Enactment:
Pursuant to the requirements of title III of the Clean Water Act Amendments (33 USC 1311 et seq.) and
regulations promulgated thereunder, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act of 1970 as amended (415
ILCS 5/1 et seq.), and in accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-141-7 et seq.), the
following Article is hereby enacted by the City Council. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-101. Purpose And Policy:
This Article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Rock Island and enables the City to comply with all applicable
State and Federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this Article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the
POTW;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW,
inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 467/735
(3) To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which
allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;
(4) To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and to protect the general public;
(5) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
(6) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and
improvement of the POTW; and
(7) To enable the City to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject.
This Article shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. The Article authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-102. Administration:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this Article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be
delegated by the Superintendent to other City personnel. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-103. Rock Island Water Pollution Control Commission:
(a)Creation, Membership, And Procedure :
(1) There is hereby created the Rock Island Water Pollution Control Commission, consisting of five
(5) voting members, residents of Rock Island, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council. The Sewer Systems Superintendent shall be an ex officio member and shall act as
secretary to the Commission. The commissioners shall serve without compensation. The
commissioners shall serve a term of three (3) years.
(2) The Commission shall elect its own chairperson annually. If the chairperson is absent from a
meeting, a temporary chairperson shall be elected by those present.
(3) Meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept of proceedings,
showing the action of the Commission and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating that fact.
(4) Three (3) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
(5) The Commission shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business.
(b)Purpose : The Commission is created for the purpose of:
(1) Reviewing permit denials at the industrial user's request.
(2) Determining if information or data relating to an industrial user is entitled to confidential treatment.
(3) Hearing testimony and evidence concerning permit revocations.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 468/735
(4) Hearing testimony and evidence concerning disconnection of service. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-104-16-199. Reserved:
Sec. 16-200. Definitions:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Article,
shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
Act Or "The Act" : The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.).
Approval Authority : The appropriate administrator of the Illinois EPA, or his designee.
Authorized Representative Of The Industrial User :
(1) If the industrial user is a corporation, "authorized representative" shall mean:
a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation;
b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing
more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
(2) If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an "authorized representative" shall
mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
(3) If the industrial user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility, an "authorized
representative" shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee;
(4) The individuals described in subsection (1) through (3) of this Section may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual
or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates
or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the City.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) : The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at 20 centigrade expressed in
terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
Categorical Pretreatment Standard Or Categorical Standard : Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) : The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant
(Standard potassium dichromate solution) under standard laboratory procedure, expressed in terms
of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
City : The City of Rock Island or the City Council of Rock Island.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 469/735
Color : The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled
water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
Commission : The Water Pollution Control Commission of the City of Rock Island.
Composite Sample : The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples
taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
Daily Composite : The numerical average of all grab samples, or the result of analysis of a single
sample formed by combining all aliquots, taken during a calendar day. A daily composite must be
based on at least three (3) grab samples or three (3) aliquots taken at different times.
Environmental Protection Agency Or EPA : The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management
Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing Source : Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior
to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such
source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
Fats, Oil, Or Grease (FOG) : Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other
material that is extracted by trichlorotrifluoroethane solvent.
Flow : Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
Garbage : Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.
Grab Sample : A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. Aliquots of a daily composite are grab
samples only if they are analyzed separately.
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Or IEPA : The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or,
where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the duly authorized official of said
agency.
Indirect Discharge Or Discharge : The introduction of (nondomestic) pollutants into the POTW from
any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial User Or User : A source of indirect discharge.
Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit : The maximum concentration (or loading) of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.
Interference : A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Therefore is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean
Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II commonly referred to as the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 470/735
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the
Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Medical Waste : Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological
wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
Monthly Average : The numerical average of all daily composites taken during a calendar month. A
monthly average must be based on at least three (3) daily composites.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit) : A permit issued under the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable
waters of the United States pursuant to the Act.
New Source :
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source
is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c of this Section but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or
2. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which
are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts which can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 471/735
Noncontact Cooling Water : Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any
raw material intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Pass Through : A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
Person : Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint
stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State or local governmental
entities.
pH : A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standards units.
Pollutant : Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD,
COD, toxicity, odor).
Pretreatment : The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of
the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment Requirements : Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment
imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment Standards Or Standards : Prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, State of Illinois pretreatment standards, and City local limits as they appear in Section 16-
301 of this Article.
Prohibited Discharge Standards Or Prohibited Discharges : Absolute prohibitions against the
discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 16-300 of this Article.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works Or POTW : A "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the
Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the State or municipality. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also
means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of the treatment works.
Septic Tank Waste : Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, and septic tanks.
Sewage : Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish washing operations, etc.).
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
Significant Industrial User : Shall apply to:
(1) Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 472/735
(2) Any other industrial user that:
a. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater,
b. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant or,
c. Is designated as significant by the City on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement.
Sludge : The settleable solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment processes.
Slug : Any discharge which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section
16-300 of this Article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to,
an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
Slug Load : Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in Section 16-300 of this Article or any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code : A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.
Standard Laboratory Procedure : Any laboratory procedures recognized by the EPA and IEPA.
Storm Water : Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting
therefrom, including snow melt.
Superintendent : The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the POTW, and
who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this Article or his duly authorized
representative.
Suspended Solids : The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtration using a Reeve
Angel type 934A or 984H glass fiber filter disc as prescribed in standard laboratory procedure.
Toxic Pollutant : One of one hundred twenty six (126) pollutants, or combination of those pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of section 307 (33 USC
1317) of the Act.
Treatment Plant Effluent : Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into waters of the State.
User : See Industrial User Or User in this Section.
Wastewater : Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater Treatment Plant Or Treatment Plant : That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment of sewage and industrial waste. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-201. Abbreviations:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 473/735
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, oils and grease
gpd Gallons per day
IEPA Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classifications
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-202-16-299. Reserved:
Sec. 16-300. Prohibited Discharge Standards:
No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
State, or local pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the
following substances to the POTW:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 474/735
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the Municipal wastewater collection and
POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F)(60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or more than ten (10.0), or otherwise causing
corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering City personnel.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") or one and twenty
seven hundredths centimeters (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
(4) Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
(5) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty seven degrees Fahrenheit
(157°F)(65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant
to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F)(40°C).
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will
cause interference or pass through.
(7) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City in accordance
with Section 16-354 of this Article.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(10) Any substance which will cause unnatural coloring of the wastewater at the POTW treatment
plant. Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such
as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color
to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the City's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point
for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for
aquatic life.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved
by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
(12) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(13) Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
(14) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Superintendent in a wastewater
discharge permit.
(15) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 475/735
(16) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW.
(17) Any discharge of fats, oils, or grease is limited to one hundred (100) mg/l.
Wastes prohibited by this Section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. (Ord. 96-69,
9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-301. Specific Pollutant Limitations:
(a)The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following monthly average allowable
discharge limits:
Concentration Limit For Concentration Limit For
Pollutant Main Treatment Plant Southwest Treatment Plant
Ammonia nitrogen 50 mg/l 50 mg/l
Arsenic 0.20 mg/l 1.79 mg/l
BETX 750 µg/l 750 µg/l
BOD5 300 mg/l 300 mg/l
Barium No limit No limit
Benzene 50 µg/l 50 µg/l
Cadmium 0.10 mg/l 0.10 mg/l
Chromium, hexavalent No limit No limit
Chromium, total 1.00 mg/l 1.71 mg/l
Copper 2.00 mg/l 1.81 mg/l
Cyanide 0.65 mg/l 0.33 mg/l
Fluoride 15 mg/l 15 mg/l
Iron 50.0 mg/l 50.0 mg/l
Lead 0.40 mg/l 0.40 mg/l
Manganese 1.00 mg/l 1.00 mg/l
Mercury 0.0005 mg/l 0.0005 mg/l
Nickel 1.18 mg/l 2.00 mg/l
Phenols, total 2.50 mg/l 10.0 mg/l
Selenium 1.00 mg/l 1.00 mg/l
Silver 0.20 mg/l 0.24 mg/l
Total suspended solids 350 mg/l 350 mg/l
Zinc 1.48 mg/l 1.48 mg/l
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. At his
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 476/735
discretion, the superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the
concentration based on limitations above.
(b)Except as otherwise specifically provided, proof of violation of the numerical standards of subsection
(a) of this section shall be on the basis of one or more of the following averaging rules:
(1) No monthly average shall exceed the prescribed numerical standard.
(2) No daily composite shall exceed two (2) times the prescribed numerical standard.
(3) No grab sample shall exceed five (5) times the prescribed numerical standard.
In the event the number of grab samples collected in a twenty four (24) hour period is less than three
(3), the individual test results for those samples shall not exceed two (2) times the prescribed
numerical standard of subsection (a) of this section.
In the event the number of grab samples collected in a particular month is less than three (3), the
individual test results for those samples shall not exceed the prescribed numerical standard of
subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996; Ord. 98-05, 1-19-1998; Ord. 96-2002, § 1, 11-
18-2002)
Sec. 16-302. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards:
The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-303. State Requirements:
The state of Illinois pretreatment standards established in 35 Illinois Administrative Code 307 are hereby
incorporated. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-304. City's Right Of Revision:
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in section 16-101 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in section
16-300 of this article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-305. Special Agreement:
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms
under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the city from
entering into special agreements with industrial users to allow discharges that vary significantly from
normal domestic concentrations for BOD and suspended solids, and therefore, might exceed the
limitations set forth in section 16-301 of this article, where such discharges will not, as determined by the
superintendent, cause pass-through or interference or otherwise adversely affect the POTW. Where the
city enters into a special agreement regarding excess BOD and suspended solids discharges, the city
shall charge the industrial user excess user charges for such discharges in accordance with the
provisions of section 16-85.2 of this chapter. However, the industrial user may request a net gross
adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a
variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the EPA. Such a request will be approved only
if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 477/735
factors considered by the EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user
requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996; Ord. 74-00, § 1, 9-25-2000)
Sec. 16-306. Dilution:
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-307-16-349. Reserved:
Sec. 16-350. Pretreatment Facilities:
Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Article and
shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set
out in Section 16-300 of this Article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State, or the
Superintendent -- whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the City under the provisions
of this Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-351. Additional Pretreatment Measures:
(a)Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require industrial users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams
from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this Article.
(b)Each person discharging into the POTW greater than twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day
or greater than five percent (5%) of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is lesser, shall
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to
ensure equalization of flow over a twenty four (24) hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for
at least thirty three percent (33%) of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms
and a rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the Superintendent. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
(c)Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they
are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil,
or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units
shall be of type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense.
(d)Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and
maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 478/735
(e)At no time shall two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the
POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten
percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-352. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans:
The Superintendent may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two (2) years the Superintendent shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement
an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges
in Section 16-300 of this Article.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-353. Tenant Responsibility:
Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease
agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible
for compliance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-354. Hauled Wastewater:
(a)Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated receiving structure within the
treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the Superintendent, provided such
wastes do not violate Sections 16-300 through 16-306 of this Article or any other requirements
established or adopted by the City. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such
facilities shall be issued by the Superintendent.
(b)The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage" requires prior approval and a
wastewater discharge permit from the City. The Superintendent shall have authority to prohibit, at
his/her sole discretion, the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with the
treatment plant operation. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this Article.
(c)Fees for dumping septage will be determined by the Superintendent for individual cases depending
on the quality and quantity of such wastes. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-355. Vandalism:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with
or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 479/735
found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in Section 16-455 of this
Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-356-16-399. Reserved:
Sec. 16-400. Wastewater Survey:
When requested by the Superintendent all industrial users must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their
discharge. The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable
grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of the Article.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-401. Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement:
(a)It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the City's POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the
terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this Article and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Section 16-455 of this Article.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all Federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State and local law.
(b)The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-
23-1996)
Sec. 16-402. Wastewater Discharge Permitting Existing Connections:
Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90)
days after said date, apply to the City for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with Section 16-
405 of this Article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred
eighty (180) days of the effective date of this Ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the Superintendent. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-403. Wastewater Discharge Permitting New Connections:
Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the
POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least ninety (90) days
prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-404. Wastewater Discharge Permitting Extrajurisdictional Industrial Users:
(a)Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the City limits shall submit a wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with Section 16-405 of this Article, within ninety (90)
days of the effective date of this Ordinance. New significant industrial users located beyond the City
limits shall submit such applications to the Superintendent ninety (90) days prior to any proposed
discharge into the POTW.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 480/735
(b)Alternately, the Superintendent may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which
the significant industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-405. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents:
In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all industrial users required to have a
wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required by Section 16-451 of this Article. The
Superintendent shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following
information may be requested:
(1) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally
be, discharged to the POTW.
(2) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of
the POTW.
(3) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production.
(4) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
(5) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
(6) Time and duration of the discharge.
(7) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Superintendent to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user
for revision. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-406. Application Signatories And Certification:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following
certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user.
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility
of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-407. Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions:
The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application,
the Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 481/735
determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The
Superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-408-16-449. Reserved:
Sec. 16-450. Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration:
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the
Superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-451. Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by
the Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed
five (5) years.
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferrable without prior notification to
the City, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
c. Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in Federal, State, and local
law.
d. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law.
e. Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
a. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
b. Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass,
or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties.
c. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works.
d. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine
discharges.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 482/735
e. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW.
f. The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW.
g. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment.
h. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit.
i. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to ensure compliance with this
Article, and State and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-452. Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals:
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater
discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative
appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions
objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the City fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be
denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of Commission review.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking Commission review of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Superintendent within thirty (30) days. (Ord.
96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-453. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification:
The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not
limited to, the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes, or
wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 483/735
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City
personnel, or the receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application or in any required reporting.
(7) Revisions of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay
any wastewater discharge permit condition. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-454. Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if
the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the Superintendent and the
Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent
must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes.
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on
the date of facility transfer. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-455. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation:
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge.
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions pursuant to Section 16-504 of
this Article.
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application.
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(6) Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records.
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 484/735
(8) Failure to pay fines.
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application.
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility.
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge
permit or the Ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of
business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-456. Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance:
A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with Section 16-405 of this Article a
minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge
permit. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-457-16-499. Reserved:
Sec. 16-500. Baseline Monitoring Reports:
(a)Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment
standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to
submit to the City a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this Section. At
least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that
become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall
be required to submit to the City a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of
this Section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
(b)The industrial user shall submit the information required by this Section including:
(1) Identifying Information : The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator
and owners.
(2) Wastewater Discharge Permits : A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description Of Operations : A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 485/735
(4) Flow Measurement : Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement Of Pollutants :
a. Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b. Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by the City) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations
and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 16-509 of this Article.
c. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 16-510 of this
Article.
(6) Certification : A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis - and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance Schedule : If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this Section must meet the requirements set out in Section 16-701 of this Article.
(8) Signature Required : All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with Section 16-406 of this Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-501. Compliance Schedule Progress Report:
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by Section 16-701 of this Article. The
schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion
of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed
nine (9) months. The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment or progress, the reason for any delay, (and, if
appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no
event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Superintendent.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-502. Report On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment
standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the City a report containing the information described in subsection 16-500(b)(4) through (6) of
this Article. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 486/735
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of
the industrial user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Section 16-406 of this Article. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-503. Periodic Compliance Reports:
(a)Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by
the Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Section 16-406 of this Article.
(b)All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in
good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(c)If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this Section monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in Section 16-509 of
this Article the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-504. Report Of Changed Conditions:
Each industrial user is required to notify the Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the
industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at
least thirty (30) days before the change.
(1) The Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under Section 16-405 of this Article.
(2) The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 16-407 of this Article
or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 16-453 of this Article.
(3) No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions(s) until and unless the
Superintendent has responded to the industrial user's notice.
(4) For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten percent (10%) or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-
1996)
Sec. 16-505. Report Of Potential Problems:
(a)In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a
nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause
potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
Section 16-300 of this Article), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone
and notify the City of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 487/735
(b)Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the
Superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of discharge and the
measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this Article.
(c)Failure to notify the City of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this
Article.
(d)A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this
Section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-506. Reports From Nonsignificant Industrial Users:
All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as the Superintendent may
require. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-507. Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting:
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the
control authority within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control
authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required
to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a month, or if the
POTW performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the industrial user
receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-508. Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste:
(a)Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than ten (10) kilograms of such
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of
such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of
the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve
(12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under
Section 16-504 of this Article. The notification requirement in this Section does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 16-500, 16-502 and 16-503 of
this Article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 488/735
(b)Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this Section during a calendar
month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the
wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime
notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(c)In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics
of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.
(d)In the case of any notification made under this Section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-509. Analytical Requirements:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge
permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR
part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-
1996)
Sec. 16-510. Sample Collection:
(a)Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this Section, the industrial user must collect wastewater
samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional
sampling is infeasible, the Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or
through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(b)Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic
chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-511. Determination Of Noncompliance:
The Superintendent may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment
standards. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-512. Timing:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date post-marked. For reports which are
not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-513. Record Keeping:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 489/735
Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information
required to be retained under this Article. These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
compliance with this Article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Superintendent. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-514. Wastewater Monitoring Expenses:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater to which reference is made in
Sections 16-500 through 16-513 of this Article will be performed by an independent analytical laboratory
and will be provided at the user's expense. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-515-16-549. Reserved:
Sec. 16-550. Inspection And Sampling:
The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose
of this Article, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is
complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the Superintendent or his
representatives ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
(1) Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with
its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City, State,
and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(2) The City, State, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
(3) The City will construct a manhole to be used as a sampling chamber on each sewer lateral that
goes into the public sewer. The manholes will be constructed on public right of way and will be paid
for by the City. This sampling chamber may be used by the industrial user for sampling purposes
except as noted in Section 16-550(d) of this Section.
(4) The City may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense, and shall be built in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the City. The chamber shall be easily accessible to
authorized representatives of the City during operational hours of the industry. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically or at any time that it is deemed
necessary by the City to ensure their accuracy.
a. Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus flume unless a weir or similar device is
approved by the City with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity;
or at the discretion of the City the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the
liquid quantity where it is substantiated to the City that the metered water supply and waste
quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the City is
made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity.
b. When required, samples shall be taken every hour or half hour, as determined by the City and
properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance with standard laboratory procedure and shall be
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 490/735
composited in proportion to the flow for a representative twenty four (24) hour sample. Such
sampling shall be done as prescribed by the user's Wastewater Discharge Permit.
c. The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the frequency of sampling,
sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection
and verification by the City.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed be the industrial user at the written or verbal
request of the Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
born by the industrial user.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be
a violation of this Article.
(7) All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in this Article shall be
determined and performed in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.12(g), as amended from time to
time.
(8) The City will periodically sample the industrial user's wastewater to determine the nature and
concentration of the pollutants in the effluent. Any sampling and testing performed by the City to
ascertain that the requirements of the Article are being met will be paid for by the user. (Ord. 96-69,
9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-551. Search Warrants:
If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof,
and if the Superintendent has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this Article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City designed
to verify compliance with this Article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the City Attorney, the
presiding judge of the City shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific
location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or
seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the
Superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of the City. In the event of an emergency
affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. (Ord. 96-
69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-552-16-599. Reserved:
Sec. 16-600. Confidential Information:
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit
applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from City inspection and
sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction - unless the industrial user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission, that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets under applicable State law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 491/735
40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-601-16-649. Reserved:
Sec. 16-650. Publication Of Industrial Users In Significant Noncompliance:
The City shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term
"significant noncompliance" shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent
(66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a two (2) quarter period exceed the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent
(33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a two (2)
quarter period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation that the City believes has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of City personnel or
the general public);
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
(8) Any other violation(s) which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-651-16-699. Reserved:
Sec. 16-700. Notification Of Violation:
Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating this Article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent
or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt
of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Superintendent.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the City to take any
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 492/735
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of
violation. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-701. Consent Orders:
The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 16-703 and 16-704 of this
Article and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-702. Show Cause Hearing:
The Superintendent may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this Article,
wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Commission and show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause
why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the
user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A
show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 96-69,
9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-703. Compliance Orders:
When the Superintendent or the Commission finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this
Article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, he/she may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user
come into compliance within a date set by him or her. If the user does not come into compliance within
the set date, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-704. Cease And Desist Orders:
When the Commission finds that a user is violating this Article, the user's wastewater discharge permit,
any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past
violations are likely to recur, the Commission may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 493/735
Issuance of cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-705. Administrative Fines:
(a)Notwithstanding any other section of this Article, any user that is found to have violated any provision
of this Article, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day per violation. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
(b)Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the Commission
shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees.
(c)Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional
penalty of nine percent (9%) of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of
nine percent (9%) per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
(d)Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Commission to reconsider the
fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the Commission shall convene a hearing on the matter within thirty (30)
days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the
payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user. The City
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the
fine.
(e)Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-706. Emergency Suspensions:
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user)
whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice
and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents
or may present an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent shall allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in Section 16-707 of this
Article are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to
the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 16-702 and 16-707 of this Article.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 494/735
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension
under this Section. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-707. Termination Of Discharge:
In addition to those provisions in Section 16-706 of this Article, any user that violates the following
conditions of this Article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to
discharge termination.
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and
characteristics prior to discharge.
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or
sampling.
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 16-300 of this Article.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity
to show cause under Section 16-702 of this Article why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-708-16-749. Reserved:
Sec. 16-750. Injunctive Relief:
Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the
provisions of this Article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Commission may petition the Circuit Court through the City's Attorney for
the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
Article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief
may also be sought by the City. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking
any other action against a user. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-751. Civil Penalties:
(a)Any user which has violated or continues to violate this Article, any order or wastewater discharge
permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the
Commission for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. In
the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
(b)The Commission may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the City.
(c)In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the
compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 495/735
(d)Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-752. Criminal Prosecution:
(a)Any user that wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this Article, any orders or wastewater
discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
(b)Any user that wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal
injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or be subject to imprisonment for one year.
This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under State law.
(c)Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this Article, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per
day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
(d)In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both. (Ord.
96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-753. Remedies Nonexclusive:
The provisions in Section 16-752 of this Article are not exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan.
However, the City reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the City is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-754-16-799. Reserved:
Sec. 16-800. Upset - An Unintentional And Temporary Noncompliance:
(a)For the purposes of this Section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(b)An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section are met.
(c)An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through
properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 496/735
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
(3) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant
operator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance.
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue.
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(d)In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset
shall have the burden of proof.
(e)Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an
enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(f)The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment
facility is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-801. Affirmative Defense:
An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in Section 16-300 of this Article if it can prove
that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources would cause pass through or interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with
each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference, or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from
the user's prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in
the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-802. Bypass:
(a)Definitions:
Bypass : The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment
facility.
Severe Property Damage : Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment
facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property
damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 497/735
(b)When Allowed : An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this Section.
(c)Notice :
(1) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
POTW, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards to the POTW within twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not
been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
(d)Exceptions :
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a
bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed
in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
c. The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this Section.
(2) The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
POTW determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this Section.
(Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-803-16-849. Reserved:
Sec. 16-850. Severability:
If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or article of this Ordinance is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Sec. 16-851. Conflicts:
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this Article,
are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
Secs. 16-852-16-899. Reserved:
Sec. 16-900. Effective Date:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 498/735
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval and
publication, as provided by law. (Ord. 96-69, 9-23-1996)
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER
Sec. 16-901. Establishment Of A Stormwater Utility And A Stormwater Fund:
(a)The city hereby establishes a stormwater utility to provide for the management, protection, control,
regulation, use and enhancement of the stormwater systems and to facilities owned or operated by
the city.
(b)The management and supervision of the stormwater utility shall be under the direction of the director
of public works.
(c)The city hereby establishes a stormwater fund. All revenues of the stormwater utility shall be
deposited into the stormwater fund and used for purposes of the stormwater utility as deemed
appropriate by the city council. (Ord. 74-2002, § 1, 9-9-2002)
Sec. 16-902. Definitions:
City: The city of Rock Island, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the state of Illinois.
Combined Sewer: A sewer designed to receive or receiving both wastewater and storm or surface water.
Credit: A conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property
based upon the provisions of the "Rock Island Stormwater Credit Manual".
Detached Single-Family Residential (DSFR): Developed land containing one dwelling structure which is
not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and
kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. DSFR units may include houses, manufactured
homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may
be classified as a DSFR despite the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as
such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, structures
or additions to the building which are used for nonresidential uses.
Developed Land: Property that has been altered from its natural state by the addition of impervious area
equal to at least one percent (1%) of the gross area.
Gross Area: The entire area of a parcel, including both the impervious and pervious areas.
Impervious Area Or Impervious Surface: Those areas that prevent or impede the infiltration of
stormwater into the soil. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks,
walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted aggregate and awnings.
Impervious Area Unit (IAU): Shall be used as the basis for determining the stormwater service charge to
a parcel. Two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet of impervious area shall be one IAU. The
number of IAUs attributed to a parcel will be determined by dividing the total impervious area (square
feet) of the parcel by two thousand eight hundred (2,800) and rounding the result up to the next integer.
NPDES Or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System: The national permitting program
implemented under the clean water act.
Stormwater System: A conveyance or system of conveyances and includes sewers, storm drains, curbs,
gutters, ditches, retention ponds or basins, dams, river impoundments, manmade channels or storm
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 499/735
drains and flood control facilities and appurtenances thereof which is designed or used for the collection,
control, transportation, treatment or discharge of stormwater. Combined sewers are not included in the
stormwater system. (Ord. 74-2002, § 1, 9-9-2002)
Sec. 16-903. Scope Of Responsibility For The Stormwater Utility:
The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, management and
improvement of the stormwater system owned by the city including all activities required by the NPDES
stormwater permit. (Ord. 74-2002, § 1, 9-9-2002)
Sec. 16-904. Determination Of Service Charges:
Stormwater service charges shall be determined by the city council. The revenue generated by
stormwater service charges together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to
the stormwater utility will be sufficient to meet the obligations of the stormwater utility. (Ord. 74-2002, §
1, 9-9-2002)
Sec. 16-905. Service Charges:
(a)Detached single-family residential property:
MONTHLY CHARGES
Effective
Feb. 1, 2019
Small parcels (gross area less than 6,000 sq. ft.) $3.02
Medium parcels (gross area between 6,000 sq. ft. and 18,000 sq. ft.) 4.03
Large parcels (gross area between 18,000 sq. ft. and 87,120 sq. ft.) 5.04
Charges for detached single-family residential parcels with gross areas larger than eighty seven
thousand one hundred twenty (87,120) square feet will be calculated individually using the charges
shown below.
(b)Parcels other than detached single-family residential:
MONTHLY CHARGES
Effective
Feb. 1, 2019
Charge per impervious area unit (IAU) $4.03
(Ord. 002-2019, 1-14-2019)
Sec. 16-906. Exemptions And Credits Applicable To Service Charges:
(a)All developed property in the city shall be charged stormwater service charges except street and
highway rights of way owned by a township, Rock Island County, the city or the state of Illinois.
(b)Parcels shall be eligible to receive a stormwater service charge credit based upon the requirements of
the "Rock Island Stormwater Credit Manual".
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 500/735
(c)Any credit allowed against the storm water service charge is conditioned upon continuing compliance
with the "Rock Island Storm Water Credit Manual". (Ord. 74-2002, § 1, 9-9-2002; Ord. 30-2003, § 1,
4-14-2003)
Sec. 16-907. Billing And Collection Procedures:
(a)Billings for stormwater sewer service charges shall be rendered by the Finance Department on a
monthly, quarterly or annual basis at the discretion of the Finance Department.
(b) When stormwater service charges are not paid on or before the due date stated on the bill, a penalty
of five percent (5%) shall be added. Failure to receive a bill does not entitle the owner or customer to
a remission of penalty.
(c)Written notice must be given by the parcel owner or authorized agent if it is desired that bills be
forwarded to any other address than the parcel address.
(d)In the event that the City deems it necessary to refer past due stormwater service charges to the City
Attorney or a collection agency for collection, the City may additionally recover its actual expenses so
incurred, including court costs, collection agency fees and reasonable attorney fees.
(e)A stormwater bill shall be considered delinquent if it remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after rendition
of the bill. (Ord. 74-2002, 9-9-2002; Ord. 029-2008, 4-21-2008)
Sec. 16-908. Service Charges Billed In Common:
The stormwater charge may be billed on a common statement and collected along with other charges. If
the stormwater charge is included on a common statement and the customer payment is insufficient to
pay the total of all portions of the statement, the payment will be applied according to the priority shown
in section 13-41 of this Code. (Ord. 009-2010, 2-8-2010)
Sec. 16-909. Appeals:
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the
following manner:
(1) An appeal must be filed in writing with the Public Works Director. In the case of service charge
appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any
stormwater management features, such as detention ponds or conditions which influence the
hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.
(2) Using the information provided by the appellant, the Director of Public Works shall conduct a
technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within sixty
(60) days.
(3) In response to an appeal, the Director of Public Works may adjust the stormwater service charge
and any late payment penalties applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose
and intent of this article.
(4) A decision of the Director of Public Works that is adverse to an appellant may be appealed to the
City Manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. The appeal must be
filed in writing with the City Manager by the appellant and include a detailed explanation of the
grounds for the appeal. The City Manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within sixty
(60) days.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 501/735
(5) Any appeal of the decision of the City Manager must be made pursuant to the Illinois
Administrative Review Act. (Ord. 74-2002, 9-9-2002)
Sec. 16-910. Water Resources Advisory Committee:
(Rep. by Ord. 029-2017, 8-28-2017)
ARTICLE VI. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS
OF WAY
Sec. 16-1001. Purpose And Scope:
(a)Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities
on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City rights-of-way and the City as
a whole.
(b)Intent: In enacting this article, the City intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the
City and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
(1) Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, boulevards and other public ways
and places;
(2) Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous
to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the City's utilities and of other utilities
lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
(4) Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility
facilities;
(5) Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase
impermeable surfaces;
(6) Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
(7) Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined boulevards that characterize the City's residential
neighborhoods;
(8) Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
(9) Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities
locations.
(c)Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and
operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in
any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
(d)Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The City, in its discretion and as limited by law, may
require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 502/735
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City rights-of-way. Utilities that are
not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this article.
(e)Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
(1) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a
telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
(2) Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between
the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or
extension thereof.
(f)Conflicts With Other Articles: This article supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior
hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(g)Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
(h)Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering
this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when
the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its
rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 16-1002. Definitions:
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this article.
Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
Bore Or Boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
Boulevard: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
Cable Operator: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 503/735
Cable Service: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
Cable System: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
Carrier Pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical
conductors, and fiber optic devices.
City: The city of Rock Island.
Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use
by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope,
and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on
the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external
corrosion.
Code: The municipal code of the city of Rock Island.
Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.
Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
Construction Or Construct: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
Crossing Facility: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
Disrupt The Right Of Way: For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right of way or
causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may
include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or
permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or
loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does
not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in
the vicinity of the right of way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.
Encasement: Provision of a protective casing.
Engineer: The city engineer or his or her designee.
Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of
facilities.
Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
Extra Heavy Pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires,
ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 504/735
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term
"facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city.
Freestanding Facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, or meter station.
Frontage Road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is
precluded by control of access to a highway.
Hazardous Materials: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location,
or other characteristics, is determined by the city public works director to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum
products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
Highway: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets.
"Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or
convenient for vehicle traffic.
Highway Code: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended
from time to time.
Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the
pipe.
Joint Use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
Major Intersection: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
Parallel Facility: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
Pavement Cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a
facility.
Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 16-1004 and 16-1005 of
this article.
Petroleum Products Pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including,
but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 505/735
Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig).
Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the
period shall be thirty (30) days.
Public Entity: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal
level.
Public Works Director: The city public works director or his or her designee.
Restoration: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction
of a facility.
Right Of Way Or Rights Of Way: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city
has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the
city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not
specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
Sale Of Telecommunications At Retail: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge
paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
Security Fund: That amount of security required pursuant to section 16-1010 of this article.
Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge
and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
Sound Engineering Judgment: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles,
practices and experience.
Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of
mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to
end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following),
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 506/735
as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
Telecommunications Provider: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of
way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
Telecommunications Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this section.
Vent: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground
casing.
Video Service: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law
of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
Water Lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
Wet Boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a
sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1003. Annual Registration Required:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the
public works director, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone
number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 16-1008 of this article, in
the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1004. Permit Required; Applications And Fees:
(a)Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any city right of way which: 1) changes the location of the
facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this article), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across
or within the right of way, without first filing an application with the public works director and obtaining
a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there
will be no disruption of the right of way.
(b)Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided
by the city and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page
of such materials accordingly.
(c)Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly
authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 507/735
(2) The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, email
address, and its interest in the work;
(3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
(4) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the
uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to
the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
(5) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be
employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies,
including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended
response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations
for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;
(6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of a
professional engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes,
rules, and regulations;
(7) Evidence of insurance as required in section 16-1008 of this article;
(8) Evidence of posting of the security fund or Bond as required in section 16-1010 of this article;
(9) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 16-1021 of this
article); and
(10) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
(d)Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the
requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items,
as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
(1) In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable
television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of
public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by
law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other
jurisdictional authority;
(2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and
operating pressures;
(3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection
agency, division of public water supplies, have been satisfied;
(4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of
the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of water pollution control, have been satisfied; or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 508/735
(5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe
size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
(e)Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and
the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a
permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
(f)Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all
applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1005. Action On Permit Applications:
(a)City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the city public works director within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the city public works director shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the city public works director is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city
public works director shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city public works director, that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
article.
(b)Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
(1) Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence work governed by this
article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city public works director shall specify
the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
(2) In the event that the city public works director fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work
without obtaining a permit under this article.
(3) Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work pursuant
to section 16-1004 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding
the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a)
of this section.
(c)Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video
Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization
under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied
with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 509/735
Sec. 16-1006. Effect Of Permit:
(a)Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the city authorizes a
permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on city rights of way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of
others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
(b)Duration: No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
(c)Preconstruction Meeting: A preconstruction meeting may be required by the city. If a preconstruction
meeting is required, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to
attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work
under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date,
time and place designated by the city with such city representatives in attendance as the city deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without
limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to
avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
(d)Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the city and applicable statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1007. Revised Permit Drawings:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee
shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days after the completion of
the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the
actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance
with section 16-1021 of this article. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall
either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and
submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1008. Insurance:
(a)Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right of way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall
secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section.
(1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and
underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 510/735
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
(2) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
(3) Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
(4) Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing
the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
(b)Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of
primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage
over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to
cover such loss.
(c)Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the
city before beginning any work in the city right of way.
(d)Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section
shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Engineer of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days
prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
(e)Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to
the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (a) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of
this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under
the workers' compensation act.
(f)Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the city
and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
(g)Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid
and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the
state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1009. Indemnification:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 511/735
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or
offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by
the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1010. Security:
(a)Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this
section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
(1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article;
(2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to
comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued
pursuant to this article; and
(3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city
may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
city from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law.
(b)Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election,
of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at
a minimum:
(1) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and the permittee;
(2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered
by it; and
(3) Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state of Illinois at which it can be
drawn.
(c)Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the city public works director, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails
to perform such restoration. In no case shall the amount be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one
location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 512/735
public works director may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The
amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
(d)Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for,
and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from
the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
(1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
(2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
(3) Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been
compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
(4) Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city determines can be remedied by an
expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
(e)Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount
has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the
amount specified in subsection (c) of this section.
(f)Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security
fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection (c) of this section.
(g)Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the
permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on
deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In
the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein,
shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or
damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of
said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
(h)Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to
all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right
the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary
recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 057-
2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1011. Permit Suspension And Revocation:
(a)City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
(2) Noncompliance with this article;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 513/735
(3) Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the rights of way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or
(4) Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and
approved plans.
(b)Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or
suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
(c)Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a
written notice of revocation or suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following
options:
(1) Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
(2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice,
providing written proof of such correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
(3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of
such removal to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this
subsection.
(d)Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may
issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth
within subsection (a) of this section.
(e)Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
subsection (c) of this section, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the
deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be
liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1012. Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status:
(a)Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of
ownership of any facility in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with
respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
(b)Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current
ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new
owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of
the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of way.
(c)Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the
name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 514/735
Sec. 16-1013. General Construction Standards:
(a)Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic
control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
(1) "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
(2) "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
(3) "Highway Design Manual";
(4) "Highway Standards Manual";
(5) "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
(6) "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
(7) "Flagger's Handbook"; and
(8) "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
(b)Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among
differing principles and standards required by this article, the city public works director shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision
shall be final. If requested, the city public works director shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-
25-2008)
Sec. 16-1014. Traffic Control:
(a)Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in
IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and this code.
(b)Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing
warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state,
and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work
on the rights of way.
(c)Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(d)Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will
partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 16-1020 of this
article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
(e)Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1015. Location Of Facilities:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 515/735
(a)General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility
facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements
of this subsection.
(1) No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city
public works director determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
(2) Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of the right of way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon,
and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right
of way.
(3) No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with
the usual travel on such right of way.
(4) No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility
of or by users of the right of way.
(5) Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes,
equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless
of location, for the particular application.
(b)Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
(1) Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way
lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right
of way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum
distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with
minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are
not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line
or as near as possible to the right of way line; and
f. No overhead lines are located in an area designated in city ordinances as an area where all
utilities shall be buried.
(2) Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of
way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet
(8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are
impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed
in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 516/735
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near
the right of way line as practicable and not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line
and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line or as near as practicable.
(3) Underground Parallel Facilities In Easements: As an alternate location, parallel underground
facilities may be located in an easement provided by or for the utility of a width deemed adequate by
the utility for such purposes. Said easement shall be adjacent to and parallel with the existing right of
way line, and shall be dedicated for utility purposes.
(c)Facilities Crossing Highways:
(1) No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the
ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
(2) Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle
passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
(3) Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree
(90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
(4) Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may
cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction Of
Electric Power And Communication Lines" (83 Ill. adm. code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside
of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
(5) Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility
may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service
life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
(6) Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an
underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
(d)Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may require that facilities be
located within particular rights of way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
(e)Freestanding Facilities:
(1) The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
(2) The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from
view.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 517/735
(f)Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
(1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
(2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
(3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and
materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless,
single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and
light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.
(g)Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
(1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility
has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other
means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway
structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized,
especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
(2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway
structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of
the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation
system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
(h)Appearance Standards:
(1) The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual
quality.
(2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or
alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of way user or to adjacent residents and
property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord.
057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 518/735
Sec. 16-1016. Construction Methods And Materials:
(a)Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
(1) Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located
at a minimum distance specified by the city engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring
shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all
vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in
diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger
shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may
be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be
preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system.
(2) Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done
in accord with the applicable portions of section 819 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road
And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with
requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench
at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city public works director.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be
protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the
roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved
portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the
city to be preserved.
(3) Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its
full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill or controlled low strength material shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility
shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the public works director, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 519/735
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades,
as determined by the public works director.
(4) Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway
only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. Unless a variance to the limitation set forth in
this subsection (a)(4) is permitted under section 16-1021 of this article, the following requirements
shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with
granular material of CA-6, CA-10, FA 1, FA 2, FA 6, or FA 21 gradation, as designated by the
public works director.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary
repair with two inches (2") of well compacted, cold mix asphalt placed on six inches (6") of well
compacted stone shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary
repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last
seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
(5) Encasement:
a. Casing pipe, when required, shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one piece fabrication or by
welding or jointed installation approved by the city.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits
unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty
(60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located
so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right of way.
(6) Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the
amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 520/735
Communication, cable or video service
lines
18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by
city)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage
line
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
(b)Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
(1) Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city rights of way shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative
code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "rules for
construction of electric power and communications lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole
construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may
be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for
maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
1. Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to
boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
2. If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking
or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of
"moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the
opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
3. Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and
March 15 of the current year, also known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current
year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
(2) Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground
facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to
move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring between the ditch lines, back of curb, or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench between ultimate ditch lines, back of curb, or toes of slopes, but only if prior to
roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 521/735
(3) Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved manner and in conformance with the
federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", and all other
applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(4) Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to
the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation
piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
(5) Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines,
sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed
the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
(6) Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground
facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending
one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the public works director. With the approval of the public works director, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground
mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
(c)Materials:
(1) General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those
meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
(2) Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the
prior written approval of the city public works director. When such storage is permitted, all pipe,
conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way
maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of
way, prior approval must be obtained from the city.
(3) Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous
materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
(d)Operational Restrictions:
(1) Construction operations on rights of way shall, at the discretion of the city, be discontinued when
such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such
operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
(2) These restrictions may be waived by the public works director when emergency work is required
to restore vital utility services.
(3) Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 522/735
(e)Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact
JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records
available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or
when requested by the city or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the
Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1017. Vegetation Control:
(a)Electric Utilities-Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree
trimming and vegetation control activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois
laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city as
permitted by law.
(b)Other Utilities-Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with
facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and
regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation,
but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit
required under this article.
(1) Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include
assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are
experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
(2) Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be
tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of
damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be
used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of
trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would
leave them in an unacceptable condition.
(c)Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require that special measures be
taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
(d)Chemical Use:
(1) Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals
on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
(2) Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the
utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the public works director that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1018. Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities:
(a)Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 523/735
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
(b)Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any
utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the
rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from
the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted
by applicable law;
(2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if
required;
(3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of
this article; or
(4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or
franchise.
(c)Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move
any facilities located within the rights of way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit,
the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and
shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
(d)Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the city, the
utility shall notify the city within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct
the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city public works director determines that
such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 057-2008, § 2, 8-25-
2008)
Sec. 16-1019. Cleanup And Restoration:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten
(10) days after any portion of the rights of way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction
or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances and
side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made in accordance with specifications provided
by the City Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to
that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. All areas disturbed by the construction
shall be resodded unless reseeding is approved in writing by the adjacent property owner. Unless other
arrangements can be documented, the permit holder is responsible for watering the restored area until
the new growth is well established. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the City
Public Works Director for good cause shown. (Ord. 057-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1020. Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance:
(a)General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 524/735
(b)Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
(1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take
immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of
equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is
available.
(2) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the City Public Works Director or his
or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been
taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the City police
shall be notified immediately.
(3) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as
practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
(c)Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken
in the right-of-way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 057-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1021. Variances:
(a)Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article
must do so in writing to the City Public Works Director as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
(b)Authority To Grant Variances: The City Public Works Director shall decide whether a variance is
authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
(c)Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The City Public Works Director may authorize a variance only if
the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
(1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular
right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
(2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision
from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
(d)Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the City
Public Works Director may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards
and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the
purposes of this article.
(e)Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including
denial of a variance, made by the City Public Works Director under the provisions of this article shall
have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as it may designate.
The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after
the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 525/735
seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord.
057-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1022. Penalties:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be
times when the City will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not
or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City's
costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility
that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay
the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 057-2008, 8-25-2008)
Sec. 16-1023. Enforcement:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the City may
have for enforcement of this article. (Ord. 057-2008, 8-25-2008)
APPENDIX A
ZONING 1
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE AND TITLE
The zoning ordinance of the city of Rock Island, Illinois, heretofore adopted October 4, 1976, be and is
hereby amended by striking all of said ordinance (appendix A of this code) except the title thereof and
inserting in lieu thereof the following. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE II. INTERPRETATION
The provisions of this appendix shall be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Where this appendix imposes
greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or other structures, of law or ordinance, the provisions of
this appendix shall prevail. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
Accessory Building Or Use:
Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure detached but located on the same lot as the principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
Accessory Use: A structure or use that: 1) is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with a principal building or use; 2) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; 3)
is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served; 4) contributed
to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants, business, or industry in the principal building or
principal use served; and 5) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 526/735
Adult Bookstore: An establishment for the sale, rental, or exchange of books, magazines, or
videocassettes, distinguished or characterized by primary emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas" as defined below including
instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual
activities. Adult bookstores do not include businesses which sell, rent, or exchange books, magazines,
or videocassettes as a sideline or adjunct to sales or rental of books, magazines, or videocassettes not
relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas".
Specific Anatomical Areas are defined as:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(2) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specific Sexual Activities are defined as:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theaters: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons,
used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specific anatomical areas" or "specific sexual activities" for observation by
patrons therein.
Adult Modeling And Entertainment Facility: An establishment having its primary activity the presentation
of live models displaying lingerie, or otherwise presenting live, artistic modeling, with said modeling
displaying the human body in a nude or seminude state, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specific anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Motion Picture Theaters: An enclosed building with capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Alley: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of
premises that front on a nearby street.
Amusement Center: Any premises which contains four (4) or more coin or token operated devices
played for a fee, such as pinball machines, foosball tables, pool tables and other similar entertainment or
amusement devices.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used or
intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities,
permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment.
Apartment/Dormitory: A multiunit dwelling for which each dwelling unit contains fewer than ten (10)
occupants whether related or unrelated. Each unit shall have two (2) exits and a common area of not
less than three hundred (300) square feet, which may include cooking and dining facilities and shall be
subject to relevant codes or regulations for behavior by students and others in effect at such educational
facility which are enforced by resident personnel of such educational facility.
Automobile Repair - Major: General repair, rebuilding of or reconditioning of engines of any type, motor
vehicles, trucks, buses or trailers. Collision service, including bodywork, frame or fender straightening or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 527/735
repair, overall painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailers or painting booth.
Automobile Repair - Minor: Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, touchup painting and
upholstering, replacement of minor parts and general tune up service to passenger automobiles and
trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons' capacity.
Automobile Service Station: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition the following
services may be rendered and sales made, and no other:
(1) Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts;
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but no recapping or regrooving;
(3) Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses,
floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings,
mirrors, and the like;
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing;
(5) Washing and polishing where no mechanical conveyor, blower, or steam cleaning device is
employed provided that no more than one single car bay of the service station shall be equipped with
washing equipment; and provided that the lot on which the washing equipment is to be located shall
be sufficient to provide on site waiting storage for a total number of vehicles equal to the number
capable of being processed during one-half (1/2) hour; and provided that a drip area shall be
provided where vehicles can be dried, located such that water will be confined to the site and will not
run onto any street or alley so as to cause a hazard.
(6) Greasing and lubrication;
(7) Providing and repairing fuel pumps and lines;
(8) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
(9) Emergency wiring repairs;
(10) Adjusting and repairing brakes;
(11) Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase or racing the motor;
(12) Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for filling station
customers, as accessory and incidental to principal operation;
(13) Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers and provision of
restroom facilities.
It shall be unlawful to provide major mechanical and bodywork, straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles, trucks or trailers not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other such characteristics. An automobile service station is not a repair
garage, a body shop, a car wash, an automobile wrecking yard or junkyard, nor a storage place for
rental trailers.
Automobile Wrecking Yard: Any place where two (2) or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts
thereof, are stored in the open, and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure
used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 528/735
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating
condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
Balcony: An outside deck located at least on the second floor or any higher floor of a dwelling building,
and can be cantilevered or supported on piers.
Bed And Breakfast: An operator occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the
public with no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent, in operation for more than ten (10) nights in a
twelve (12) month period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
"Operator" shall mean the owner of the bed and breakfast establishment, or the owner's agent, who is
required to reside in the bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous property.
Boarding House: An establishment with lodging for compensation offering accommodations for short
term transients or extended periods of time. Meals may or may not be provided (also referred to as
rooming house, lodging house, lodging room, does not include bed and breakfast).
Book/Stationery Store: An establishment dealing in books, printed materials and stationery supplies,
which is not an adult bookstore.
Building: Any permanently anchored structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls, each part shall be
deemed a separate building (see definition of Structure).
Building, Completely Enclosed: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from
other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only
by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
Building, Height Of: The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of
a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever
yields a greater height of building:
(1) The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot (5')
horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not
more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
(2) An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface
described in subsection (1) of this definition is more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum of any segment of the building.
Building Setback Line: See definition of Setback.
Building, Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to: buildings,
walls, swimming pools, signs and fences.
Bulk Storage: The storage of flammable or combustible liquid in an aboveground tank that is not for
dispensing purposes. If an aboveground tank is used for any bulk storage purposes, it is classified as a
"bulk storage tank" for the remainder of the calendar year in which it was so used.
Care Home, Large Residential: A residential care home for more than eight (8) persons, plus
supervisory or oversight personnel, living together as a single housekeeping unit who are disabled, as
defined by "disability" in this article, for the primary purpose of providing shelter.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 529/735
Care Home, Small Residential: A residential care home containing a single one-family dwelling unit for
eight (8) persons or fewer, plus supervisory or oversight personnel, living together as a single
housekeeping unit for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family like atmosphere.
Carport: A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles that may be enclosed on
not more than three (3) sides.
Church: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble
for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained
and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
Clinic Or Medical Health Center: A building containing an individual practitioner or an association or
group of physicians, dentists, clinical psychologists, or similar professional healthcare practitioners,
including assistants. The clinic may include apothecary, dental and mental laboratories, and/or x-ray
facilities, but shall not include inpatient or overnight care.
Club Or Lodge, Private: Nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual
dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof, the use of such premises being
restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such
premises provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic
beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided such sale of alcoholic beverages is in
compliance with the applicable federal, state and municipal laws.
Comprehensive Plan: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the city to guide and coordinate the
physical and economic development of the city. The comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to,
plans and programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public buildings
or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
Convenience Store: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household
items, commercial products associated with minor auto servicing (but not automobile parts), and other
goods commonly associated with the same including the retail dispensing of vehicular fuels.
Daycare Center: A childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours
per day for: 1) more than eight (8) children in a family dwelling unit, or 2) more than three (3) children in
a facility other than a family dwelling unit.
Daycare Home: A family dwelling unit occupied by attending family which receives more than three (3)
and up to a maximum of eight (8) children for less than twenty four (24) hours a day. The maximum of
eight (8) children includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of
twelve (12). A daycare home may also be a family home which receives adults who are sixty (60) years
of age or older.
Deck: An outside porch without a roof not necessarily attached to a dwelling wall, whose floor is built on
a foundation, piers, or blocks, as a distinct structure requiring a building permit, above ground grade,
limited to a maximum height of the adjacent first floor level in the dwelling. It is not allowed any higher
level than above grade, to avoid the deck floor from creating a de facto roofed porch underneath; but a
deck can be located on the existing roof of dwellings and garages.
Disability: As defined by the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), a person who has:
(1) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities;
(2) A record of such an impairment; or
(3) Is regarded as having such an impairment.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 530/735
District; Zoning: A portion of the territory of the city wherein uniform requirements or various
combinations thereof apply to structures, lots, and uses under the terms of this zoning ordinance.
Dormitory: A building used as group living quarters for a student body operated by a college or university
or other such institution of higher education, subject to relevant codes and regulations for behavior of
students and others in effect at such educational facility which are enforced by resident personnel at
such institution.
Dwelling Group: Two (2) or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings, or boarding or
lodging houses, located on one zoning lot, but not including tourist courts or motels.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building or portion thereof designed or altered for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, One-Family: A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family, and entirely
separated from any other dwelling by space totaling at least nine hundred (900) square feet and the
structure's length does not exceed four (4) times its width and is affixed to a permanent masonry or
concrete footing and/or foundation.
Dwelling, Row (Townhouse): A row of two (2) to twelve (12) attached, one-family, party wall dwellings.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two (2)
families.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for a family
or for a community residence as a single housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and
kitchen facilities in addition to sleeping and living areas.
Easement: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for certain limited purposes.
Educational Institution: Public, private, or parochial school, charitable or nonprofit junior college, college
or university, other than trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or
without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal
or other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated
and underground water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
general welfare but not including buildings.
Family: One or more persons each related to them by blood, marriage, or adoption (including foster
children), together with such relatives of the respective spouses who are living with the family in a single
dwelling and maintaining a common household. A family may also be composed of not to exceed three
(3) persons not so related, provided that such unrelated persons live in a single dwelling and maintain a
common household and single housekeeping unit. A family includes any domestic servants and not
more than one gratuitous guest residing with said family; such servants or guest shall be included in the
unrelated persons attained by this definition, and shall not be in addition thereto.
Farm: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees,
flora, fauna, and grain, and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry, feeding of such farm poultry and farm animals shall be subject to the regulations of the state of
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 531/735
Illinois environmental protection agency. The term "farming" includes the operating of such an area for
one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and
storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and provided further that farming does not include the
extraction of minerals. The term "farm" includes farm dwellings.
Fast Food Restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of rapidly prepared food
directly to the customer in a ready to consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building
or off premises. The establishment may include a drive-up or drive-through service facility or offer curb
service.
Fence: A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials or plantings/shrubbery planted or erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Decorative corner treatments which do not exceed six feet (6') in length and three feet (3') in height are
not considered fences if it allows for fifty percent (50%) or more open visibility.
Foster Family Home: A family home which provides full time family care to foster children unrelated to
them. Foster family homes are limited to a maximum of eight (8) children, including the foster family's
children, unless all of the children unrelated to the foster family are of common parentage, or the
applicable department of the state of Illinois has waived the limit of eight (8) unrelated children to
facilitate an adoptive placement.
Foster Group Homes: A childcare facility which regularly provides care for no more than ten (10) children
placed by and under the supervision of a child welfare agency licensed by the applicable department of
the state of Illinois. Adult supervision shall be provided on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
Frontage Lots: See definition of Lot, Multiple Frontage.
Garage, Bus Or Truck: A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks,
truck trailers, tractors, commercial vehicles, and buses exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) ton capacity.
Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building used for storage of selfpropelled
passenger vehicles or trailers of the occupants of the premises and/or not more than one truck
of a rated capacity exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons.
Halfway House/Group Home: A temporary residential living arrangement for up to five (5) persons,
excluding staff, who are receiving therapy, counseling and/or care from support staff who are present at
all times residents are present, for the following purposes:
(1) To help them reenter society while housed under supervision while under constraints of
alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited to, prerelease, work release, and probationary
programs;
(2) To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention
and care in order to achieve personal independence;
(3) To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic abuse and/or neglect; or
(4) To provide adult congregate living arrangements without nursing care.
Hazardous Waste: Any substance or material that, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or
otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or
otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S. environmental protection
agency (EPA) has developed a list of hazardous wastes based upon corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity.
Hazardous substances include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chlorine,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 532/735
nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and their common salts, lead, nickel and
mercury and their inorganic salts, or metallo-organic derivatives; coal, tar acids, such as phenol and
cresols and their salts, and all radioactive materials.
Health/Recreational And Physical Training Club: An indoor facility including uses such as game courts,
exercise equipment, locker rooms, training studios, jacuzzi and/or sauna, and pro shop.
Height: See definition of Building, Height Of.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit
as a secondary use, and which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential
purposes. There are major and minor home occupations which are clearly addressed under the general
provisions of this appendix.
Hospital Or Sanitarium: An institution in which patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical
care; or for the care of contagious diseases or terminal patients, and may include inpatient overnight
care.
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and
providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities and is not a
bed and breakfast (see also definition of Motel).
Hotel, Transient: See definition of Boarding House.
Household Hazardous Waste: A hazardous waste that can catch fire, react, or explode under certain
circumstances, or that is corrosive or toxic. Common household hazardous waste items, and others not
included on this list, might contain materials that are ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic such as: drain
openers, oven cleaners, wood and metal cleaners and polishers, automotive oil and fuel additives,
grease and rust solvents, carburetor and fuel injection cleaners, air conditioning refrigerants, starter
fluids, paint thinners, paint strippers and removers, adhesives, herbicides, insecticides, and
fungicides/wood preservatives.
Independent Trailer Coach Or Independent Mobile Home: A transportable nonpermanent single-family
dwelling unit on wheels suitable for year round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste
disposal, heating and air conditioning, electrical conveniences and with self-contained toilet and bath or
shower facilities as conventional housing. This definition is not intended to include recreational vehicle
types.
Junkyard: Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto and building wrecking
yards.
Kennel: Any structure or premises where dogs and cats over four (4) months of age are kept, raised,
bred or boarded for commercial purposes excluding animal hospitals, clinics and pet shops.
Land Use Plan: The comprehensive long range plan for the desirable use of land in the jurisdiction, as
officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the city council, the purpose of such plan being
among other things, to serve as a guide to the zoning and prospective changes in the zoning of land to
meet changing community needs in the subdividing and use of undeveloped land.
Legal Objector: The owner of a lot, parcel, or tract of land, which is next to a lot, parcel, or tract of land,
for which a special use is proposed or which is the subject of an amendment of this appendix. For the
purposes of this appendix, a lot shall be deemed to be next to another if the lots, parcels, or tracts share
a common lot boundary line in whole or in part or if a common lot boundary in whole or in part would
occur if all street, highway, or alley right of way between such lots were excluded.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 533/735
Loading And Unloading Space, Off Street: An open hard surfaced area of land other than a street or
public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors,
and trailers, to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
Lodging Or Rooming House: See definition of Boarding House.
Lodging Room: See definition of Boarding House.
Lot: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of development or
transfer of ownership. A lot may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
Lot Area/Coverage: The area of the lot covered by buildings above grade, excluding permitted
projections.
Lot, Corner: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their full length upon streets.
Lot, Front Or Frontage: The length of any one property line of a premises, which property line abuts a
legally accessible street right of way, except alleys.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel and most remote from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: A lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot, Multiple Frontage: A lot that fronts on two (2) or more street rights of way, such as corner lots,
through lots, etc.
Lot Of Record: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat recorded with the recorder of deeds of Rock
Island County, Illinois, in accordance with state law.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across
an alley or not.
Lot, Through: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately
parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot, Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the side lot
lines at the front building line.
Lot, Zoning: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building
permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit,
under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation
after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at
the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent
foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer, self-contained motor home or other
recreational vehicle is not to be considered a mobile home.
Modular Home: Factory built housing certified to meet the current building codes and amendments as
adopted by Rock Island County, Illinois, and the requirements of the Illinois department of public health,
applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to the same
standards as site built homes.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 534/735
Motel: A building or a group of buildings, whether attached or in connected units, used as individual
sleeping units designed primarily for transient travelers and providing for accessory off street parking
facilities. The term "motel" includes, but is not limited to, buildings designated as auto courts, tourist
courts, motor hotels, motor lodges, and similar terms.
Motor Freight Terminal: A building or area in which trucks, including tractor or trailer units, are parked,
stored, or serviced, including the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities
for the temporary storage of loads prior to transshipment.
Nightclub: A tavern or other commercial establishment where alcoholic beverages and/or food are
served for consumption on premises and a dance floor and/or entertainment are provided (see also
definition of Tavern).
Nonconforming Use: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning
district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established.
Nursery School: An institution providing instructional/educational services for six (6) preschool aged
children.
Ordinance: Reference to "ordinance" herein shall be construed as this zoning ordinance.
Owner: Applies to the entity in which title is vested in the building or land.
Parking Area, Accessory: An area of one or more parking spaces located at the same property as the
building, structure or premises it is intended to serve, or on adjoining or nearby property and of such
shape and nature as to be appropriate and usable for the parking or storage, loading and unloading of
self-propelled vehicles.
Parking Space, Automobile: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than one hundred
sixty (160) square feet (8 1/2' x 19') exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and
work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half
(1 1/2) ton capacity.
Person: An individual, group of individuals, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture or other
entity, and includes any trustee, estate, receiver, assignee or personal representative.
Plan Commission: Planning commission of the city of Rock Island.
Planned Unit Development: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its
own environment, controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement
as to which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it
is located. The developer or developers of a planned unit development may be granted relief from
specific land use regulations and design standards and may be awarded certain premiums in return for
assurances of an overall quality of development, including any specific features which will be of
exceptional benefit to the community as a whole.
Porch: A roofed structure (either enclosed or unenclosed), attached to one or two (2) permanent exterior
walls of a dwelling building, whose floor is at or just below the level of the dwelling's first floor adjacent to
the porch.
Principal Building: A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is
conducted.
Property Owner: Any individual, group of individuals, association, corporation, joint stock association,
joint venture, or any other entity in whose name the legal title to the real estate is recorded.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 535/735
Recreational Vehicle: A general term for a vehicular unit bearing current license and/or registration, not
exceeding thirty six feet (36') in overall length, eight feet (8') in width or twelve feet (12') in overall height,
which includes, but is not limited to, the following specific vehicle types:
Boat Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed to transport a boat for
recreation and vacation use and which is licensed and registered for highway use.
Camper Trailer: A folding or collapsible vehicular structure without its own (motive) power designed as
temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation uses; and (to) be licensed and
registered for highway use.
Horse Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed primarily for the
transportation of horses and which, in combination with the towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for
highway use.
Motor Home: A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily
designed to provide temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and to be
licensed and registered for highway use. This category shall include converted bus campers.
Recreational Boat: A vessel, whether impelled by wind, oars or mechanical devices, and which is
designed primarily for recreation or vacation use. A recreation vessel when mounted upon a boat trailer
shall be considered one unit. If the recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied gas containers, they
shall meet the standards of the interstate commerce commission or the federal department of
transportation standards in existence at the effective date hereof.
Travel Trailer: A rigid structure without its own motive power designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
camping, recreation and vacation use; to be licensed and registered for highway use; and which, when
equipped for the road, has a body width of not more than eight feet six inches (8'6").
Truck Camper: A portable structure without its own motive power designed to be transported on a power
vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and which, in
combination with the carrying vehicle (shall) be licensed and registered for highway use.
Utility Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed and/or used for the
transportation of all manner of motor vehicles, goods or materials and licensed and registered for
highway use.
Refuse Equipment Operation: The storage, repair, maintenance, sale or lease of equipment used in the
collection, storage or transportation of refuse, including, but not limited to, vehicles, containers and any
repair, parts, accessories and appurtenances thereof.
Residential Solid Waste: Waste that normally originates in a residential environment.
Restaurant: A food establishment serving full course meals prepared on the premises and which may
serve alcoholic beverages.
Right Of Way: A strip of land dedicated to the city or other unit of government for streets, alleys, and
other public improvements.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line and the nearest front, side or
rear line of the building, including terraces or any covered projection thereof, including steps.
Stable, Riding: A building/buildings including other structures and grounds used for the boarding or
housing of horses used for riding sessions or pleasure riding on the premises.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 536/735
Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface
of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly
above a usable or unused under floor space is more than six feet (6') above grade as defined herein for
more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade as
defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story.
Story, Half: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story.
Street: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar
designations, but excludes an alley or way for pedestrian use only.
Structural Alteration: Any changes in the supporting members of a building including, but not limited to,
bearing walls, load bearing walls, load bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial
change in the roof or the exterior walls.
Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Tavern: Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises as
the principal use; and where sandwiches, snacks and other food products are available for purchase.
"Tavern" does not include "restaurants", where the principal business is serving food (includes "bar" and
"cocktail lounge") (see definition of Nightclub).
Terrace/Patio: An unroofed paved area located outside at ground grade, which is paved as concrete,
stone, brick or wood paver blocks (also known as patio blocks).
Theater: An establishment used to observe films and other visual material which is neither an adult
motion picture theater nor adult mini-motion picture theater.
Tourist Courts, Motor Lodges, Motels: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage
attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, motor lodges
or other similar type uses.
Tourist Home: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
Toxic Waste: Any combination of pollutants, including disease carrying agents, that, after discharge and
upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, can cause death or disease,
mutations, deformities or malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring and that adversely affect the
environment, which are being discarded by being disposed, incinerated or recycled.
Trailer Park Or Mobile Home Park: An area of land upon which two (2) or more occupied trailer coaches
or mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any
building, structure, tent, vehicles, or enclosure used or intended for as, a part of the equipment of such
trailer coach park.
Truck Parking Area Or Yard: Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks,
tractors, truck trailers, and including commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading. Does not
include class B trucks.
Unrelated Group Family: A group of no more than five (5) unrelated adults living together as a common
household by doing their own cooking and living together, as distinguished from a group occupying a
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 537/735
boarding house, lodging house, club, fraternity, sorority, or hotel. Unrelated group families are permitted
with administrative approval, provided that they comply with the standards and conditions specified in
article IV of this appendix.
Yard: The space adjacent to lot lines which is required to be open and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward except as otherwise permitted. The minimum depth of width of a yard shall consist of the
horizontal distance between the lot line and nearest point of the foundation or exterior wall of a building.
Yard, Front: An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principal building and the street
right of way except for an alley, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as
hereinafter specified.
Yard, Rear: An open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the rear lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
Yard, Side: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the
side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
Zoning Maps: The map or maps incorporated into this appendix as a part hereof. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-
2002)
ARTICLE IV. ENFORCEMENT
AND ADMINISTRATION
4.0 Duty To Enforce: It shall be the duty of the planning and redevelopment administrator, or designee,
with the aid of the police department, to enforce this appendix in accordance with the administrative
provisions of this appendix.
4.1 Application For Building Permit: Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
plans in duplicate and plot plan drawn to scale in ink or blueprint, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of the building or structure to be
erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part, the proposed number of
families or housekeeping units, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as
may be necessary for the enforcement of this appendix. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the
applicant when approved by the building inspector together with such permit as may be granted.
4.2 Survey Stakes: Prior to building construction, stakes based on actual survey shall be set and shall
be maintained in their prior location on the property during construction.
4.3 Certificate Of Occupancy: Before using any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, or enlarged in use of structure, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained
from the building official. Such certificate shall show that such building, premises or part thereof, and the
proposed use thereof conform with the provisions of this appendix.
4.4 Violation: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this appendix shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
4.5 Legal Action: In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the provisions
of this appendix, the city attorney, in addition to other remedies under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, is
hereby authorized to institute an action or proceedings to prevent such erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 538/735
4.6 Unrelated Group Family Uses:
4.6a Uses Permitted With Administrative Approval Purposes Statement: This procedure has been
developed to permit certain uses which would only be permitted with approval of the planning
commission or board of zoning appeals, to be approved by the planning and redevelopment
administrator or his/her designee, when such uses meet established conditions as set forth herein. The
planning and redevelopment administrator shall not vary any of the applicable conditions.
4.6b Procedure: Upon receiving an application for a use with administrative approval, the planning and
redevelopment administrator, or his/her designee shall process the application to determine its
conformity with the applicable standards, the permit shall be granted by the planning and redevelopment
administrator or his/her designee. If the land and its structure do not meet the standards, the permit shall
be denied by the planning and redevelopment administrator or his/her designee. The standards may not
be varied by the planning and redevelopment administrator or his/her designee in considering the
application.
(1) Initiation And Application: Any person owning or having interest in the subject property may file an
application to use such land for a use permitted with administrative approval provided for in this
appendix in the zoning district in which the land is situated. Such application shall be submitted to the
planning and redevelopment administrator together with the application fee in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling unit and such proof that the land and the structure comply with
the requirements set forth for the permit, as the planning and redevelopment administrator may require,
including a site plan of the subject property.
(2) Unrelated Group Family Uses Established Prior To April 26, 1991: Unrelated group family uses
established prior to April 26, 1991, which presently are required by this appendix to obtain administrative
approval may continue such use if application to the planning and redevelopment administrator was
made prior to October 26, 1991, with proof that the use existed prior to said date, proof that the minimum
off street parking spaces, as required prior to April 26, 1991, have been provided and provided that
requirements of the city's housing, building and fire codes are met. Any existing unrelated group family
use that does not meet the above stated conditions will not be allowed to continue as an unrelated group
family use.
(3) Term Of Approval:
a. In any case where a permit for a use permitted with administrative approval has not been
established within six (6) months after the granting thereof, then without further action by the city, the
use permitted with administrative approval shall be null and void.
b. If a use permitted with administrative approval, including an existing use, has been discontinued
for a period of one year or more, it shall not be reestablished without obtaining new approval from the
city.
(4) Revocation: The planning and redevelopment administrator may revoke a use granted with
administrative approval upon giving the owner and any interested persons who applied for the use at
least ten (10) days' written notice of the grounds for revocation and the opportunity for a public hearing
before the city council at which time they may present evidence bearing upon the question and cross
examine witnesses. The grounds for which a use permit with approval may be revoked are:
a. The owner or interested person applying for the use has knowingly furnished false or misleading
information or withheld relevant information on any application for any use knowingly suffered or
caused another to furnish or withhold such information on his/her behalf.
b. The owner, his/her agent, employee, officer, tenant, licensee or occupant has violated any of the
provisions of this article or the standards required to obtain the use with administrative approval, or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 539/735
that the property no longer complies with the standards necessary to obtain a use with administrative
approval; provided however, that the planning and redevelopment administrator shall give at least ten
(10) days' prior written notice to the owner of the alleged violation or manner in which the property no
longer complies with the standards, with the opportunity to correct the problem during said time
provided further, however, that violations of article VIII of this appendix shall not be cause for
revocation.
c. The property has become a "nuisance" as that term is defined in subsection 4.6b(5) of this section.
The property owner shall be responsible for the acts of his/her agents, employees, officers, tenants,
licensees, and occupants.
(5) Nuisance: A property shall be considered a nuisance when any of the following shall occur:
a. The owner, his/her agents, employees, officers, tenants, licensees or occupants have been
convicted of three (3) or more violations of this code for occurrences in any twelve (12) month period
or occurring on said property.
b. The owner has received three (3) or more notices for the property from the planning and
redevelopment administrator during any twelve (12) month period which have not resulted in the
revocation of the use granted with administrative approval due to the fact that the owner has
corrected the alleged violation.
4.6c Group Occupancy:
(1) Purpose Statement: The purposes of this appendix include conserving the taxable value of land
and buildings, lessening and avoiding congestion in the public streets, promoting the public health,
safety, comfort and welfare, securing and promoting the quiet, seclusion, clean air and clean
surroundings in residential neighborhoods. In order to accomplish these objectives, the city has adopted
regulations limiting the occupancy of each dwelling unit to a single "family".
In order to accomplish these objectives without prohibiting those group occupancies which are
compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located, and without unlawful restrictions
against protected populations, the city adopts the unrelated group family provisions set forth in this
portion of this appendix.
(2) Standards For Unrelated Group Families: No use permitted with administrative approval shall be
approved by the planning and redevelopment administrator unless he/she finds all of the following
standards are met:
a. The number of residents complies with requirements of this appendix.
b. The parking requirements of two (2) off street parking spaces per dwelling unit have been met.
c. The proposed unrelated group family use is not within three hundred feet (300') of another existing
unrelated group family use, which requires a use with administrative approval, or one which has
obtained a use permitted with approval or special use in lieu of a use with administrative approval.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the property line of the proposed use to the property line of the existing use.
d. In order to ensure that the structure and rooms therein are used as originally designed and
intended, the proposed use will not require or include structural alterations as that term is defined in
the uniform housing code or other building codes adopted by the city.
e. The structure meets the requirements of the city's housing, building and fire codes as set forth in
this code or the codes adopted by reference herein.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 540/735
(3)Reinspection Requirements:
a. All unrelated group family uses are required to be inspected to determine city housing, building
and fire code compliance every two (2) years that such use is maintained. The first reinspection will
take place two (2) years after receiving administrative approval from the city. An inspection fee of
sixty dollars ($60.00) per dwelling unit shall be paid by the owner thereof.
(4)Revocation Of Administrative Approval For Unrelated Group Family Uses: Administrative approval of
a group occupancy shall be revoked in the event the planning and redevelopment administrator
determines it has not been operated in conformance with the above standards or other requirements
of this appendix. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 008-2009, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-2009)
ARTICLE V. BOARD OF APPEALS 1, 2
5.0 Creation, Membership And Procedure: A board of appeals consisting of seven (7) members shall be
appointed by the mayor and approved by city council in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes. The city council may remove any member of the board for cause and after a public
hearing.
5.1 Chairman Elected: The board shall elect its own chairman and have the power to adopt rules and
regulations for its own government, not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this appendix or
any other ordinance of the city of Rock Island. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at
such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the vice chairman, may
administer oaths and compel attendance of the witnesses.
5.2 Meetings: Meetings of the board shall be open to the public, minutes shall be kept of proceedings,
showing the action of the board and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, or failing
to vote, indicating that fact and records shall be made of the board's examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board.
5.3 Quorum: Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall act by resolution,
and the concurring vote of four (4) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this appendix, or to effect any variation in the requirements of this
appendix.
5.4 Assistance To Board: The board may call on the city departments for assistance in the performance
of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such departments to render such assistance to the board as may
reasonably be required.
5.5 Applications And Appeals: An application to the board, in cases in which it has original jurisdiction
under the provisions of this appendix, may be taken by any property owner, including a tenant, or by any
governmental officer, department, board or bureau. Such application shall be filed with the planning and
redevelopment administrator who transmits the same, together with all the plans, specifications and
other papers pertaining to the application, to the board.
5.6 Appeal: An appeal to the board may be taken by any property owner, including a tenant, or by any
governmental officer, department, board or bureau, affected by any ruling of the building official. Such an
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as prescribed by the rules of the board, by filing with the
planning and redevelopment administrator a notice of appeal, specifying grounds thereof. The planning
and redevelopment administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board such notice of appeal, together
with all the plans and papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) toward
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 541/735
the costs of processing the application. Should the application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal
notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon the written request of the applicant.
5.7 Hearing: The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on an application for appeal. It shall
give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing by insertion in a daily
newspaper published in the city of Rock Island, and shall also give notice delivered personally or by mail
at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the applicant or appellant, and to the
building official and to the respective owners of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the premises
in question. Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent, or by attorney. The board shall
decide the application or appeal within a reasonable time.
5.8 Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by an order which may on due cause shown, be granted by the board on an
application, after notice to the building inspector or by a court of record.
5.9 Powers Of The Board: The board shall have jurisdiction in matters and shall have the specific and
general powers provided by this appendix pertaining to:
Administrative review.
Certain industries in I-2 districts.
Interpretation of maps.
Nonconforming uses.
Special exceptions.
Temporary uses.
Variances.
5.10 Variances: To authorize or appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this appendix
as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this appendix will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this appendix
shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows: Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property, at the time of enactment of this ordinance, or by
reason of topographic conditions, or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such
piece of property, or of the use or development of property immediately adjoining the piece of property in
question, the literal enforcement of the provisions of this appendix would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
unnecessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this appendix shall be observed and substantial
justice done. The Board shall make final decisions on all variances except for variances for business
zoned properties on parcels twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or larger in total area. In those
circumstances, the Board will conduct the public hearing and then make a recommendation to the City
Council for final action. In authorizing a variance, the Board may attach thereto such reasonable
conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use
as it may deem advisable in the interest of the furtherance of the purposes of this appendix.
5.10a No such variance in the provisions or requirements of this appendix shall be authorized by the
Board and/or City Council unless the Board and/or City Council find that all of the following conditions
exist:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 542/735
(1) The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the
conditions allowed by the regulations in that zone;
(2) The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question as to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or classes of uses in the same zoning district;
and
(3) The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Such variance is
necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right-of-way possessed by
other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity.
5.10b No variance shall be authorized unless the Board and/or City Council specifically finds that the
condition or situation of the specific piece of property for which the variance is sought is not of so typical
or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation, under an
amendment of this appendix, for such conditions or situations.
5.11 Special Exceptions: In addition to permitting the special exceptions heretofore specified in this
appendix, the Board shall have the authority to permit the following.
5.12 Nonconforming Uses: The substitution of a nonconforming use for another nonconforming use, if no
structural alterations, except those required by law or ordinance are made; provided, however, that any
use so substituted shall be of the same or a more restricted classification. The expansion of a
nonconforming use through structural alterations, provided that said expansion shall not be hazardous,
harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood, as determined by the Board.
In all cases, the expansion shall be made to conform to the requirements of the zone in which said
nonconforming use is located at the time of the appeal, unless a variance to said requirements is
granted by the Board.
5.13 Temporary Uses And Permits: The temporary use of a building or premises in any district for a
purpose or use that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by this appendix, provided that such
use be of a true temporary nature and does not involve the erection of substantial buildings. Such permit
shall be granted in the form of a temporary and revocable permit for not more than a twelve (12) month
period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare.
5.14 Certain Industries In I-2 Districts: In authorizing certain industries under section 31.2 of this
appendix, the Board shall find due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures,
and the consistency therewith of the proposed use and development. Before authorizing a use as a
special exception, the Board shall determine whether the proposed exception or use would be
hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of
noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire and safety
hazards, sewage waste and pollution, transportation and traffic, aesthetic and psychological effects. The
Board may utilize and give recognition to those performance standards which are available in model
codes or ordinances, or have been developed by planning, manufacturing, health, architectural and
engineering research organizations, and can be applied to the proposed use, to assist it in reaching a
fair and objective decision.
5.15 Requirements And Conditions: Upon authorizing a temporary use and/or special exception, the
Board may impose such reasonable requirements and conditions, in addition to those expressly
stipulated in this appendix for the particular temporary use and/or special exception as the Board may
deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
5.16 Interpretation Of Map: Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or as recorded, differs
from the street and lot lines indicated on the zoning map, the Board after notice to the owners of the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 543/735
property, and after a public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and
purpose of this appendix for the particular section or district in question.
5.17 Action Of The Board: In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of this appendix, reverse, affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as, in the Board's opinion ought to be made, and to that end, the Board has all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
5.18 Judicial Review: All final administrative decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to judicial
review, pursuant to the provisions of the "Administrative Review Act", approved May 8, 1945, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
5.19 Refiling Of Board Of Zoning Appeals Cases: The refiling of denied requests or requests for removal
of stipulations attached to approved cases by the Board of Zoning Appeals, that are not substantially or
materially different from the previously filed request, shall not be accepted from the same or different
person for the following periods of time:
(1) For a six (6) month period from the date of the first decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals on
the request.
(2) For a one year period from the date of subsequent decisions by the Board of Zoning Appeals
on the request.
The City Planning and Redevelopment Administrator shall determine whether a request is substantially
or materially different and submittable, although the Board of Zoning Appeals may, by majority vote,
reverse a decision of the Planning and Redevelopment Administrator to not accept a request following a
denied request on the property or request for removal of stipulations attached to approved cases by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 33-2003, 4-21-2003; Ord. 008-2009, 2-2-
2009; Ord. 014-2018, 4-23-2018)
ARTICLE VI. DISTRICT CHANGES AND
ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
6.0 Hearing: In accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, the city council may,
from time to time, amend or change by ordinance, the number, shape or area of districts established on
the zoning map, or the regulations set forth in this appendix; but no such amendment or change shall
become effective unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change shall first be submitted to
the city planning commission for approval, disapproval or suggestions, and said planning commission
shall have been allowed a reasonable time, for consideration and report. The planning commission shall
give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing by insertion in a daily
newspaper published in the city of Rock Island, and shall also give notice delivered personally or by mail
at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the applicant, to the building official, and to
the respective owners of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the premises in question.
6.1 Protests: In case a written protest against a proposed change in the boundaries of a district signed
and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of either the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed
with the city clerk, such amendment shall not be passed or become effective except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the council. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be
served by the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment, and a copy upon the
applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the
application for the proposed amendment.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 544/735
6.2 Application For Change: Any person desiring a change in zoning of property shall make application
thereof, and in doing so, shall accompany the petition for such change in zoning, or the ordinance
introduced for the purpose of changing such zoning, with a statement giving the names and addresses
of the owners of all properties lying within the block or blocks where the proposed change is to be. Such
petition or ordinance seeking a change in zoning shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) toward the cost of processing the application. Should the application be
withdrawn prior to publication of the legal notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon written request
of the applicant.
6.3 Failure To Notify: The failure to notify, as provided by this article, shall not invalidate any ordinance,
provided such failure was not intentional, and the omission of the name of any owner or occupant of
property who may, in the opinion of the city planning commission, be affected by such amendment,
supplement or change, unless such omission is intentional, shall not invalidate any ordinance passed
hereunder, it being the intention of this article to provide so far as may be possible for notice to the
persons substantially interested in the proposed change that an ordinance is pending before the council,
proposing to make a change in zoning.
6.4 Refiling Of Denied Requests: Upon denial by the city council of an application to change the zoning
of a particular property, a second zoning request which is not substantially or materially different from the
denied request shall not be accepted from the same or a different person, for a public hearing to be held
within six (6) months from the date of city council denial. Subsequent requests which are also not
substantially or materially different shall not be accepted for a public hearing to be held within one year
from the last date of city council denial. The planning and redevelopment administrator shall determine
whether a request is substantially or materially different and submittable, although the city council may,
by majority vote, reverse a decision of the planning and redevelopment administrator to not accept a
rezoning request for public hearing.
6.5 Special Use Permits:
6.5a General Description: This procedure is established to provide a special use permit for those areas
of the city that are zoned, but in which unusual circumstances prevail, where it would be in the best
interest of the safety, health and welfare of the residents of a zoned district that a special use permit be
issued rather than a change of zoning be granted.
(1) Such "special uses" shall fall into two (2) categories:
a. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest; and
b. Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise
to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
6.5b Application For A Special Use: An application for a special use permit may be filed in any case
where the planning commission has denied rezoning, but has recommended to the applicant that he file
an application for a special use permit. In that event, the applicant shall file an application for such a
permit with the planning and redevelopment administrator on a form he shall prescribe. The application
shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data prescribed by the planning commission and shall
include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed
special use will conform to the standards set forth in subsection 6.5e of this section. The city council may
on its own motion initiate a special use proceeding, and if initiated, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
6.5c Hearing Upon Application: Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to
in subsection 6.5b of this section, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed special
use. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such a
manner as the city council, by rule, prescribes.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 545/735
6.5d Notice Of Hearing: The council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application of an
appeal. It shall give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing by insertion in
a daily newspaper published in the city of Rock Island, and shall also give notice delivered personally or
by mail at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the applicant or appellant and to
the building official, and to the respective owners of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the
premises in question. Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. The
council shall decide the application or appeal within a reasonable time.
6.5e Standards: No special use shall be recommended for approval by the city council unless such
council shall find:
(1) That the granting of a special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
(2) That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property
values within the neighborhood;
(3) That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or
are being provided;
(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed
as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and
(6) Restrictions for the use should be consistent with the district in which the use would normally
be located except as may be modified by the city council.
(7) That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the
district in which it is located, except as such regulations may in each instance be modified by city
council.
6.5f Conditions And Safeguards: Prior to the granting of any special use, the city council shall stipulate
such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and
operation of the special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in subsection 6.5e of this section. In all cases in which special
uses are granted, the city council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary
as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being complied with.
6.5g Authorization: The city council shall not authorize a special use permit unless the council
specifically finds that the condition or situation of the special piece of property for which the special use
is sought is not of so typical or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a
general regulation, under an amendment to this appendix, for such conditions or stipulations.
6.5h Term Of Permit: Said special use permit, when granted, shall be in full force and effect only as long
as the applicant of the property affected retains ownership of said property. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002;
Ord. 33-2003, §§ 2, 3, 4-21-2003; Ord. 008-2009, §§ 4, 5, 2-2-2009)
ARTICLE VII. DISTRICTS AND MAP
7.1 Classes Of Districts: For the purpose of this appendix, the city of Rock Island is hereby divided into
twenty four (24) classes of districts as follows:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 546/735
AG-1 Agricultural preservation district.
AG-2 General agricultural district.
SE-1 Suburban estates low density district.
SE-2 Suburban estates medium density district.
R-1 One-family residence district.
R-2 One-family residence district.
R-3 One- and two-family residence district.
R-4 One- to six-family residence district.
R-5 Multiple-family residence district.
R-6 Multi-family residence district.
R-7 Mobile home/manufactured housing district.
U-1 University/college district.
C-1 Conservation district.
C-2 Conservation district.
O-1 Office district.
B-1 Neighborhood business district.
B-2 Central business district.
B-3 Community business district.
B-4 Highway/intensive business district.
ORT Office/research park and technology district.
I-1 Light industrial district.
I-2 General industrial district.
PUD Planned unit development district.
RCO Riverfront corridor overlay district.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 547/735
7.2 Map: The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled
"zoning map, city of Rock Island, Illinois", hereinafter referred to as the "zoning map", which is on
file in the city. The district boundary lines on said map are intended to follow lot lines, the
centerlines of streets or alleys, the centerline of streets or alleys projected, railroad right of way
lines, or the corporate limit lines, all as they existed at the time of enactment of this ordinance; but
when a district boundary line does not clearly coincide with lot lines, it shall be determined by
scaling.
7.3 Use Restrictions: Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership and
of record at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the use authorized on and the other district
requirements applying to the less restricted portion of such lot is more than fifty feet (50') beyond
said dividing district boundary line, such less restricted use shall be limited to the portion of the lot
lying within fifty feet (50') of said boundary line.
7.4 Location Questions: Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be
determined by the appropriate authority according to the rules and regulations which it may adopt.
7.5 Annexation: All territory which may hereinafter be annexed to the city of Rock Island shall be
classed automatically to the R-1 one-family residence district within the general land use
classification shall have been changed by amendment of this appendix as provided hereunder.
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.1 Zoning Affects Every Structure And Use: Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure
or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof or structure shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered or repaired, except in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the class of district in which it is located.
8.2 Continued Existing Uses: Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of
enactment of this ordinance may be continued, except certain nonconforming uses as provided in
section 8.3 of this article. Nothing in this appendix shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building official.
8.3 Nonconforming Uses: Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective date
hereof, or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in
which it is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except
as otherwise provided herein.
8.3a Any legal nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use provided there is no
physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, except as otherwise permitted
herein.
8.3b Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date hereof, or
of amendments hereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided
construction is started within six (6) months and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building
shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
8.3c Any nonconforming building or structure which has been or may be damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other act of God, may be reconstructed and used as before if it be
done within twelve (12) months of such calamity unless damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of its fair
market value, as determined by the board of appeals, at the time of such damage, in which case,
reconstruction shall be in accordance with the provisions of this appendix except as modified for singlefamily
uses as specified below:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 548/735
(1) Continuance On Nonconforming Single-Family Uses, Dwellings And Lots : Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section, a single-family use, a single-family dwelling and accessory structures
or a lot on which a single-family dwelling is located, that was conforming prior to the effective date
hereof, shall generally be treated as conforming for as long as the dwelling is used for a single-family
use. Accordingly, the following rights shall be granted under this section:
a. Structures for a nonconforming single-family use may be restored for a single-family use if
destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or by public enemy, reconstructed or repaired
provided all other requirements of this section are met.
b. Nonconforming single-family dwellings or nonconforming accessory structures to a single-family
use may be restored to the same degree of nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God, or by public enemy, repaired and structurally altered, provided such
construction does not increase or extend the degree of nonconformity. Nonconforming structures
shall not be reconstructed except in compliance with the provisions of this section.
c. A nonconforming single-family use and a nonconforming single-family dwelling and accessory
structures on a nonconforming lot shall be granted the same rights as above and any other rights
as if the lot were conforming.
d. A nonconforming single-family use and a nonconforming single-family dwelling and accessory
structures shall also be granted the same rights as for other nonconforming uses and structures.
8.3d No building, structure or premises where a nonconforming building or structure which has
been or may be discontinued for more than one year, or has been or may be changed to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall again be devoted to a nonconforming use.
8.3e Any building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use with a fair market value of less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00), as determined by the board of appeals, may be continued for a
period not to exceed three (3) years after enactment of this ordinance, whereupon such
nonconforming use shall be removed or changed to a conforming use.
8.3f Any legal, nonconforming use shall be enclosed on all sides by a solid wall or tight board fence
not less than eight feet (8') high if said use includes storage, repair or maintenance of vehicles,
equipment or materials on the premises and not within the building. Said wall or fence shall be
maintained to the satisfaction of the building official. Any use so described that is in existence at the
time of this amendment is adopted shall comply with said fencing requirement within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the adoption of this amendment.
8.3g A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter
devoted to a conforming use, and only if the required yards for the district in which it is located are
maintained for such enlargement, except as provided for under variances of this appendix.
8.3h No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to
permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied by such nonconforming use.
8.3i No nonconforming building in any residential district shall be so altered as to increase the
number of dwelling units therein.
8.3j No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required
usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot as it existed at the
effective date hereof, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or the same parcel.
8.4 Street Frontage Required; Flag Lots: Every lot shall have at least twenty feet (20') of frontage
which provides reasonable access onto public right of way dedicated to street purposes. No
building in the rear of a principal building on the same lot shall be used as a dwelling. Setbacks for
flag lots will be determined at the start of the buildable area of the lot.
8.5 Accessory Buildings In Residence Districts:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 549/735
8.5a No accessory building or buildings shall be erected in any required court or front yard. Except
for carports and garages, no accessory building shall be erected in a side yard. When erected in a
side yard the accessory building shall meet the setback requirements of the principal structure.
When erected in a rear yard it or they cumulatively shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%)
of a required rear yard and/or it or they shall not exceed the total ground floor footage of the
primary structure except for swimming pools and shall be a distance at least three feet (3') from all
lot lines adjoining lots which are in any R district, and at least six feet (6') from alley lines and from
any other building or structure on the same lot. Accessory buildings shall not exceed fifteen feet
(15') in height, except that an accessory building used in part or wholly as a dwelling for domestic
employees of the owners or of the tenants of the principal building shall not exceed two (2) stories
or twenty five feet (25') in height, provided it shall conform to the open space requirements of this
appendix for a principal building, and for the purpose of determining the front yard in such case, the
rear line of the rear yard required for the principal building shall be considered the front lot line for
the building in the rear. Where the natural grade of a lot at the front wall of the principal building is
more than eight feet (8') above the average established curb grade in front of the lot, a private
garage may be erected within any yard or court, but not within ten feet (10') of any street line,
provided that at least one-half (1/2) of the height of such private garage shall be below the level of
the yard or court.
8.5b Any accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or if at
least six feet (6') from the principal building, may be connected to the principal building by a
breezeway or similar structure, provided all yard and court requirements of this appendix for the
principal building are complied with, unless such accessory building is in a rear yard, in which case
the applicable provisions of subsection 8.5a of this section shall apply.
8.6 Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced Or Used By Another Building:
8.6a No lot, yard, court, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced in area or dimension
as to make any such area or dimension less than the minimum requirement. No required open
space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part of any open space required
for another building or structure.
8.6b The space occupied by a required private garage or parking area shall be considered the
same as any required open space provided about a principal building, and such space shall not be
reduced or included as any part of any required open space for another building or structure.
8.7 Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards: The following shall not be considered to be
obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
8.7a In All Yards: Porch awnings and canopies, steps which are necessary for access to a
permitted building, or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley; chimneys projecting not more
than eighteen inches (18") into the yard; clotheslines; flagpoles; arbors, trellises, closed and open
type fences, and hedges six feet (6') or less in height, provided no such fence, the top rail of which
is between two (2) and six feet (6') above the roadway surface or no other ground level sight
obstructions, exceptions being trimmed tree trunks and poles, shall be placed or permitted to
remain on any corner or reversed corner lot within the triangular area formed by the right of way
lines and a line connecting them at points twenty five feet (25') from the intersection of the right of
way lines, or in the case of a rounded right of way corner, from the intersection of the right of way
lines extended; open fences exceeding six feet (6') in height.
8.7b In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard; and
overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard. In AG-1 and AG-2
districts permitted roadside stands.
8.7c In Rear Yards: Open decks not enclosed, attached or detached off street parking spaces; open
off street parking spaces; accessory sheds, tool rooms, similar buildings or structures for domestic
or agricultural storage; balconies; breezeways and open porches; one-story windows projecting
three feet (3') or less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or
less into the yard.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 550/735
8.7d In Side Yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard for a distance not
exceeding ten percent (10%) of the required yard width but in no case, exceeding eighteen inches
(18").
8.8 Conversion Of Dwellings: The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of
any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be
permitted only within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted
under this appendix, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements
governing new construction in such a district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling
unit, dimensions of yards and other open spaces and off street parking. Each conversion shall be
subject to such further requirements as may be specified hereinafter with the article applying to
such district.
8.9 Minimum Ground Floor Area For Dwellings: A one-story dwelling or a story and a half, or twostory
dwelling shall meet the minimum floor area standards in the international building code and
be at least nine hundred (900) square feet with the length being no more than four (4) times the
width.
8.10 Traffic Visibility Across Corner Lots: In any district, except B-2, on any lot, no fence, structure
or planting shall be erected or maintained within twenty feet (20'), measured horizontally from the
property line where they intersect on a street corner.
8.11 Essential Services: Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law
and other ordinances of the city, it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services
from the application of this appendix.
8.12 Fences, Walls And Hedges: General provisions:
8.12a Fences, walls and hedges located in a yard adjacent to a public street of residential and
college and university zoned property shall be no more than forty two inches (42") in height
provided the top rail is not between two (2) and six feet (6') above the roadway surface or other
ground level sight obstructions and the smooth, finished, nonstructural or dressed side of a fence, if
any, shall be directed toward the neighboring properties.
8.12b Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed six feet (6') in height, except trimmed tree trunks
and poles in any side or rear yard, and the smooth, finished, nonstructural or dressed side of the
fence, if any shall be directed toward neighboring properties.
8.12c All fences, walls or hedges may be placed up to the property line, except in cases of a corner
lot or reversed corner lot, where they shall not be placed within the triangular area formed by the
right of way lines and a line connecting them at a point twenty five feet (25') from the intersection of
the right of way lines or in the case of a rounded corner from the intersection of the right of way
lines extended.
8.12d Fences up to ten feet (10') in height shall be permitted in any I district.
8.12e All refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses
shall be screened on a minimum of three (3) sides by a six foot (6') solid or tight board fence. All
refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial and industrial uses which do not conform to all
applicable provisions of this section shall be made to conform within three (3) years from the
effective date hereof. The planning and redevelopment administrator, or designee, shall make the
determination if it is an unreasonable hardship to require existing refuse and/or discard to be
screened on a case by case basis.
8.12f Snow fencing shall only be used on a temporary basis by public jurisdictions for public safety
purposes or in agricultural districts or as a permitted use for temporary festival/event enclosure
purposes.
8.12g Fencing shall not be allowed in floodways.
8.12h Swimming pool fencing requirements are outlined in the city building code.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 551/735
8.12i Barbed wire fences shall be permitted only in industrial districts and the bottom strand shall
be a minimum of eight feet (8') above grade.
8.12j Electric fences shall be permitted only in agricultural, or suburban estate SE-1 districts and
only for the enclosure of livestock. Electric fences shall not carry a charge greater than twenty five
(25) milliamperes nor a pulsating current lower than one-tenth (1/10) second in a one second cycle.
All electric fence charges shall carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
8.13 Home Occupations:
8.13a Home Occupation, Major: Major home occupations are those home occupations where either
nonresident customers and/or employees come to the property for purposes of furthering the business
enterprise of the home occupation, and where the occupation:
(1) Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on by the inhabitants thereof and
their employees or customers.
(2) Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the
appearance of the structure shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted
in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds or vibrations that carry
beyond the premises.
(3) Shall have no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area used for the home
occupation.
(4) Shall have no signs present on the property except one sign, not exceeding fifteen (15) square
feet.
(5) Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies
or products, provided that incidental retail sales may be made in connection with other permitted
home occupations, for example, a single chair beauty parlor would be allowed to sell combs, hair
spray, and other miscellaneous items to customers. However, a dressmaker would be required to do
only custom work for specific clients and would not be allowed to develop stocks of dresses for sale
to the general public on site.
(6) Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the structure.
(7) Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or stored on the premises unless
approved by the fire inspector. No activity shall be allowed that would interfere with radio or television
reception in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
(8) Shall have adequate off street parking spaces available to compensate for additional parking
needs generated.
(9) Deliveries from commercial suppliers may be made more than once a week, and the deliveries
shall not be made from semitractor trailer trucks.
(10) Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
a. Single chair beauty parlors and barbershops;
b. Photo developing and printing;
c. Organized classes with up to six (6) students at a time;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 552/735
d. Television and other electric or electronic repair, excluding major appliances such as
refrigerators or storage;
e. Upholstering;
f. Dressmaking and millinery; and
g. Woodworking excluding cabinetmaking.
Major home occupations require a special use permit for approval. (See section 6.5 of this appendix.)
8.13b Home Occupation, Minor: Minor home occupations are those where neither nonresident
customers nor nonresident employees come to the property for purposes of furthering the business
enterprise of the home occupation, and where the occupation:
(1) Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof and no
other.
(2) Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the
appearance of the structure shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted
in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or other emission of sounds or vibrations that carry
beyond the premises.
(3) Shall have no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area used for the home
occupation.
(4) Shall have no advertising, display, or other indications of a home occupation on the premises.
(5) Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies
or products, provided that orders previously made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on
the premises. That is, direct sales of products off display shelves, racks or from inventory is not
allowed, but a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described herein.
(6) Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the structure.
(7) Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or stored on the premises unless
approved by the fire inspector. No activity shall be allowed that would interfere with radio or television
reception in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
(8) Shall not create greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than normal for the district in which it is
located, including commercial and general delivery services.
(9) Shall have no use of material or equipment not recognized as being part of the normal practices
of owning and maintaining a residence allowed.
(10) Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, garage, basement, yard or other
similar sales shall not be allowed more than twice a year, and each sale shall not last more than
seventy two (72) consecutive hours, and only goods which have been generated from within the
household and not purchased elsewhere for resale. Sales shall be conducted on the owner's
property except that multiple-family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the
participants and any such sale shall be considered to be a sale for all participants.
(11) Shall have no deliveries from commercial suppliers made more than once a week, and the
deliveries shall not be made from semitractor trailer trucks.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 553/735
(12) Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
a. Artists and sculptors;
b. Authors, desktop publishers and composers;
c. Home crafts for sale off site;
d. Office facility of clergy;
e. Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturer's representative provided that
no transactions are made in person on the premises;
f. Address of convenience used solely for receiving and making telephone calls including computer
usage, mail, keeping business records in connection with a profession or occupation;
g. Individual tutoring;
h. Preserving and home cooking for sale off site;
i. Individual instrument and vocal instruction provided that no instrument may be amplified;
j. Telephone solicitation work;
k. No professional offices in minor home occupations.
(13) Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority.
Minor home occupations do not require a special use permit.
8.14 Off Street Parking And Loading:
8.14a Purpose: The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the
public streets and promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and unloading of motor
vehicles in accordance with the use of the property.
8.14b General Provisions:
(1) Procedure: An application for a building permit for a new or
enlarged building, structure or use shall include a plot plan, drawn
to scale and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading
facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of
this appendix.
(2) All Districts: In all districts, in connection with every building or
part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied
by uses requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials and merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same premises with such building at least one
off street loading space accessible from any alley, easement of
access, or when there is no such alley or easement of access
from a street, plus one additional such loading space for each two
thousand (2,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross
floor area so used in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required rear
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 554/735
yard or upon authorization from the board of zoning appeals, any
part of any other yard or court space.
(3) Exceptions: In all districts, except B-2, an off street parking area in
the open or in a garage, shall be provided in connection with the
uses set forth hereinafter and to the extent indicated therewith, in
addition to the above required loading and unloading spaces.
Such areas in the case of R districts, and for dwellings in other
districts, shall be on the premises intended to be served; and in
the case of other districts, and in connection with uses other than
property within one hundred feet (100') of any part of said
premises and in the same or less restricted district.
(4) Accessory Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in
accordance with the requirements of this section shall be used
solely for the parking of passenger vehicles owned and occupied.
8.14c Units Of Measure:
(1) "Floor area" as employed in this parking and loading section in the
case of office, merchandising or service types of use shall mean
the gross floor area of a building or structure used or intended to
be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients,
patients, or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and
equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. Floor area for
the purposes of this section shall not include any area used for
storage accessory to the principal use, incidental repairs,
processing or packaging of merchandise, show windows,
incidental management offices, restrooms, utilities and
dressing/fitting rooms.
(2) Parking spaces shall not be less than eight and one-half feet (8
1/2') wide and nineteen feet (19') long or not less than one
hundred sixty (160) square feet in area exclusive of access drives
or aisles.
(3) Loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide, fifty feet
(50') in length and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of
access and turning areas.
8.14d Schedule: Parking requirements shall be as follows, reference to maximum
number of patrons shall be based on the figure provided by the fire code for a given
facility:
Athletic field 5 parking spaces per acre
Auditorium/theater 1 parking space for every 4 seats or 1 parking space for every
150 square feet plus 1 for every 2 employees during a maximum
shift
Auto gas and
sales
2 parking spaces per pump, plus 2 per service bay plus 1 per
employee during a maximum shift
Auto repair 3 per bay, plus 1 per employee during a maximum shift
Banks and
business offices
4 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet, plus drive-through
requirements if applicable
Barber/beauty shop styling and tanning salons
2 parking spaces per personal grooming station, plus 1 for every 2 employees during
a maximum shift
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 555/735
Bowling alleys 6 parking spaces per alley plus bar and restaurant requirements,
if applicable
Car wash 6 parking
spaces per
bay
Care homes 1 parking space for every 2 residents, plus 1 for each employee
during a maximum shift
Churches 1 parking
space for
every 4
sanctuary
seats
Community center 1 parking space for every 3 maximum patrons
Daycare centers 1 parking space for every 2 employees during a maximum shift,
plus 1 for every 10 children served plus 1 per institutional vehicle
Drive-through
facility
6 stacking spaces for each drive-through station or automatic
teller machine, plus appropriate employee parking for principal
use
Dry cleaning 1 parking space for every 2 employees during a maximum shift,
plus 4 for patrons
Durable goods sales (appliances, furniture, etc.)
1 parking space per 500 square feet, plus 1 per employee during a maximum shift
Elderly housing
facility
3 parking spaces for very 4 units, plus 1 per employee during a
maximum shift
Fraternities, sororities and boarding houses
1 parking space per lodging resident, plus 1 per employee during a maximum shift
Funeral home 1 parking space per 50 square feet of public access area, plus 1
per business vehicle
Group home/halfway house/boarding house
1 parking space per bedroom
Health recreation and physical training facility
5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet, plus additional parking for outdoor accessory
use if applicable
Hospital 1 parking
space per
overnight
bed, plus 1
per affiliated
doctor plus
1 per
employee
during a
maximum
shift, plus 6
per 1,000
square feet
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 556/735
devoted to
outpatient
service
Laundromats 1 parking space for every 2 washers
Manufacturing plants and testing labs
3 parking spaces for every 4 employees during a maximum shift, plus 1 per business
vehicle plus 4 per 1,000 square feet devoted to office space
Medical, dental or veterinary office or clinic
2 parking spaces per treatment room, plus 1 per employee during a maximum shift
Mobile home park 1 parking space and 1 for every 4 units
Motel, hotel or
apartment hotel
1 parking space per unit, plus 1 for every 2 employees during a
maximum shift plus banquet, restaurant and/or bar requirements if
applicable
Nursing home 1 parking space per overnight bed, plus 1 per affiliated doctor plus
1 per employee during a maximum shift
Park, community 5 parking spaces per acre, plus requirements for major facilities
as noted elsewhere in this list if applicable
Park,
neighborhood
5 parking spaces per first 2 acres, plus 1 for each additional acre
Residences 2 parking spaces per unit and for sixplexes or greater; guest
parking equal to 10 percent of the total dwelling units
Restaurants, taverns, or nightclubs
1 parking space for every 75 square feet of public floor area or for each 2 persons
allowed by the fire code, whichever is greater, plus drive-through requirements if
applicable
Retail, freestanding and shopping centers
5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area, and 1 for every 2 employees
on a maximum shift
Schools, elementary and junior high
1 parking space per employee, plus 1 per class room plus 1 per institutional vehicle
Schools, high 1 parking space per employee, plus 1 for every 4 students plus 1
per institutional vehicle
Sports stadium,
outdoor
1 parking space for every 3 maximum patrons, plus parking for
buses
Swimming pool 1 parking space for every 3 maximum patrons
Wholesale and
warehouse
2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet for first 10,000 square
feet, plus 1 per 2,000 square feet for the remaining space with
office area parking calculated separately at 4 per 1,000 square
feet
8.14e Development Standards:
(1) Off street accessory parking areas shall be of usable shape and
shall be improved in accordance with requirements of the city
engineer with asphalt cement concrete, Portland cement concrete
or alternate equivalent materials acceptable to the city engineer,
and so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 557/735
accumulation within the area. Any lighting used to illuminate such
parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining premises in any R district and in accordance with
illumination standards further described in this appendix.
(2) Parking lot layout shall be designed so the maneuvering
requirements are accomplished without backing into adjacent
public streets. Stack parking shall not be allowed to meet parking
requirements for uses other than one- and two-family uses.
(3) All motor vehicles and trailers in residential zoning districts must
be parked on an improved surface in accordance with
requirements of the city. Outside storage of inoperable or
unlicensed vehicles and vehicle parts is prohibited in residential
zoning districts.
8.14f Exceptions:
(1) The board of appeals may, on appeal, authorize a modification,
reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements. Such
modification, reduction or waiver shall be justified by the particular
nature of the use, or other exception, situation or condition.
8.14g Establishment Of Off Street Parking:
(1) The city planning commission, in consultation with other city
departments and agencies concerned, shall make studies as
found advisable of various areas in the city for the purpose of
determining the areas within which there is need for the
establishment of off street parking facilities to be provided by the
city and to be financed wholly, or in part, by a special assessment
district or by other means. Where such need is found, the
planning commission shall report its recommendation for the
acquisition of such off street parking facilities to the city council.
This report shall include recommendations on the type, size,
location and other pertinent features of the proposed off street
parking facilities and the areas they are intended to serve.
(2) Wherever pursuant to this procedure, off street parking facilities
are established by means of a special assessment district, or
other district which the city council may have determined, they
shall be exempt from the requirements of this article for privately
supplied off street parking facilities except as provided in the
following: The city council, upon recommendation of the planning
commission and after public hearing, may require by resolution,
that a portion, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the off street
parking facilities required by this article shall be provided in
connection with occupancy or use of a building in an area that
was included in a special assessment district for the provision of
off street parking facilities, or in any other district which the city
council may have determined to be served by a public off street
parking facility in the following cases:
a. In such cases where the use of a building, erected after the levying of the special assessment in
such an area or after the establishment of the public off street parking facility, creates a need for an
annual or exceptional amount of off street parking facilities.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 558/735
b. In such cases where alteration, extension or change in a use of a building, after the levying of the
special assessment in such an area or establishment of the public off street parking facility, creates a
need for off street parking facilities more than thirty percent (30%) in excess of the requirements of
off street parking facilities for such building or use before alterations, extensions or changes in use,
as computed on the basis of the requirements in this section.
c. In any district, spaces for off street parking and for loading or unloading shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this section 8.14.
8.14h Parking, Storage Or Use Of Recreational Vehicle:
(1) No "recreational vehicle", as defined, shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district
except in a required side or rear yard providing all yard setbacks are met by the recreation
vehicle and the vehicle is parked on a concrete pad. However, such equipment may be parked
anywhere on residential premises for a period of time not to exceed twenty four (24) hours
during loading and unloading no more than twice in any consecutive period of seven (7) days.
At least thirty (30) hours must separate each occurrence. No such equipment shall be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any
location not approved for such use.
(2) No recreational vehicle intended for portable temporary housing shall be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any other
location not approved for such use, provided however, that such equipment may be used for
the housing of guests of occupants of the principal residence if: a) occupancy shall not exceed
thirty (30) consecutive days; and b) no charge is made for such occupancy.
(3) No recreational vehicle shall be stored out of doors on residential premises unless it is in
condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is intended or can be
made so at a cost not exceeding the value of the equipment in its existing state. In no case
shall any such equipment be so stored for a period of more than six (6) months if not in
condition for safe and efficient performance of the function for which it is intended.
8.14i Portable Outdoor Storage Unit-Description: Includes a purpose built, fully enclosed container
placed outdoors which is designed and intended to temporarily serve as a storage or containment unit
for household or commercial goods or equipment.
(1) Temporary Use Regulations For Residential Zoning Districts:
a. Units must be accessory to a principal building or use;
b. There shall be no more than one portable outdoor storage unit per property, per year;
c. Units shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and eight feet (8') in
height;
d. Units shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines;
e. Units shall be separated by six feet (6') from any structure on the subject property;
f. No unit shall remain on the property for more than thirty (30) days per calendar year;
g. Units shall be placed on a driveway or other paved surface if located in a front yard;
h. Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right of way, or in a location that obstructs
traffic visibility;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 559/735
i. Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust, peeling paint, and other forms of
visible deterioration;
j. Existing portable outdoor storage units must come into conformance with regulations within one
year following passage of ordinance amendments.
(2) Temporary Use Regulations For All Nonresidential Zoning Districts:
a. Units must be accessory to a principal building or use;
b. There shall be no more than three (3) portable outdoor storage units per property, per year;
c. Units shall not exceed forty feet (40') in length, eight feet (8') in width, and nine feet (9') in height;
d. Units shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines;
e. Units shall be separated by six feet (6') from any structure on the subject property;
f. No units shall remain on the property for more than ninety (90) days per calendar year;
g. Stacking of units is not permissible;
h. Units shall be placed on a paved surface within a side or rear yard;
i. Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right of way, or in a location that obstructs
traffic visibility;
j. Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust, peeling paint, and other forms of
visible deterioration;
k. Existing portable outdoor storage units must come into conformance with regulations within one
year following passage of ordinance amendments.
8.15 Pending Applications For Building Permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change
in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any development, building,
structure or part thereof, for which official approvals and required building permits have been
granted before the enactment of this ordinance as amended, the construction of which, conforming
with such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date hereof, as amended, and
completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six (6) month period, and
not discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder's control.
8.16 Uses Authorized By The Board Of Zoning Appeals: Any use or structure as regulated by the
board of zoning appeals in the various districts shall be accumulative in nature beginning with the
most restrictive district.
8.17 Principal Building: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a
"lot" as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one principal building on one lot
unless otherwise provided in this appendix.
8.18 Adult Regulated Uses: The supreme court of the state of Illinois has judicially confirmed that
the purpose of these amendments as hereinafter stated serves a valid government interest. In the
development and execution of this appendix, it is recognized that there are some uses which
because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas, particularly adjacent and nearby
residential and commercial areas where nurseries, schools, nursing homes, churches and similar
uses are located. Proper and realistic zoning and special regulations of these uses are necessary
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 560/735
to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood or discouraging normal development of undeveloped areas. These
special regulations are itemized in this section. A primary control or regulation is for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. To prevent concentration of such uses
from having an adverse effect upon the adjacent and nearby residential and commercial areas
referred to herein, such uses are hereby established as permitted uses in all industrially zoned
areas of I-1 and I-2. To prevent such uses from having an adverse effect upon nearby or residential
and commercial areas, they are prohibited within one thousand feet (1,000') of the following
specified uses or zones:
From any church or religious center.
From any public or private school or licensed daycare center.
From any public park or a city designated pedestrian/bike path.
From any residential, commercial and/or conservation zone.
To prevent such uses from having an adverse effect upon the adjacent areas in an I-1 and/or I-2
district, not more than two (2) such uses shall be established within one thousand feet (1,000') of
each other, within said I-1 and/or I-2 district. Uses subject to these controls hereafter referred to as
"adult regulated uses" are as follows: adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion
picture theater, adult modeling and entertainment facility. Such adult regulated uses as set
forth herein are hereby prohibited from all industrially zoned areas of I-1 and I-2.
8.18a Amortization Of Preexisting Regulated Uses: Any nonconforming building, structure, lot or
regulated use which existed lawfully as of August 1, 1990, which shall become nonconforming as of
said date may be continued as hereinafter provided.
8.18b Notice Of Nonconforming Use: Upon written notice from the planning and redevelopment
administrator to the owners or interests therein, that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is
nonconforming under the regulated use provisions of this appendix as amended, the owners or
interests therein shall, within three (3) months from the date of such notice, apply to the planning
and redevelopment division for a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule.
8.18c Failure To Apply For A Certificate Of Nonconformance: Failure to apply for a certificate of
nonconformance and amortization schedule within three (3) months of the notice provided for in
subsection 8.18b of this section will require the amortization of the nonconformance within six (6)
months of the notice provided for in subsection 8.18b of this section.
8.18d Amortization After Obtaining A Certificate Of Nonconformance: Nonconformances that have
obtained a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule from the planning and
redevelopment division shall be discontinued within one year of the notice provided for in
subsection 8.18b of this section.
8.18e Uses Presently Prohibited: None of the provisions of this appendix as amended, pertaining to
adult uses, shall be construed to permit any use or activities that presently are, or in the future may
be, prohibited by law.
8.18f Prohibition Of Graphic Materials: Any building or structure within which an adult regulated use is
lawfully operated shall not use or display graphic sexual material, photos, or drawings on the exterior of
said business, but shall designate said business to be an adult business and admission granted to
adults only.
8.19 Solar Energy Systems:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 561/735
8.19a Small Solar Energy System: A small solar energy system is an on site solar energy system that is
incidental and subordinate to a principal use and/or structure serving the needs of all residential,
suburban estate, general agricultural, C-2 (conservation), neighborhood business, university and college
and office zoning districts.
(1)Small systems shall be allowed as a permitted use in the above identified zoning districts if it meets
conditions in this section.
(2)Only one freestanding unit shall be allowed per property and shall only be allowed in a rear yard
location and shall meet all rear yard setback requirements as an accessory structure and shall have
a maximum array size of two hundred forty (240) square feet.
(3)Maximum height for freestanding unit shall be fifteen feet (15').
(4)Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory structures and shall not project into
minimum yard setback requirement.
(5)Roof mounted system panels (other than flat solar panels) shall only be located on the rear side of a
roof facing and shall be no more in height than five feet (5') above the peak of the roof and/or shall
not exceed total height restrictions of the subject zoning district in which the property is located.
(6)Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front and/or side roof facing only if they are mounted flat
against the roof surface or incorporated into roofing surface material.
(7)System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
(8)If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one year time period it shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be required to be removed within ninety (90) days.
(9)System shall have nonreflective and neutral color with no advertising or logos on system panels
and/or supporting structure other than a small identification of the manufacturer.
(10)All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached to structures.
(11)System shall comply with adopted building and fire codes and all other applicable state and federal
regulations.
8.19b Large Solar Energy System: A large solar energy system is an on site multiple-unit solar energy
system that is incidental and subordinate to a principal use and/or structure serving the needs of B-2, B-
3, B-4, ORT, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts.
(1)Large multiple-unit systems shall be allowed as a permitted use in the above identified zoning districts
if it meets conditions in this section.
(2)Large multiple-unit freestanding systems shall only be allowed in a rear yard location and shall meet
all rear yard setback requirements as an accessory structure.
(3)Maximum height for freestanding units shall be fifteen feet (15').
(4)Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory structures and shall not project into
minimum yard setback requirement.
(5)Roof mounted system panels (other than flat solar panels) shall only be located on the rear side of a
roof facing and shall be no more in height than five feet (5') above the peak of the roof and/or shall
not exceed total height restrictions of the subject zoning district in which the property is located.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 562/735
(6)Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front and/or side roof facing only if they are mounted flat
against the roof surface or incorporated into roofing surface material.
(7)System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
(8)If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one year time period it shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be required to be removed within ninety (90) days.
(9)System shall have nonreflective and neutral color with no advertising or logos on system panels
and/or supporting structure other than a small identification of the manufacturer.
(10)All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached to structures.
(11)System shall comply with adopted building and fire codes and all other applicable state and federal
regulations. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 23-2004, § 1, 2-16-2004; Ord. 012-2008, §§ 1, 2, 3, 2-
18-2008; Ord. 067-2008, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. 047-2009, § 1, 7-27-2009; Ord. 068-2012, 11-5-2012)
ARTICLE IX. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS,
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
The requirements and regulations specified hereinbefore in this appendix shall be subject to the
additional requirements, exceptions, modifications and interpretations in the following:
9.1 Height Limits: Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this appendix shall not apply to:
9.1a Barns, silos or other farm buildings, provided these are not less than fifty feet (50') from every
lot line, to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose
towers, masts and aerials; to parapet walls extending not more than four feet (4') above the limiting
height of the building. However, if in the opinion of the building inspector, such structures would
adversely affect adjoining or adjacent properties, such greater height shall not be authorized except
by the board of zoning appeals.
9.1b Places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other permitted public and
semipublic buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'), provided that for each
foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the
district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the
side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
9.1c Bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery
lofts; to monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holders or other
structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted use for
the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
9.1d Hospitals, provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds the
maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in
width and depth by an additional one-half foot (1/2') over the side and rear yards required for the
highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
9.2. Lot Area Requirements:
9.2a Existing Lots Of Record: In any district where dwellings are permitted, a one-family detached
dwelling may be constructed on any lot of official record at the time of enactment of this ordinance,
provided that proposed yard spaces satisfy requirements stipulated for the district in which said lot
is located, or requirements as may be modified by the board of zoning appeals.
9.2b Lots Unserved By Sewer And Water: In any district where neither public water supply nor
public sanitary sewer is accessible, the otherwise specified lot area and width requirement shall be
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and one hundred feet (100'); respectively, provided, however,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 563/735
that where a public water supply system is accessible and will be installed, these requirements
shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet and seventy five feet (75') respectively, provided further
that the health officer has certified that the said areas will be large enough to satisfy all applicable
requirements concerning water supply and the disposal of sanitary wastes.
9.3 Lot Area Per Family:
9.3a Modification Of Minimum Lot Area: On any lot where more than two (2) dwelling units are
permitted. Where part or all of the off street parking spaces required for dwelling are provided
within the principal building, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit specified may be reduced by a
maximum of twenty percent (20%), in accordance with the following formula:
a/b x 20%
When a =
The number of spaces provided within the principal building, and
b = The number of spaces required for the dwellings.
9.4 Front Yard Exceptions And Modifications:
9.4a Front Yard: Front yard requirements do not apply to bay windows or balconies occupying, in
the aggregate, not more than one-third (1/3) of the front wall, provided that these projections come
entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the front wall, making the interior angle of
twenty two and one-half degrees (22 1/2°) in the horizontal planes with the front wall; to chimneys,
flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, uncovered porches or similar features not over three
feet (3') high above the average finished grade and distant five feet (5') from every lot line.
9.4b Interior Lots: In any district where the average depth of two (2) or more existing front yards on
lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') in either direction of the lot in question and within the same
block front less than the average depth of said existing front yards or the average depth on the two
(2) lots immediately adjoining, provided, however, that the depth of a front yard in any R district
shall be at least ten feet (10') and need not exceed thirty feet (30').
9.4c Corner Lots: In any district where the average depth of two (2) or more existing front yards on
lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the lot in question and within the same front is less than
the least front yard described, the depth of the front yard on such lot shall not be less than the
average depth of said existing front yards or depth of the front yard on the lot immediately
adjoining; provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on a lot in any R district shall be at least
ten feet (10') and need not exceed thirty feet (30'), except as provided in section 8.10 of this
appendix.
9.5 Side Yard Exceptions And Modifications:
9.5a District Boundary Line: Along any district boundary line, an abutting side yard on a lot in the
less restricted district shall have at least width equal to that required in the more restricted district;
and in a B-2 or I district, on a lot abutting a lot in any R district, such side yard for a building higher
than the limiting height in such R district shall be increased by three feet (3') for each story over
such limiting height.
9.5b Side Yards Increased: Side yards shall be increased in width by two inches (2") for each foot
by which the length of the side wall of the building, adjacent to the side yard, exceeds forty feet
(40') in any R-1 or R-2 district, or fifty feet (50') in any R-3 district.
9.5c Side Yards Reduced: Side yards may be reduced by three inches (3") from the otherwise
required least width or sum of the least widths for each foot by which a lot of record at the time of
enactment of this ordinance is narrower than the lot width specified for the district in which the lot is
located, in the case of buildings not higher than two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, and in case the
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 564/735
owner of record does not own any adjoining property; provided, however, that no side yard shall be
narrower at any point than three feet (3').
9.5d Accessory Building: No part of any accessory building shall be nearer a side street lot line
than the least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
9.5e Side Yards Varied: Side yards may be varied. Where the side walls of a building are not
parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, in which case, the average width, or
narrower than three feet (3') in any case.
9.5f Structures Or Projections Permitted: Structures or projections into side yards may be permitted
as follows: fences, plantings or walls not over six feet (6') above the average natural grade. Fire
escapes three feet (3') from a side lot line. Bays and balconies not more than three feet (3') from
the building, provided these projections are entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of
the side wall, making an interior angle of twenty two and one-half degrees (22 1/2°) in the
horizontal plane with the side wall. The sum of the lengths of such projection shall not exceed onethird
(1/3) of the length of the side yard.
9.5g Overhangs: Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, into or over a required side yard not more than one and onehalf
feet (1 1/2').
9.5h Steps; Porches: Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features not higher
than the elevation of the ground story of the building and distant three feet (3') from a side lot line.
9.6 Rear Yard Exceptions And Modifications:
9.6a Rear Yards Reduced: Rear yards may be reduced by three inches (3") from the required least
depth for each foot by which a lot at the time of enactment of this ordinance is less than one
hundred feet (100') deep, in the case of a building not higher than two and one-half (2 1/2) stories,
and in case the owner of record does not own adjoining property to the rear, provided, however,
that no required rear yard shall be less than ten feet (10') deep.
9.6b Structures Or Projections Permitted: Structures or projections into rear yards may be
permitted as follows: Fences, plantings or walls not over six feet (6') above the average natural
grade. Fire escapes six feet (6') from the building. Bays and balconies not more than three feet (3')
from the building, provided these projections are entirely within the planes drawn from either main
corner of the rear wall, making an interior angle of twenty two and one-half degrees (22 1/2°) in the
horizontal plane with the rear wall. The sum of the lengths of such projections shall not exceed onehalf
(1/2) of the width of the rear wall.
9.6c Overhangs: Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features,
cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, into or over a required rear yard not more than one and onehalf
feet (1 1/2').
9.6d Steps; Porches: Terraces, steps, uncovered porches or similar features not more than ten feet
(10') into a required rear yard, nor closer than six feet (6') of an alley or within ten feet (10') of a rear
lot line, nor an alley lot line or within six feet (6') of an accessory building. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-
2002)
ARTICLE X. AG-1 AGRICULTURAL
PRESERVATION DISTRICT
10.1 General Description: The AG-1 district is established to conserve farmland and to encourage
continued agricultural activities, thereby helping to ensure that sustainable agriculture will continue
as a long term land use and a viable economic activity within the district. The AG-1 district is also
established to preserve natural features and the rural landscape, while allowing low density
residential development that minimizes its impact on agricultural land, farming operations and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 565/735
sensitive environmental features. The preferred use in the AG-1 district is agriculture. The district is
intended to permit a range of uses related to agriculture, to encourage preservation of large blocks
of farmland, and to permanently protect from development the tracts of land which remain after
permitted residential development has occurred. More specifically, the district is established to
severely restrict nonfarm development in predominantly agricultural areas in order to:
10.1a Preserve productive agricultural land for continued food and fiber production;
10.1b Protect productive farms from encroachment by incompatible nonfarm uses;
10.1c Maintain the existing agricultural processing and related service industries;
10.1d Preserve the maximum freedom of operation for those legitimate agricultural purposes
permitted in this district.
10.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Agriculture.
Farm dwelling unit.
Home occupation, minor.
Private stable.
Public parks and forest preserves.
Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises.
Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility companies within existing public
rights of way.
Uses customarily accessory to farm operations.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
10.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
10.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Agribusiness.
Aircraft hangars/tie downs.
Airstrips/runways and heliports.
Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers.
Cemetery.
Churches.
Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a stream, lake or river channel and
removal of dirt and/or topsoil, quarry, borrow pits.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 566/735
Density increase for farm dwellings on a single forty (40) acre parcel when forty (40) acres per
dwelling requirement is met on entire farmstead.
Government buildings.
Grain elevator.
Home occupation, major.
Kennels.
Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of renewal for additional periods of one
year for those instances where a unique and substantial hardship is found to be in existence for the
protection of property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a severe physical
condition, with appropriate documentation.
Private recreational use on land that is located along a body of water.
Public stable.
Recreational camps.
Schools.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
10.5 Height Regulations:
10.5a No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty five feet (35') for the
principal structure.
10.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory
buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Front Least
Side
Side
Yard
Rear
Lot Area Lot Width Yard
Depth
Yard
Width
Sum
Width
Yard
Depth
40 acres 165 feet 40
feet
15
feet
30
feet
40
feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XI. AG-2 GENERAL
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
11.1 General Description: The AG-2 general agricultural district is established to protect and
maintain the agricultural economy and the open space and natural features of rural areas of the
county in order to protect lands for continued farming, allow nonfarm residential development on a
limited basis, and minimize conflicts between agricultural and nonagricultural areas.
The AG-2 district is also established to protect those agricultural lands which, due to their location,
soils, and use for agricultural activities, warrant protection from indiscriminate development.
However, their proximity to existing development, combined with pressures for new development,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 567/735
makes these lands unsuitable for preservation according to the more restrictive regulations of the
AG-1 agricultural preservation district. The AG-2 district is also intended to protect those
agricultural lands that would otherwise be subject to residential subdivision activity which could
render these important farmlands useless for farming.
11.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Agriculture.
Cemeteries.
Churches.
Farm dwelling unit.
Governmental uses.
Greenhouses, commercial.
Home occupation (nonimpact, minor impact).
Nurseries, commercial.
Private stable.
Public parks and forest preserves.
Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises.
Schools.
Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility companies within existing public
rights of way.
Uses customarily accessory to farm operations.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
11.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
11.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Agribusiness.
Aircraft hangars/tie downs.
Airstrips/runways and heliports.
Auction barns.
Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers.
Childcare facilities.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 568/735
Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a stream, lake or river channel and
removal of dirt and/or topsoil, quarry, borrow pits.
Density increase for residential dwellings.
Government buildings.
Grain elevator.
Home occupation (major impact).
Kennels, animal hospitals, veterinary clinics.
Landscape contractors.
Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of renewal for additional periods of one
year for those instances where a unique and substantial hardship is found to be in existence for the
protection of property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a severe physical
condition, with appropriate documentation.
Private recreational use on land that is located along a body of water.
Public or private recreational facilities (i.e., golf course, marina, boat dock).
Public stable.
Recreational camps.
Recreational vehicle parks.
Residential care homes.
Temporary uses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
11.5 Height Regulations:
11.5a No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty five feet (35') for the
principal structure.
11.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory
buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Front Least
Side
Side
Yard
Rear
Lot Area Lot Width Yard
Depth
Yard
Width
Sum
Width
Yard
Depth
15 acres 165 feet 40
feet
15
feet
30
feet
40
feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 569/735
ARTICLE XII. SE-1 SUBURBAN ESTATES
LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
12.1 General Description: The SE-1 suburban estates district is established to provide for single-family
detached housing opportunities in a rural setting at a low density and to preserve open space and
natural features. This district is intended to provide a natural buffer between the strictly urban
characteristics of the SE-2 suburban estates medium density district and the R-1 residential district. The
primary difference between the SE-1 and the SE-2 districts is lot size and the allowance of livestock.
12.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Farm.
Livestock not less than one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private property.
Nursery or greenhouse.
Roadside stand selling products grown on premises.
Structure for storage or treatment of seeds.
Urban chickens pursuant to chapter 7, article VI, division 4 of this code.
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to the above uses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
12.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Living quarters for persons employed on the premises.
Private garages or parking areas.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
12.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Grain elevator.
Kennel with buildings and outdoor facilities at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned
private property.
Recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs and tennis courts with no building or pool
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in an R district.
Riding stable subject to:
(1) All buildings in which horses are kept shall be at least two hundred feet (200') from any lot line
contiguous with any residentially zoned lot. Animals shall not be permitted to graze or be ridden
within fifty feet (50') of any residentially zoned property, and shall not be ridden off the premises.
(2) All wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with any applicable laws, regulations, or policies
of any agency having jurisdiction over such matters.
(3) No odors shall be discernable at the perimeter of the site.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 570/735
Utility stations without service yard storage.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
12.5 Height Regulations:
12.5a No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35').
12.5b Farm buildings such as barns, silos, windmills and places of public assembly such as schools and
other permitted public and semipublic buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'),
provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise
permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot
over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
12.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area Lot Width
Front
Yard Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard Depth
5 acres 165 feet 40 feet 15 feet 30 feet 40 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XIII. SE-2 SUBURBAN ESTATES
MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
13.1 General Description: The SE-2 suburban estates district is established to provide for single-family
detached housing opportunities in a rural to urban transitional setting at a medium residential density
level to preserve open space and natural features. This district is intended to provide a natural buffer
between the strictly urban characteristics of the R-1 high density district. The primary difference between
the SE-1 and the SE-2 districts is lot size and the allowance of livestock.
13.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Essential services and municipal administrative or public service buildings not less than twenty feet
(20') from any lot.
One-family detached dwelling.
Public cultural buildings.
Public libraries.
Public parks, playgrounds, and community center.
Roadside stand selling products grown on premises.
Structure or storage for treatment of seeds.
Urban chickens pursuant to chapter 7, article VI, division 4 of this code.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 571/735
13.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Nursery or greenhouse, private.
Private garages or parking areas.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
13.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Gardening.
Major home occupation as defined.
Municipal buildings and libraries.
Off street parking facilities.
Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis courts.
Public and parochial schools, churches, and centers not less than twenty feet (20') from any lot in an
R district.
Utility stations without service yards or storage.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
13.5 Height Regulations:
13.5a No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty five feet (35') for the principal structure.
13.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area Lot Width
Front
Yard Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard Depth
1 acre 100 feet 30 feet 10 feet 20 feet 40 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XIV. R-1 ONE-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
14.1 General Description: Residential districts (R-1 through R-7) are established in order to protect
public health, and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and welfare.
These general goals include, but are not limited to, the following specific purposes:
14.1a To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive noise, smoke,
vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other objectionable factors.
14.1b To protect residential areas to the greatest extent possible and appropriate in each area
against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through traffic, and to alleviate congestion by
promoting off street parking.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 572/735
14.1c To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public streets and other public
facilities by controlling the density of population through regulations of the bulk of buildings.
14.1d To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for ample light and air to
buildings and the windows thereof.
14.1e To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open space on the same
zoning lot with residential development.
14.1f To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the probable need for future
residential expansion and to meet the need for necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of
residences, which increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
14.1g To promote the best use and development of residential land in accordance with a
comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of residential development and protect the
character of desirable development, and to protect the value of land and improvements and so
strengthen the economic base of the city.
14.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Care home, small residential.
Daycare home.
Essential services and municipal administrative or public service buildings not less than eighty feet
(80') from any lot line.
Existing railroad right of way, but not switching storage or freight yards of sidings.
Foster family homes.
Municipal fire and police station.
One-family detached dwellings.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Unrelated group family uses.
Urban chickens pursuant to chapter 7, article VI, division 4 of this code.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
14.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Daycare home licensed by the state of Illinois and with occupancy permit.
Living quarters for persons employed on the premises.
Minor home occupations, as defined.
Private garages or parking areas.
Private office of lawyer, architect, or engineer within their own dwelling.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 573/735
14.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Community center.
"Daycare home", as defined, but serves between nine (9) and twelve (12) children.
Municipal buildings and libraries.
Off street parking facilities for permitted uses and/or uses permitted upon review of the board of
zoning appeals in this zoning district.
Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis courts.
Public and parochial schools and churches not less than twenty feet (20') from any lot in an R district.
Utility stations without service yards or storage.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
14.5 Height Regulations:
14.5a No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
No accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in
section 9.1 of this appendix.
14.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Number
Of Stories
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Lot
Width
Front
Yard Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard Depth
1 to 11/2 7,500 75 feet 25 feet 8 feet 20 feet 35 feet
2 to 21/2 7,500 75 feet 25 feet 10 feet 25 feet 35 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 014-2008, 2-18-2008; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XV. R-2 ONE-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
15.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
Any permitted use in an R-1 district.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
15.2 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-1 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
15.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 574/735
Any use authorized by the board of zoning appeals in an R-1 district.
Dwelling groups.
Any other similar uses deemed consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
15.4 Height Regulations:
15.4a No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (2
1/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height. No accessory
structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height,
except as provided in section 9.1 of this appendix.
15.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
Number Lot Area Lot Front Least
Side
Side
Yard
Rear
Of Stories (Square Feet) Width Yard
Depth
Yard
Width
Sum
Width
Yard
Depth
1 to 1 1/2 6,000 60
feet
25
feet
6 feet 15
feet
30
feet
2 to 2 1/2 6,000 60
feet
25
feet
8 feet 20
feet
30
feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XVI. R-3 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
16.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
All permitted uses allowed in an R-2 district, with the exception of urban chickens which are only
permitted on land with one single-family dwelling.
Two-family dwellings.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
16.2 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-2 district.
16.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
16.4 Height Regulations:
16.4a No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height
and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 575/735
section 9.1 of this appendix.
16.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Number
Of Stories
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Lot Area
Per Family
(Square Feet)
Front
Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
1 to 11/2 5,000 single 3,000 50 feet 25 feet 6 feet 15 feet 30 feet
6,000 duplex
2 to 21/2 5,000 single 3,000 50 feet 25 feet 8 feet 20 feet 30 feet
6,000 duplex
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XVII. R-4 ONE- TO SIX-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
17.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
All permitted uses allowed in an R-3 district, with the exception of urban chickens which are only
permitted on land with one single-family dwelling.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Public and parochial schools and churches not less than twenty feet (20') from any lot in an R district.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
17.2 Accessory Uses Permitted:
All permitted accessory uses in an R-3 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
17.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any use authorized by the board of zoning appeals in an R-3 district.
Care home, large residential at least one thousand feet (1,000') from an existing similar use.
Daycare centers licensed by the state of Illinois.
Halfway house/group home at least one thousand feet (1,000') from an existing similar use.
Nursing homes at least fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
Parking lots accessory to use in an adjoining or less restrictive district when abutting or directly
across an alley.
Private clubs, lodges, union halls.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 576/735
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
17.4 Height Regulations: No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five
feet (35') in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height,
except as provided in section 9.1 of this appendix.
17.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed along
with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this appendix.
Number
Of Stories
Minimum
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Lot Area
Per Family
(Square Feet)
Front
Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
1 to 11/2 5,000 2,000 50 feet 25 feet 6 feet 15 feet 30 feet
2 to 21/2 5,000 2,000 50 feet 25 feet 8 feet 20 feet 30 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XVIII. R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
18.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
All permitted uses allowed in an R-4 district, with the exception of urban chickens which are only
permitted on land with one single-family dwelling.
Dwellings, multiple-family.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
18.2 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-4 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
18.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any use authorized by the board of zoning appeals in an R-4 district.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
18.4 Height Regulations:
18.4a No principal structure shall exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75') in height at the required
front, side and rear yard lines, other than as provided in section 9.1 of this appendix. No accessory
building shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in section 9.1 of this
appendix.
18.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed along
with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this appendix:
Required
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 577/735
Number
Of
Stories
Minimum
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Lot Area Per
Family For Multi-
Family Structures
(Square Feet)
Front
Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depth
Least
Side Yard
Width
Side
Yard Sum
Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
1 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 6 feet 12 feet 30 feet
2 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 6 feet 15 feet 30 feet
3 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 8 feet 20 feet 35 feet
4 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 10 feet 25 feet 40 feet
5 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 12 feet 30 feet 45 feet
6 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 14 feet 35 feet 50 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XIX. R-6 MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENCE DISTRICT
19.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
All permitted uses allowed in an R-5 district, with the exception of urban chickens which are only
permitted on land with one single-family dwelling.
Housing designed for the elderly.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
19.2 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-5 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
19.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any use authorized by the board of zoning appeals in an R-5 district.
Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
19.4 Height Regulations: No principal structure shall exceed twelve (12) stories or one hundred fifty feet
(150') in height at the required front, side and rear yard lines, other than as provided in section 9.1 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height.
19.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed along
with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this appendix:
Number
Of
Stories
Minimum
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Required
Lot Area Per
Family For Multi-
Family Structures
(Square Feet)
Front
Lot
Width
Front
Yard
Depth
Least
Side Yard
Width
Side
Yard Sum
Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 578/735
1 n/a 2,000 50 feet 30 feet 6 feet 12 feet 30 feet
2 n/a 2,000 52 feet 33 feet 6 feet 12 feet 30 feet
3 n/a 2,000 55 feet 30 feet 8 feet 16 feet 35 feet
4 n/a 2,000 65 feet 30 feet 10 feet 22 feet 40 feet
5 n/a 2,000 75 feet 30 feet 12 feet 27 feet 45 feet
6 n/a 2,000 85 feet 30 feet 14 feet 33 feet 50 feet
7 n/a 2,000 95 feet 30 feet 18 feet 42 feet 55 feet
8 n/a 2,000 105 feet 30 feet 22 feet 51 feet 60 feet
9 n/a 2,000 115 feet 30 feet 26 feet 60 feet 65 feet
10 n/a 2,000 125 feet 30 feet 30 feet 69 feet 70 feet
11 n/a 2,000 135 feet 30 feet 34 feet 78 feet 75 feet
12 n/a 2,000 150 feet 30 feet 38 feet 87 feet 80 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 015-2017, 4-10-2017)
ARTICLE XX. R-7 MOBILE HOME/
MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
20.1 Principal Uses Permitted:
Foster family homes.
Mobile home parks (see mobile home ordinance of the city of Rock Island).
Unrelated group family uses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXI. U-1 UNIVERSITY/
COLLEGE DISTRICT
21.1 General Description: This district is established to provide an area for colleges, universities,
seminaries and other such institutions of higher education. The intent of the district is to establish an
area in which institutions of higher education may operate compatibly with surrounding residential and
business areas.
21.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Colleges, universities, seminaries and other such institutions of higher education consisting of any
number of educational, residential (apartment/dormitories, dormitories), cultural and recreational
buildings and parking areas with all associated buildings located not less than thirty feet (30') from
any residentially zoned private property or one- or two-family use lot.
Community residence with appropriate permits and at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any other
community residence.
Dwellings, one- and two-family.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 579/735
Essential services and municipal, administrative or public services, buildings or properties excluding
warehouses, storage yards and garages with all associated buildings at least twenty feet (20') from
residentially zoned private property.
Foster family homes.
Parochial buildings such as schools, churches, and parish buildings, public libraries and public safety
and municipal government buildings located not less that twenty feet (20') from any residentially
zoned private property.
Unrelated group homes.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
21.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Accessory uses permitted in an R-1 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
21.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Boarding and lodging house.
Fraternities and sororities.
Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes with any associated building at least fifty feet (50') from
any residentially zoned private property.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
21.5 Restrictions:
21.5a All buildings affiliated with institutions of higher education shall be not less than thirty feet (30')
from residentially zoned lots or existing one- and two-family use lots.
21.5b Private school buildings and public buildings shall be not less than twenty feet (20') from the side
lot line in an R district.
21.5c Small residential care homes shall be one thousand feet (1,000') from any other community
residence, shall be state or locally licensed and shall have a certificate of occupancy from the building
official.
21.6 Height Regulations:
21.6a No structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') for the principal structure and fifteen feet (15') for an
accessory structure.
21.6b To places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other permitted public and
semipublic buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'), provided that for each foot by
which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its
side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear
yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
21.7 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both
principal and accessory buildings and along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 580/735
of this appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Number Lot Area Lot Front Least Side Side Yard Rear
Of Stories (Square Feet) Width Yard Depth Yard Width Sum Width Yard Depth
1 to 1 1/2 5,000 50 feet 25 feet 6 feet 15 feet 30 feet
2 to 2 1/2 5,000 50 feet 25 feet 8 feet 20 feet 30 feet
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXII. C-1 CONSERVATION DISTRICT
22.1 General Description: The C-1 district is intended for environmental protection and preservation.
Land parcels within this district will include wetland, marshes, swamps, scenic areas, hillsides of
excessive slopes, watercourses, aquifer recharge areas, watershed protection areas, wildlife habitat,
rough terrain, and areas subject to siltation and erosion.
22.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Open space.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
22.3 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Agriculture and commercial summer gardens including agricultural buildings but not permanent
dwellings not to exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet and no more than one building per five
(5) acre tract but not the raising of livestock.
Campgrounds, wilderness.
Forestry activities and nurseries.
Inns or other dining places on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from any residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution.
Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially
zoned private property, church, school or human care institution subject to other state and federal
guidelines.
Parking areas and equipment and materials storage yards accessory to principal uses in adjoining
districts within one thousand feet (1,000') of a railroad, highway or primary thoroughfare and at least
six hundred feet (600') from any residentially zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution.
Public parks, passive.
Recreation vehicle parks on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary thoroughfare
and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned private property,
church, school, or human care institution.
Any other uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 581/735
ARTICLE XXIII. C-2 CONSERVATION DISTRICT
23.1 General Description: The C-2 district is intended to provide for the conservation and preservation of
land, while allowing for development that will make use of its natural beauty and allow for its enjoyment.
23.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
All uses when reviewed by the board of zoning appeals in a C-1 district.
Public parks, playgrounds.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
23.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use other than a permanent residence.
23.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Church, school, or human care institution.
Community centers, private or public.
Country clubs.
Inns or other dining places on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from any residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution.
Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially
zoned private property, church, school or human care institution subject to other state and federal
guidelines.
Parking areas and equipment and materials storage yards accessory to principal uses in adjoining
districts within one thousand feet (1,000') of a railroad, highway or primary thoroughfare and at least
six hundred feet (600') from any residentially zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution.
Recreational uses, open air such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball and football fields and
golf ranges, with buildings and outdoor storage when abutting a highway or primary thoroughfare and
at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned private property, church, school or human
care institution.
Recreation vehicle parks on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary thoroughfare
and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned private property,
church, school, or human care institution.
Any other uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXIV. O-1 OFFICE DISTRICT
24.1 General Description: The O-1 office district set forth herein is established to promote public welfare,
convenience, comfort, and orderly growth of the community. These objectives include, but are not limited
to, the following:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 582/735
24.1a To provide means of transitional use of land between commercial and residential uses.
24.1b To promote, enhance, and conserve quality of the manmade environment.
24.1c To protect the worth of property.
24.1d To promote the most desirable use of land.
24.1e To provide an appropriate district for functions separate from those dealing in sales, repair,
recreation, storage, processing, assembly, lodging, and eating.
24.1f To separate those functions which are obtrusive, quiet, do not generate large quantities of waste,
noise, odor or traffic, use heavy machinery, require docking facilities or separate service entrances and
which do not make use of large illuminated displays or signs, from those which do.
24.1g To provide a use district for offices for those who provide services only including instruments of
service.
24.1h To provide a district of less intense use and to encourage lower density use and retention of open
space.
24.1i To make use of areas which are not appropriate for other uses.
24.1j To control the growth of other districts.
24.1k To make less valuable land available for use other than residential.
24.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Church.
Community service offices.
Consultant offices.
Dwelling above the ground floor.
Funeral home.
Hospital and special care facilities.
Nursing home.
Offices providing clerical administration.
Professional offices.
Schools and facilities for academic instruction.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
24.3 Accessory Uses Permitted :
Accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use other than a permanent residence.
24.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 583/735
Dwellings.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
24.5 Height Regulations:
24.5a No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, and no accessory
structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in section 9.1 of this
appendix.
24.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Side Side
Yard Yard Rear
Number Lot Area Lot Front Least Sum Yard
Of Stories (Square Feet) Width Yard Depth Width Width Depth
All stories No more than 50% None 15 feet or same as None or None or 15 feet
building coverage: adjacent R district same as same as
5,000 - single adjacent adjacent
6,000 - duplex R district R district
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXV. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD
BUSINESS DISTRICT
25.1 General Description: The neighborhood business district is intended to permit the development of
retail sales and personal services required to meet the day to day needs of a fully developed
neighborhood. Stores, businesses and offices in this zone should be useful to the majority of the
neighborhood residents. The convenience nature of the various business uses located in this district
requires them to be in close proximity to residences and is intended to include a narrow range of retail
services and convenience goods.
25.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
All uses within this zone must be confined to two thousand five hundred (2,500) internal square feet
of the principal structure.
Antique or custom furniture shop with incidental upholstery.
Bakery limited to goods for retail on the premises.
Banks or similar financial enterprise.
Barber or beauty shop.
Bicycle sales and service.
Business or professional office such as attorney, architect, engineer, dentist, physician, etc.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 584/735
Camera or photographic supply store.
Churches.
Clinics, private, for human care.
Costume rental.
Daycare center meeting state and local permits with fenced play area.
Delicatessen.
Dry cleaning pick up station.
Dwelling, above ground floor.
Health/recreational and physical training club.
Hobby shop.
Interior decorating shop including upholstery and drape making.
Laundromat.
Locksmith.
Music studio.
Restaurant, not drive-in or drive-through.
Retail uses such as drugstore, florist, grocery, ice cream shop, meat market, appliance, shoe, variety,
stationery, book, clothing, packaged liquor sales and candy stores with all activities, except for
automobile off street parking and loading facilities as permitted or required in this district, shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
25.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
25.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Auto accessory store.
Bus transfer station.
Club or lodge.
Convenience store.
Nursing home.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
25.5 Uses Prohibited:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 585/735
Any commercial or manufacturing use except that which is clearly necessary for the conduct of a
permitted retail business or service on the premises.
25.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Front Side Rear
Height Yard Depth Yard Width Yard Depth Other
35 feet or same as 25 feet or same as None except same 10 feet or same In accordance
adjacent R district adjacent R district as adjacent R as adjacent R with performance
district district standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXVI. B-2 CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT
26.1 General Description: The central business district is intended to be a high density, compact,
pedestrian oriented shopping, office, service and entertainment area. This district is one of high traffic
generation and is thus located where there can be a concentration of a variety of commercial activities.
26.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Any use permitted in a B-1 district and allowing for retail establishments with greater than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Art galleries and studios.
Auction house.
Bar, dance hall, cocktail lounge or nightclub, private clubs, lodges, union halls, tavern, microbrewery
when enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage at least one hundred feet (100') from any
residentially zoned private property.
Bicycle sales and repair.
Blueprinting, photostating, print shop and duplicating establishments.
Bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal or other public transportation terminal.
Business or trade school.
Catering within a building.
Ceramic products manufacture for sale on premises.
Church.
Commercial parking lot.
Conservatory for retail sale on premises only.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 586/735
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair for retail sales on premises only.
Custom rental.
Department stores.
Drapery and mattress manufacture for sale on premises.
Employment agency.
Engraving of lithographing.
Funeral home.
Garage, public.
Hardware or paint supply store without outdoor sales or storage.
Hotel/motel.
Laboratories, medical and dental.
Laundry or dry cleaning shop when enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage at least one
hundred feet (100') from any residentially zoned private property.
Meeting halls, clubs, fraternal organizations and lodges.
Mirror and glazing shop, glass cutting.
Pawnshop.
Pet shops, but not animal hospitals.
Picture framing.
Plumbing, electrical, heating, and air conditioning supply stores or showrooms without outdoor sales
or storage and without repairs or fabrication.
Public, customer or accessory parking lot.
Public utility collection office.
Radio, television and CATV stations, not transmitting towers.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Taxidermist.
Theater, indoor.
Travel bureau and ticket office.
Upholstering shop for furniture.
Any other similar type uses not specifically permitted herein which would have economic compatibility
with the established uses on adjoining properties.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 587/735
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
26.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Permitted accessory uses in a B-1 district.
Assembly of small electrical appliances, instruments, small computers and other electronic devices.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
26.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any use permitted on review in a B-1 district.
Auto accessory store.
Auto repair, minor.
Transmission and receiving equipment for radio, television, cable, and telephone.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
26.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both
principal and primary buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory buildings shall be located in a front yard.
Front Side Rear
Height Yard Depth Yard Width Yard Depth Other
None None None except same None except same In accordance
as adjacent R as adjacent R with performance
district district standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXVII. B-3 COMMUNITY
BUSINESS DISTRICT
27.1 General Description: The community business district is intended to provide for major businesses
which serve a significant segment of the population. The district may provide for a variety of retail goods
and services, along with large traffic generators requiring access from major thoroughfares and a
reliance on motor vehicle oriented trade. The district is dominated by uses with indoor operations,
although some may have limited outdoor activities. Development in the district is encouraged in a
manner which minimizes traffic hazards and interference with other uses in the vicinity.
27.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Any uses permitted in a B-2 district, except dwelling.
Amusement centers, indoor, including bowling alleys, pool halls, billiard parlors, skating rinks arcades
and other similar uses.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 588/735
Auto/pickup sales of a two (2) ton capacity or less and service enclosed and with building(s) and
outside storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private property.
Car wash, single bay, enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage at least one hundred feet
(100') from residentially zoned private property.
Drive-in or fast food restaurant.
Exterminating shop.
Fabric or floor covering sales.
Hospital or clinic for small animals with no long term kennel use and at least one hundred feet (100')
from residentially zoned private property.
Any other similar type uses not specifically listed herein, and which has economic compatibility with
the established uses on adjoining properties.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
27.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Permitted accessory uses in a B-2 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
27.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any use permitted on review in a B-2 district.
Car wash, multiple bays.
Recreational uses, open air such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball fields and golf ranges,
with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private
property.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
27.5 Uses Prohibited:
Dwelling.
27.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Front Side Rear
Height Yard Depth Yard Width Yard Depth Other
45 feet 20 feet or same as None except same 10 feet or same In accordance
adjacent R district as adjacent R as adjacent R with performance
district district standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 589/735
ARTICLE XXVIII. B-4 HIGHWAY/INTENSIVE
BUSINESS DISTRICT
28.1 General Description: The highway/intensive business district is intended to permit development of
service uses relating to expressways or along other major arterial thoroughfares. This district permits
uses that, by their nature, tend to generate heavy traffic usage. This district also provides for functions
and businesses which may be characterized by outdoor display, storage and/or sale of merchandise, by
repair of motor vehicles, and by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational activities not
completely enclosed.
28.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Any use permitted in a B-3 district.
Agricultural implement sales and services with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred
feet (100') from residentially zoned private property.
Air conditioning and heating sales and service with outdoor fabrication and repairs.
Auto repair, major, with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from
residentially zoned private property.
Bathhouse or boathouse with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from
residentially zoned private property.
Boat sales with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially
zoned private property.
Building material sales yard, wholesale business with warehouses as specified in this appendix, at
least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private property.
Car wash.
Carpenter and cabinet shop with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100')
from residentially zoned private property.
Contractors offices and shops within building.
Feed and seed store, wholesale.
Greenhouse with outside storage permitted.
Kennels with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned
private property.
Motor vehicle dealerships with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from
residentially zoned private property.
Recreational uses, public open air, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball fields, and golf
ranges with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned
private property.
Sign painting shop and similar establishment with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one
hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private property.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 590/735
Travel trailer sales and service with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100')
from residentially zoned private property.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
28.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Permitted accessory uses in a B-3 district.
Other uses incidental to a permitted principal use.
28.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Any uses permitted on review in a B-3 district.
Auditorium.
Miniwarehousing with structures at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned private
property.
28.5 Uses Prohibited:
Dwelling.
28.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
45 feet 20 feet or same as None except same 10 feet or same In accordance
adjacent R district as adjacent R as adjacent R with performance
district district standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXIX. ORT OFFICE/RESEARCH
PARK AND TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT
29.1 General Description: The office/research park and technology district is intended to provide for
large attractively landscaped low density sites primarily along an interstate or expressway corridor. The
area is appropriate for regional and/or national businesses and offices, including research activities and
some specialized unobjectionable ultra light industrial activities which take advantage of the
transportation corridor but are low intensity and sufficiently restricted to be compatible with adjacent
residential and commercial development. This may include manufacturing, processing, packaging,
assembly or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared materials. This
district is intended to have a green/open space atmosphere conducive to quality development with the
preservation of significant natural features. No outdoor storage is allowed in this district and all
operations must be in an enclosed building.
29.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Computer manufacture, electronic assembly.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 591/735
Custom cabinet shop.
Custom drapery manufacture.
Data processing and computer centers including computer programming and software development,
training, and service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.
Hotel/motel.
Laboratories for research, development, and testing of medical, optical, dental and pharmaceutical
products.
Mattress manufacture with retail activities.
Offices for the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing,
clerical, drafting, sales and engineering excluding medical and dental offices.
Printing, publishing, duplicating and photographic processing.
Processing and assembly of engineering, laboratory, scientific, and research instruments and
associated equipment.
Prosthetic manufacture.
Research and development, technical training and related activities for industrial, scientific and
business enterprises, and design of pilot or experimental products.
Trade or industrial schools, personnel training center.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
29.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Bar/cocktail lounge incidental to hotel/motel and/or restaurant.
Childcare center when accessory to permitted principal use.
Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use when accessory of hotel/motel.
Manufacturing when accessory to permitted principal use.
Residence of caretaker or security personnel.
Retail business intended to serve the permitted uses within the district and not dependent upon direct
visits of retail customers.
Other uses incidental to permitted principal use.
29.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
Bank.
Childcare center.
Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use.
Essential public services.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 592/735
Hospital.
Manufacturing when accessory to permitted principal use.
Medical clinic.
Museum.
Parking lots, public or private.
Post office.
Radio/television station.
Restaurant, excluding drive-in/through.
Any other uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
29.5 Uses Prohibited:
Adult uses.
Auto salvage yard.
Auto service station.
Disposal or storage of toxic waste.
Freight terminal.
Miniwarehousing.
Outdoor advertising, off premises.
Residential except as noted.
Restaurant, drive-in.
Retail except as noted.
29.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Minimum
Lot Area Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
20,000 square 45 feet 50 feet 15 feet 20 feet In accordance
feet with performance
standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXX. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 593/735
30.1 General Description: The light industrial district is intended to provide for the development of most
types of industry with regulations designed to protect adjacent properties.
30.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
Assembly of products from finished materials and parts.
Bottling and canning of soft drinks.
Cabinetmaking.
Food processing.
Fur repair and storage.
Laboratories.
Laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing except walk-in/drive-up.
Photo processing involving photoengraving.
Printing and binding.
Services, providing not more than five percent (5%) of the business comes from retail on premises
sales and except repair or reconditioning of any motor vehicles.
Wholesaling, warehousing and storage, except miniwarehousing.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
30.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Offices.
Other accessory uses incidental to a permitted use.
30.4 Uses Prohibited:
Uses prohibited in an office/research park and technology district.
Disposal or storage of toxic waste.
30.5 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
45 feet 20 feet for 1-3 stories, 15 feet 20 feet In accordance
if > 3 stories, then 40% with performance
of building height standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 594/735
ARTICLE XXXI. I-2 GENERAL
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
31.1 General Description: The general industrial district is intended to provide for large scale
manufacturing facilities not otherwise permitted which have potential significant external impacts to
adjacent properties.
31.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
Any use permitted in an I-1 district.
Any of the following uses, when at least two hundred feet (200') from any residentially zoned private
property and at least one hundred feet (100') from any other district, except an I-1 district or when
authorized by the board of zoning appeals:
Acetylene manufacturing in excess of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch.
Acid manufacture.
Aircraft, assembly and testing.
Ammonia, chlorine or bleach powder manufacture.
Animal black, lamp black, bone black or graphite manufacture.
Asbestos and asbestos products manufacture.
Automobile, tractor trailer, farm implement assembly or manufacture.
Blast furnaces, steel works or rolling mills.
Bleaching, cleaning and dyeing plant.
Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops, railway car or locomotive shops,
including repair, metal working shops.
Box and crate manufacture.
Brewing or distilling of liquors.
Brick manufacture.
Bulk station.
Candle or sperm oil manufacture.
Cans and other types of containers manufacture.
Celluloid or pyroxyline manufacture, or explosive or inflammable cellulose or manufacture or storage.
Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster or plaster of Paris manufacture.
Chalk manufacture.
Charcoal manufacture.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 595/735
Chemicals, the manufacture or use of, except those which may be inflammable or explosive.
Coffin manufacture.
Cooperage works.
Cotton ginning and cotton wadding.
Cottonseed oil manufacture.
Creosote manufacture or treatment.
Dextrin, starch or glucose manufacture.
Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture.
Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bones except in the manufacture of gas.
Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and others manufacture.
Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture.
Enameling, lacquering or japanning.
Explosive manufacture or storage except for small arms ammunition.
Fertilizer, compost - manufacture or storage.
Fish curing, smoking or packing, fish oil manufacture or refining.
Flammable liquids storage not to exceed a total of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons.
Flour, grain or feed milling or processing.
Foundry works.
Gas generation or storage for illumination or heating.
Gelatin, vegetable and animal manufacture.
Glass blowing and manufacture.
Grain elevators.
Hair or hair products manufacture.
Hemp products manufacture.
Linoleum, oil cloth or oiled goods manufacture.
Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing mills manufacture.
Machinery, heavy manufacture and repair.
Match manufacture.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 596/735
Meat, packing and processing except slaughtering and glue and size manufacture, but not stockyards
or slaughterhouses.
Metal stamping and extrusion of metal products manufacture and plating.
Motor testing or internal combustion motors manufacture.
Oil, shellac, turpentine, varnish or enamel manufacture.
Paper and pulp manufacture.
Perfume manufacture.
Petroleum or flammable liquids production and refining.
Pickle, sauerkraut, sausage manufacture.
Porcelain products manufacture.
Poultry slaughterhouse, including packing and storage for wholesale.
Railroad equipment manufacture.
Rock crushing.
Rubber manufacture and processing.
Rubber products, including tires and tubes and tire recapping.
Sandblasting or cutting.
Sewage disposal plant or incinerator, sanitary landfill, recycling or composting operation except by
the municipality.
Shoe blacking or polish or stove polish manufacture.
Soap manufacture.
Steam power plant, except where accessory to a permitted principal use.
Stone and monument works employing power driven tools.
Storage, curing or tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins when refrigerated storage is
provided.
Storage of flammable liquids when facilities are located at least six hundred feet (600') from any R
district and at least three hundred feet (300') from any other district except I districts and are enclosed by
a fence at least eight feet (8') in height.
Sugar refining.
Tar distillation or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacture.
Vinegar manufacture.
Wax products manufacture.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 597/735
Wire or rod drawing - nut, screw or bolt manufacture.
Wool scouring and pulling.
Yeast manufacture.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
Any other use which, in the opinion of the planning and redevelopment administrator, is of similar
character to those specified above.
31.3 Accessory Uses Permitted:
Permitted accessory uses in an I-1 district.
Other uses incidental to a principal use.
31.4 When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals:
An establishment which has the potential to be dangerous or extremely obnoxious. Included are
those which explosives are stored, petroleum is refined, natural and liquid gas and other petroleum
derivatives are stored and/or distributed in bulk, radioactive material are compounded, pesticides and
certain acids are manufactured, and hazardous waste is treated or stored as the establishment's
principal activity.
Asphalt plant.
Automobile salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal and waste salvage operations and
junkyards not less than two hundred feet (200') from any B district and one thousand feet (1,000') from
any state or federal highway enclosed on all sides with solid masonry wall at least twelve feet (12') high;
no pile of salvage, scrap or other material shall be higher than twelve feet (12').
Aviation facilities, private and public.
Disposal or storage of toxic waste.
Landfill, construction debris, rubble, or sanitary.
Recycling centers and stations.
Resource extraction.
Scrap and salvage services.
Shooting range.
Transfer station for waste.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the board of zoning appeals.
31.5 Uses Prohibited:
Any prohibited use in an I-1 district, except auto salvage yard.
31.6 Lot Area And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both
primary and accessory buildings along with buffer yard requirements as described in section 36.6 of this
appendix. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 598/735
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
75 feet <<50 feet then 20 feet 15 feet <<50 feet then 20 feet In accordance
50 feet then 40%
of
50 feet then 30 feet with performance
building height standards
(Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXII. PUD PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
32.1 Purpose: The purpose of the PUD planned unit development district is to promote to the extent
possible:
32.1a A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a development
that would not be possible under the strict application of the other sections of this appendix.
32.1b Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and facilities.
32.1c A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic, and geologic features.
32.1d A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better
development, design and the construction of aesthetic amenities.
32.1e An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, and other
facilities.
32.1f A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare.
32.1g To improve storm water management practices and reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation
through the retention of open space, vegetation, and natural drainage patterns.
32.1h To implement adopted land use and community policies.
32.1i To implement provision of the Illinois quad cities greenway plan.
32.1j To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with amenities in the form of
neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity.
32.1k To conserve scenic views and elements of the municipality's rural character.
The PUD district is intended to provide for a development incorporating a single type or a variety of
related uses which are planned and developed as a unit but departs from the normal standards and
requirements of other sections of this appendix.
The planned unit development may provide amenities not otherwise required by law and may establish
facilities and open space greater than the minimums required by law. Such development may consist of
conventionally subdivided lots or provide for development by a land use and zoning plan which
establishes the location and extent of the features of the planned unit development in keeping with the
purpose of the plan.
The foregoing purposes and principals shall not be interpreted to permit the reduction of standards set
forth in this section.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 599/735
32.2 Procedure: The owner, owners, or bona fide buyer of any tract of land may petition the planning
commission and city council for a change to the PUD zoning district in accordance with article VI of this
appendix. A planned unit development shall be authorized in accordance with the following procedures:
32.2a Application Procedure:
(1) The application for a rezoning to the PUD zoning district shall be accompanied by an
application plan meeting the requirements of sections 32.3 and 32.4 of this article and show evidence
that the proposed development will conform to the official city plan and to the purpose of the PUD
district set forth in section 32.1 of this article. The planning commission and city council shall grant or
deny said application pursuant to the provisions contained in article VI of this appendix. Approval of
the PUD zoning district shall constitute an expression of approval by the city council of the
application plan as a guide to the preparation of the preliminary PUD plan. The applications shall be
accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal to that prescribed by article VI of this appendix.
(2) To reduce the number of steps involved in the approval of a planned unit development, a
preliminary PUD plan meeting the requirements of subsections 32.3b and 32.3c of this article may be
submitted in lieu of an application plan required in subsection 32.2a(1) of this section.
32.2b Approval Of The Preliminary Plan:
(1) Supporting data in accordance with subsection 32.3b of this article.
a. Copies of the preliminary PUD plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the planning
and redevelopment administrator for certification as to conformity with these regulations,
recommendations, and suggestions regarding the overall design, if any.
b. Copies of the preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted to the planning commission who shall
hold public hearings on the application for a preliminary PUD plan giving notice of the times and
places as required by state law by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a publication having
general circulation within the city. Following the public hearings, a recommendation of approval or
denial of the preliminary PUD plan shall be made by the planning commission to the city council. If
needed, the city council shall review the preliminary PUD plan and grant or deny any exceptions or
variances needed.
(2) Findings: The planning commission and city council shall set forth the reasons for the
recommendation, and said recommendation shall set forth how the proposal would be in the public
interest, including, but not limited to, findings of facts on the following:
a. In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the stated purpose of the planned unit
development requirements.
b. The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and standards of the planned
unit development district.
c. The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property, including, but not limited to, the density, dimension,
area, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
d. The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which said design makes
adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides
for and protects designated common open space, and furthers the amenities of light, air,
recreation, and visual enjoyment.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 600/735
e. The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent properties and
neighborhood.
f. The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development, tax base, and economic well
being of the entire community.
g. The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive plan.
h. Specific points noted on the plan that have impact on its design, function, and visibility in the
community.
(3) City Council Approval: Following receipt of the recommendation by the planning commission
and approval by the planning commission, the city council shall, within sixty (60) days, recommend
approval, modification within limits of a minor change, or disapproval of the planned unit development
plan. As a condition to the approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the city council shall set forth
findings of fact in accord with subsection 32.2b(2) of this section on which they base their approval
and describing how the proposal meets the standards of section 32.4 of this article.
(4) Requirements: All conditions, documents, and plans required by the city council must be
delineated on the plat or agreed to in writing prior to city council approval.
(5) Special Conditions: The city council may require such special conditions as they may deem
necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements, the stated
purpose of the planned development district and established city policies.
(6) Guide To Final Plat: Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the
layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which will be
submitted for approval of the city. The final plan shall be approved as the final land use and zoning
plan if it conforms substantially with the preliminary land use and zoning plan.
The final plan may be considered as a preliminary and final plan and may be submitted for
preliminary and final approval, if all of the land is to be developed at one time, and if all requirements
hereof are met.
(7) Applicability: The provisions of article VI of this appendix shall be applicable to the preliminary
PUD plan.
32.2c Approval Of Final Plan: The final planned unit development plan shall be submitted to the planning
and redevelopment administrator who shall refer same to the planning commission and city council. The
final PUD plan shall conform to the preliminary PUD plan as approved or subject to minor changes, and
may be submitted in stages with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plan; provided, however,
that such stage conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for approval
of a final plan shall be:
(1) A final planned unit development plan and other supporting data required for approval shall be
in accord with the provisions of section 32.3 of this article. Final plans must be submitted for approval
in accordance with agreed to scheduling, but not later than five (5) years from the approval of the
preliminary plan by the city council. The city council may grant an extension in time or the developer
may resubmit an application; in the event that same is not done, the city council shall initiate such
zoning changes as it deems necessary to preserve the public interest. If construction falls more than
two (2) years behind the schedule filed with the final plan, the plan becomes subject to revocation.
The planning and redevelopment administrator shall monitor all pending PUD projects and inform the
city council of those six (6) months or more behind schedule.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 601/735
(2) The final plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the city council for certification that the
final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan.
(3) After review of the final plan, the planning commission shall submit the planned unit
development plan to the city council with a recommendation for approval, disapproval, or approval
with minor modifications as reviewed at the public hearing. Any changes or modifications which arise
subsequent to the public hearing shall be specifically noted and referred to the city council who shall
determine whether the change constitutes a major or minor change and whether another public
hearing is required.
(4) The city council shall, within sixty (60) days, approve, disapprove, or extend the time period for
another sixty (60) days in taking action on the final plan.
(5) All conditions, documents, and plans required by the council must be delineated on the plan or
agreed to in writing prior to council approval.
32.2d Recording The Final Planned Unit Development Plan: The construction of any public improvement
in the planned unit development shall be initiated only after recording of the final PUD plan has been
recorded with the county recorder, and shall be issued in full conformance with this appendix.
32.2e Changes In The Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development shall be developed
according to the approved and recorded final plan, recorded approved plan and supporting data together
with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and
assigns, and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the planned unit
development project as set forth therein.
(1) Major Changes: A change in the approved preliminary PUD plan or final PUD plan which alters
the concept or intent of the planned unit development including a change in usage, the configuration,
increase in floor area or the height of buildings, an increase in intensity, a reduction of proposed open
space, a change in road locations or standards, a change in the final governing agreement,
provisions or covenants, or other major changes, shall be approved only by submission of a new
preliminary PUD plan in accordance with the procedures as previously set forth for the approval of
preliminary and final PUD plans. All approved major changes in the final PUD plan shall be recorded
with the county recorder as amendments to the final PUD plan.
(2) Minor Changes: The planning and redevelopment administrator may approve minor changes in
the planned unit development that do not change the concept or intent of the development, without
going through the "preliminary approval" steps. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as a
major change.
32.3 Specific Content: The planned unit development plans and supporting data shall include at least
the following information:
32.3a Application Stage:
(1) General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, and characteristics, available
community facilities and utilities, existing covenants and other related information.
(2) Sketch Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed location and extent of the
land uses, streets, sidewalks, lots, and other features.
32.3b Preliminary Plan Stage:
(1) Design Plan: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared at a scale of either
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), or such other
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 602/735
scale that may be recommended by the planning and redevelopment administrator. Any change in
scale between the preliminary and final plan shall be accompanied by a signed statement from the
developer attesting that there have been no modifications. All plans shall show the general location
of proposed streets (public and private), sidewalks, all buildings and their use, common open space,
recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the character of the
proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings and
shall include:
a. Boundary lines: bearing and distances.
b. Easements: general location, width, and purpose.
c. Public and private streets on and adjacent to the tract: street names, right of way widths,
existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, distance
to nearest intersection, etc.
d. Utilities (public or private) on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert elevations of
sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire
hydrants, electric and telephone lines and streetlights on the tract. The direction and distance to
the nearest usable water mains and sewers anticipated to be utilized by the development and
elevations of sewers. Drainage district boundaries and appropriate design criteria necessary for
storm drainage plans.
e. Existing ground elevations on the tract: For land that slopes less than one-half (1/2) of one
percent (1%), show one foot (1') contours; show spot elevations at all breaks in grades along all
drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in
all directions; for land that slopes more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) show two foot (2')
contours.
f. Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the commission or council: location and
results of tests made to generally ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions;
depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5'): The location and results of
soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
g. Other conditions are on the tract: watercourses, floodplains, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded
areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory
buildings and other significant features.
h. Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and gradient of ground slopes,
including any embankments or retaining walls; character and general location of buildings,
including a notation on the front setback, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby
nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplanted land; for adjacent
platted land refer to subdivision plan by name and show approximate percent built up; typical lot
size and dwelling type.
i. Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
j. Proposed public improvements: highways or other major improvements planned by public
authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
k. Open space: all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use of all property owners
with the purpose indicated.
l. General location, purpose, and height, in feet or stories of each building other than singlefamily
residences on individually platted lots.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 603/735
m. Map data: name of development, north point and scale, date of preparation, acreage of site
and name and address of developer, designer, and engineer.
n. Miscellaneous: such additional information as may be required by the planning and
redevelopment administrator or found in the subdivision control ordinance.
(2) Character: Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the reasons why
it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations.
(3) Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project,
including present tract designation according to official records in offices of the county recorder.
(4) Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
a. Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use and public facilities
such as open space to be developed with each stage shall be shown on the plan and through
supporting graphic material.
b. Completion date or dates of new construction for above and below ground facilities, utilities,
and buffer planting.
c. If different land use types are to be included within the planned unit development, the
schedule must normally include the mix of uses to be built in each stage.
(5) Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any of its common open
space.
(6) Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses and the number of dwelling units
by type.
(7) Use: Provide a list of uses planned for the ancillary and nonresidential uses.
(8) Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities and off street parking facilities.
(9) Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted
in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the
building and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
(10) Facilities Plans (Public And/Or Private): Preliminary plans for:
a. Roads and sidewalks, including classification, width of right of way, width of pavement, typical
construction details, and plan and profile drawings.
b. Sanitary sewers.
c. Storm drainage and erosion.
d. Water supply system, if required by the city engineer.
e. Lighting program, if required by the city engineer.
f. Grading.
32.3c Final Plan Stage:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 604/735
(1) Final Detailed Plan: A final land use and zoning plan shall be prepared. The purpose of the
land use and zoning plan is to designate the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other land, not so treated, into common open areas and building areas. The final land use
and zoning plan shall include, but not be limited to:
a. An accurate legal metes and bounds description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
b. A subdivision plan of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements
of a normal subdivision final plan.
c. An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each separate unsubdivided use area,
including common open space.
d. Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed in unsubdivided areas.
e. Tabulations on separate subdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings,
number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre.
f. Architectural plans unless waived by the planning and redevelopment administrator during the
preliminary stage.
(2) Common Open Space Documents: All common open space shall be either conveyed to a
municipal or public corporation, conveyed to nonprofit corporation or entity established for the
purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned unit development or retained by the
developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the city attorney, that the common
open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as open area. All land conveyed to a
nonprofit corporation or like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a legally
enforceable lien for maintenance and improvement of the common open space.
(3) Engineering Data: All public utilities or improvements required by the city in the development of
a planned unit development shall be constructed only after the approval of the final plan. Supporting
data to be submitted with the final plans shall include final engineering drawings (construction plans),
as required by the city engineer.
(4) Guarantee Deposit: Prior to the acceptance by the city engineer of public utilities and
improvements, the contractor(s) for the owner of the land shall furnish to the city a good and
sufficient bond with surety to secure to the city the actual construction and installation of such public
utilities or improvements according to the city specifications within two (2) years from the date of
approval by the city council of the final plan or a petition to the city council to provide the required
public facilities or improvements and to assess the cost thereof against the subdivided property in
accordance with the local requirements regarding special assessments; provided, however, that the
subdivider or property owners shall be responsible for any differences between the cost of the public
utilities or improvements and the amount that can be legally assessed by the city against the
subdivided property, and shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the entire
costs of the public utilities or improvements. A maintenance bond shall be provided for the repairs
necessitated by defects in material or workmanship not to exceed four (4) years from the date of
completion as certified by the city engineer.
(5) Dedication Of Lands And Recording Documents: Certificates, seals, and signatures required
for the dedication of lands and recording document, as set forth in the subdivision regulations.
(6) Covenants: Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will provide for the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development, if applicable.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 605/735
32.4 Standards: The planned unit development must meet the following standards:
32.4a Comprehensive Plan: A planned unit development must conform with the intent and spirit of the
comprehensive plan.
32.4b Size: The site of the total planned unit development must be under single ownership and/or
unified control and be not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in area.
32.4c Compatibility: The uses permitted in a planned unit development must be of a type and so located
so as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon surrounding properties.
32.4d Space: Space between buildings shall be subject to approval during the review process.
32.4e Open Space Land Use And Design:
(1) Permitted Open Space Uses: The following uses are permitted in open space land areas:
a. Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example, woodland fallow field, or managed
meadow).
b. Agricultural and horticultural uses, including raising crops or livestock, wholesale nurseries,
and associated buildings, including residences that are specifically needed to support an active,
viable agricultural or horticultural operation. Specifically excluded are commercial livestock
operations involving swine, poultry, and other animals likely to produce highly offensive odors.
c. Pastureland for horses used solely for recreational purposes. Equestrian facilities shall be
permitted but may not consume more than sixty five percent (65%) of the minimum required open
space land.
d. Silviculture, in keeping with established standards for selective harvesting and sustained yield
forestry.
e. Neighborhood open space uses such as village greens, commons, picnic areas, community
gardens, trails, and similar low impact passive recreational uses. Motorized off road vehicles, rifle
ranges, and other uses similar in character and potential impact are specifically excluded.
f. Active noncommercial recreation areas, such as ball fields, playgrounds, courts and bikeways,
provided such areas do not consume more than half of the minimum required open space land or
five (5) acres, whichever is less. Ball fields, playgrounds, and courts shall not be located within one
hundred feet (100') of abutting properties and shall not be illuminated for activity after dark. Parking
facilities for the same shall also be permitted and shall generally be gravel surfaced, properly
drained, provide safe ingress and egress, and contain no more than ten (10) parking spaces.
g. Golf courses may comprise up to seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum required open
space land, but shall not include commercial driving ranges or miniature golf. Not more than ten
percent (10%) of the remaining open space land may be wetland, submerged, or used for storm
water management. Golf course parking areas and any associated structures shall not be included
within the minimum open space requirement. Parking and accessways may be paved and lighted.
Golf courses included as part of the open space shall be designed to maximize the extent of
fairways that front along adjacent public roads. Naturalistic plantings comprised of indigenous
species shall be established in the buffer areas between the fairways and the adjacent roadways.
h. Storm water drainage and detention areas designed, landscaped, and available for use as an
integral part of the open space.
i. Easements for drainage, access, sewer or water lines, bike paths, or other public purposes.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 606/735
j. Underground utility rights of way. Utility and street rights of way may traverse conservation
areas. Street rights of way shall not count toward the minimum required open space land, but
underground utility rights of way shall.
(2) Open Space Design Standards: The following standards shall be adhered to in the design of
the open space and greenway areas:
a. Open space shall be laid out in general accordance with the open space and greenway
networks.
b. Long, narrow strips of open space are discouraged, except where designed to protect linear
resources such as streets or trails or to provide connections between larger open space areas.
c. Fragmentation of open space into isolated unlinked pieces is discouraged, except to provide
neighborhood parks and common areas.
d. Dedicated open space land shall generally remain undivided and may be owned and
maintained by a homeowners' association, land trust, another conservation organization
recognized by the municipality, or by a private individual (typically as part of "noncommon"
conservation land used for rural resource activities, such as equestrian facilities, tree nurseries,
etc.). However, in no case shall less than twenty five percent (25%) of the property be available for
the common use and passive enjoyment of the subdivision residents. These ownership options
may be combined so that different parts of the open space land may be owned by different entities.
e. The open space shall include land dedicated for public recreational use as outlined in the city
subdivision regulations.
f. Where the proposed development adjoins public park land, a natural open space buffer at
least fifty feet (50') deep shall be provided within the development along its common boundary with
the park land, within which no new structures shall be constructed, nor shall any clearing of trees
or understory growth be permitted (except as may be necessary for street or trail construction).
Where this buffer is unwooded, the city may require vegetative screening to be planted, or that it
be managed to encourage natural forest succession through "no-mow" policies and the periodic
removal of invasive alien plant and tree species.
(3) Other Requirements:
a. No portion of any building lot may be used for meeting the minimum open space required.
However, active agricultural land with farm buildings, excluding areas used for residences, may be
used to meet the minimum required open space land.
b. Pedestrian and maintenance access, excluding those lands used for agricultural or
horticultural purposes in accordance with the permitted open space uses specified herein, shall be
provided to open space land in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Each neighborhood shall be provided with one centrally located access point to the open
space per twenty five (25) lots, a minimum of thirty feet (30') in width.
2. Access to open space land used for agriculture may be appropriately restricted for public
safety and to prevent interference with agricultural operations.
c. All open space land areas that are not wooded or farmed shall be landscaped, revegetated, or
managed to encourage natural succession to meadow or woodland.
32.4f Yards:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 607/735
(1) The required yards along the periphery of the project should be at least equal in width or depth
to that of the adjacent zoning district.
(2) All other yards shall be subject to approval during the review process.
32.4g Parking Requirements: Adequate, adjacent parking shall be provided based on design and use.
32.4h Traffic: That adequate provision be made to provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. The city engineer or city council may require a
professional traffic engineer to investigate and submit a traffic study.
32.4i Low Density Conservation Standard: Open space shall comprise a minimum of fifty percent (50%)
of the development site. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed 1.4 development
units per acre. A "development unit" is defined as the entire impervious developed area of the unit
including the building footprint and surfaced parking, driveways, sidewalks, etc. No more than twenty
percent (20%) of the minimum open space land may be wetland, submerged or used as a storm water
retention facility. The open space requirement shall include land dedicated for public recreational use in
accordance with the subdivision regulations of this city.
32.4j Medium Density Conservation Standard: Open space shall comprise a minimum of thirty percent
(30%) of the development site. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed 2.0
development units per acre. A "development unit" is defined as the entire impervious developed area of
the unit including the building footprint and surfaced parking, driveways, sidewalks, etc. No more than
twenty percent (20%) of the minimum open space land may be wetland, submerged or used as a storm
water retention facility. The open space requirement shall include land dedicated for public recreational
use in accordance with the subdivision regulations of this city.
32.4k Other Standards: The planned unit development may depart from strict conformance with the
required density, dimension, area, height, bulk, use, and other regulations for the standard zoning
districts and other provisions of this appendix to the extent specified in the preliminary land use and
zoning plan and documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as the planned unit
development project will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or
general welfare. All new construction shall conform to city specifications and regulations.
32.5 Conditions And Guarantees: Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the city council
may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height,
density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of planned unit
development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the
development, protection of the adjacent area and to secure compliance with the standards specified in
section 32.4 of this article. In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted, the city council
shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXIII. RCO RIVERFRONT
CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
33.1 General Description: The intent of the RCO riverfront corridor overlay district is:
33.1a To recognize, preserve, maintain and promote economically viable uses that are a benefit to the
city;
33.1b To maximize public benefit for further development of the riverfront area;
33.1c To provide for improved scenic and aesthetic controls;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 608/735
33.1d To recognize the riverfront area as a visual, environmental and recreational resource that affects
and benefits the city as a whole;
33.1e To protect adjacent properties from the negative effects of incompatible development;
33.1f To establish a physically attractive pattern of development for the general welfare of the city.
The RCO extends along the Mississippi River and Rock River in the corporate limits of the city of Rock
Island. The exact boundary of the RCO is delineated on the official city zoning map. The riverfront
corridor overlay district regulations supplement and control (where inconsistent) the regulations of
underlying district(s). All other applicable provisions and standards of this zoning ordinance and other
pertinent ordinances shall remain in effect.
33.2 Principal Uses Permitted:
All uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning district(s).
33.3 Other Uses:
Uses authorized by the board of zoning appeals.
33.4 Applicable Regulations:
33.4a All requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) concerning site planning, building height, lot
area, and yard depths shall remain applicable except where modified by the following sections.
33.5 Public Pedestrian/Bike Easement: For the benefit of the public, access to or along the riverfront is
encouraged. This will serve to provide open areas and vehicle free areas for use by the general public.
The desired design standards for such access are as follows:
33.5a A public pedestrian/bike easement of at least twenty feet (20') in width running in continuous
length through the property for properties bordering the river. The easement shall be adjacent to the
riverfront by an alternative location may be proposed if the riverfront location is not possible.
33.5b The easement should connect to any adjacent public pedestrian/bike easement in a physically
logical and efficient manner.
33.5c Such pedestrian/bike easements should be located in a safe and logical fashion and be usable by
pedestrians and bicyclists.
33.5d The city shall be responsible for the cost, installation, and maintenance of the asphalt surfacing,
lighting, signage, security and fencing where needed, and any other facilities necessary for the public
use along the pedestrian/bike easement.
33.6 Development Incentives:
33.6a If a public pedestrian/bike easement of at least twenty feet (20') in width running continuously
through the property is provided by the owner, the maximum building height allowable may be increased
up to four (4) stories, not to exceed fifty feet (50'). The granting of this increase shall also be dependent
upon design and topographical considerations.
33.6b If a public pedestrian/bike easement of at least twenty feet (20') in width running continuously
through the property is provided by the owner, the required setbacks from public right of way may be
varied as long as design, floodplain, safety, topographic and view considerations are satisfactorily
addressed; provided, however the setback may not be reduced to less than ten feet (10').
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 609/735
33.6c For every four hundred (400) square feet of dedicated public pedestrian easement which is at
least twenty feet (20') wide that is provided by the owner, one parking space may be deducted from the
required parking total. This provision shall not apply to residential use within the RCO. Regardless of
waivers or exemptions hereinabove granted or the requirements set forth in the off street parking
regulations of the city of Rock Island, required parking spaces shall never be reduced to less than fifty
percent (50%) of the normal required total number of spaces.
33.7 Site Plan Requirements: All applicants for proposed uses in the RCO shall be required to submit a
site plan for review and recommendation by the planning commission and approved by the city council
prior to, or in conjunction with, a zoning change, special use permit or building permit. The board of
zoning appeals shall review site plans for proposed uses requiring authorization or variances. The site
plan shall include the following information:
33.7a A drawing(s) at a scale of one hundred feet (100') or less to the inch indicating:
(1) The legal description of the property;
(2) Existing topography and the proposed finished grade of the site, shown with contour intervals
of two feet (2');
(3) Location and description of existing and proposed utility services on and adjacent to the
development, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, and other utilities;
(4) All existing and proposed easements;
(5) The location and size of each existing and proposed structure or use on the site;
(6) The location and width of streets adjacent to or on the property;
(7) The location and width of all existing and proposed curb cuts, driveways and driving lanes;
(8) The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas, including the location and
type of illumination and landscaping;
(9) The types of surfacing, such as paving, turf or gravel to be used on the site;
(10) A drainage plan for the site;
(11) The location and height of all existing proposed walls, fences, and screen plantings,
landscaping and buffer areas; and
(12) The size, location and height of all freestanding, roof or outdoor advertising signs; and
(13) Description and location of any development incentives that are being used, as outlined in
section 33.6 of this article.
33.8 Traffic Analysis: A traffic study shall be required for developments that are expected to generate
large volumes of traffic to and from a site. The city engineer shall determine if a traffic study is required
for a site. The analysis shall be performed by a registered professional engineer. The analysis shall
include the anticipated or projected trip generation per day (ADT) and peak hourly traffic resulting from
the proposed use; access points and driveways to and from the site; parking areas and number of
parking spaces; stacking areas, sight distances from the access points; distance from proposed access
points to existing intersections and driveways within five hundred feet (500'); and other information
necessary for proper review by the city.
33.9 Performance Standards For Site Development:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 610/735
33.9a Landscaping And Screening: Commercial, industrial, office and multi-family developments shall be
required to provide landscaping or screening adequate to achieve the following objectives:
(1) To screen incompatible land uses and protect residential areas from negative effects such as
noise, glare and litter;
(2) To provide a visually attractive site design;
(3) To encourage the creative use of landscaping to frame or enhance views and vistas and
discourage the obstruction of existing views; and
(4) To be sensitive to the environmental nature of the riverbank by limiting its alteration except as
necessary.
33.9b Illumination: Exterior lighting on buildings or in yard and parking areas shall not produce any
hazards, nuisances, or unsightly glare for adjacent land uses, pedestrians and motorists.
33.9c Specific Development Standards: Refer to articles VIII, XXXIV, XXXV and XXXVI of this appendix
for specific development standards.
33.9d Signs: All signs shall comply with the intent and regulations of the sign ordinance. In addition,
developments in the corridor shall be limited to one freestanding sign per parcel.
33.10 Submission Of Site Plan: A site plan shall be submitted at the time of application for a rezoning,
an authorized use, and if applicable, for a variance. If only a building the site plan shall be submitted at
the time of application for the permit. The site plan shall be submitted to the planning and redevelopment
administrator. A processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the
site plan is submitted. This fee shall not be required if the site plan is submitted at the same time as an
application for a zoning change or authorized use.
33.11 Review Process: Upon receiving a site plan, the planning and redevelopment administrator shall
schedule a public hearing for review by the appropriate public body. The planning commission shall
review and make a recommendation to the city council for site plans requiring a zoning change, or only a
building or sign permit. The city council shall review and take final action on site plans requiring a zoning
change, or only a building or sign permit. The board of zoning appeals shall review and approve site
plans for uses requiring board of zoning appeals authorization or variances, if applicable. A site plan
approved by the board of zoning appeals shall not require planning commission or city council review
before the issuance of a building permit.
33.12 Notice Of Public Hearing: If a site plan is submitted as part of an application for a zoning change,
authorized use or variance, the appropriate notification procedure established in this appendix shall be
followed. If only a building or sign permit is required, at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing,
a notice stating the time and place of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city of Rock Island. Notice shall also be delivered personally or by mail at least five (5) days before
the hearing to the applicant, respective owners of record or property adjoining or adjacent to the subject
parcel within the city's planning jurisdiction, and the planning commission.
33.13 Findings Of Fact: Site plans reviewed by the planning commission, city council or board of zoning
appeals shall be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved. In any case, the reviewing body
shall make the following specific findings of fact concerning the site plan:
33.13a Whether the proposed development conforms to the standards and requirements of the riverfront
corridor overlay district;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 611/735
33.13b Whether the proposed development is consistent with the land use recommendations and
development policies;
33.13c Whether the proposed development is designed to prevent traffic congestion and access
problems along adjacent streets;
33.13d Whether the proposed development is an attractive design and an efficient use of land;
33.13e Whether the proposed development is compatible with adjacent land uses and is designed to
protect adjacent properties from adverse effects such as noise, glare, litter and unattractive features;
33.13f Whether the proposed development will be adequately served by public facilities; and
33.13g Whether the proposed development will have any negative environmental or physical impacts on
the site or on adjacent properties.
33.14 Exemptions From Site Plan Requirements: One- and two-family residences are exempt from the
site plan requirements of the RCO. In addition, a site plan shall not be required for the renovation or
expansion of an existing structure or use unless access points would be changed or a substantial
increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
33.15 Amendments To Approved Site Plans: Any amendment or change to an approved site plan must
be submitted to the planning and redevelopment administrator for review. The planning and
redevelopment administrator shall determine if the proposed amendment is a major change requiring
review and approval by the appropriate public body. The planning and redevelopment administrator can
approve minor changes. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002; Ord. 33-2003, § 4, 4-21-2003; Ord. 008-2009, § 6,
2-2-2009)
ARTICLE XXXIV. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
34.1 Compliance With Provisions:
34.1a New Uses: Any use established in the business or industrial zones after the effective date hereof
shall comply with the minimum performance standards contained in this article.
34.1b Existing Uses: Existing business and industrial uses which are not in compliance with the
performance standards contained in this article are exempt, except where a use did not comply with
performance standards in effect prior to the passage of this ordinance.
Conditions which do not comply shall not be increased in scope or magnitude. Such uses shall be
permitted to be enlarged or altered, provided the addition or change conforms with the applicable
performance standards.
34.2 Certification May Be Required: When necessary, the planning and redevelopment administrator
may require of the applicant certification by a registered professional engineer or other qualified person,
at the expense of the applicant, that the performance standards for a proposed use can be met.
34.3 Smoke Emissions: The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not exceed a density
or equivalent opacity permitted by the Illinois EPA.
34.4 Particulate Matter: No person shall operate or cause to be operated any process which emits
particulate air contaminants exceeding the air quality standards of the Illinois environmental protection
agency (IEPA) or its successor.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 612/735
34.4a Prior to the city issuing a certificate of occupancy, an applicant must submit to the planning and
redevelopment administrator documentation of the IEPA approval of the applicant's application and
permit to install or alter equipment or control equipment if such a permit is required under the applicable
IEPA standards.
34.4b In the event the IEPA lowers its air quality standards, the IEPA standards in effect on the adoption
date of this ordinance shall remain applicable. Under these circumstances, prior to the city issuing a
building permit, an applicant must submit to the planning and redevelopment administrator
documentation from a licensed engineer demonstrating that the use complies with the IEPA standards
(on the adoption date of this ordinance).
34.4c In the event the IEPA raises its air quality standards, the new IEPA standards shall apply, and the
applicant must comply with the requirements of subsection 34.4b of this section.
34.5 Toxic Matters: The release of airborne toxic matter from any operation or activity shall not exceed
the fractional quantities permitted below of the threshold limit values adopted by the American
conference of governmental industrial hygienists. If a toxic substance is not listed, verification that the
proposed level of toxic matter will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or injurious to plant
and animal life will be required. The measurement of toxic matter shall be on the average of any twenty
four (24) hour sampling period.
34.5a All B Zones And The ORT Zone: In all B zones and in the ORT zone, the release beyond lot lines
of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of the threshold limit values.
34.5b I-1 And I-2 Zones: In the I-1 and I-2 zones, the release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed
one-eighth (1/8) of the threshold limit values beyond zone boundary lines.
34.6 Vibration: Earth borne vibrations from any operation or activity shall not exceed the displacement
values below. Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously
measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less
than the vibration displacement permitted. The maximum displacements shall be determined by the
following formula:
D = K
f
where
D=displacement in inches
K=a constant given in table below
f=the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per second
Zone And Place Of Measurement Continuous Impulsive1 Less Than 8 Pulses Per 24
Hour Period
B zones and ORT zone:
At lot line 0.003 0.006 0.015
I-1 zone and I-2 zone:
At zone boundary line 0.030 0.060 0.150
At R zone, recreational area or school
boundary line
0.003 0.006 0.015
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 613/735
1. At least 1 second rest between pulses which do not exceed 1 second duration.
34.7 Glare Illumination: See article XXXV, "Illuminations Provisions", of this appendix.
34.8 Sewage Waste: Sewers and sewage discharge shall meet the appropriate city code and all IEPA
requirements.
34.9 Storage:
34.9a The open storage of materials and equipment except for sales display shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Storage of materials and equipment shall be completely screened from view. An eight foot (8')
solid wall fence with a level A buffer yard as described in article XXXVI of this appendix will be
required.
(2) All combustible material shall be stored in such a way as to include, where necessary, access
drives to permit free access of firefighting equipment.
34.9b The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals, when stored in aboveground tanks, shall
occur no closer than the lot line or any principal building than the distance indicated by the following
table:
Capacity Minimum Separation
Per Container Distances Above-
(Gallons) ground Containers
Less than 125 None
125 to 250 10 feet
251 to 500 10 feet
501 to 2,000 25 feet
2,001 to 30,000 50 feet
30,001 to 70,000 75 feet
70,001 to 90,000 100 feet
34.9c The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be located in accordance with the
uniform fire code regarding tank storage underground, except the minimum distance between such
underground tanks and any R zone boundary shall be at least ten feet (10').
34.10 Screening: See buffer yard requirements as described in article XXXVI of this appendix.
34.11 Noise: The following requirements shall apply in all districts:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 614/735
34.11a Decibel Levels: The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below, shall not exceed
the following decibel levels in the designated octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of
use districts:
Octave Band, Districts Sound Level,
Cycles B-1, In Decibels
Per Second B-2, B-3 All Residential
0 to 75 73 58
76 to 150 69 54
151 to 300 65 50
301 to 600 61 46
601 to 1,200 55 40
1,201 to 2,400 48 33
2,401 to 4,800 41 26
Over 4,800 35 20
34.11b Sounds Hard To Measure: Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not easily
measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
34.11c Method Of Measurement: Measurement is to be made at the nearest boundary of the nearest
residential area or at any other point along the boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels
shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the
American Standards Association. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXV. ILLUMINATIONS PROVISIONS
35.1 Parking Facility And Exterior Security Lighting:
35.1a Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish lighting requirements for personal safety and
crime prevention while regulating any spillover of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles,
pedestrians, and land uses near a light source to promote personal and traffic safety and to prevent the
creation of public nuisances.
35.2 Lighting Plan: Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, plans for required parking lot and
security lighting shall be approved by the planning and redevelopment administrator and the police
department prior to approval and issuance of permits. Plans, at appropriate scale, shall be based on
accurate, approved final site plans and shall depict all exterior lighting as to its location, orientation and
configuration. This must include, but not be limited to:
35.2a Luminaire height;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 615/735
35.2b Luminaire and standard technical specifications;
35.2c Intensity of illumination measured at the least point of illumination and the greatest point of
illumination when measured from ground level;
35.2d Type of light source (metal halide, high pressure sodium, etc.);
35.2e Hours of illumination; and
35.2f Photometric plan superimposed on the site plan for each classification of lighting with points no
greater than thirty feet (30') apart.
35.3 Performance Standards:
35.3a Lighting Standards:
(1) Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian walkways, entrance areas, and
yard areas within thirty feet (30') of the building. No wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate
areas for motor vehicle parking or access unless the police department and the planning and
redevelopment administrator find the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this article;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety, and
welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed luminaire has a cutoff angle of less than or equal to sixty six degrees (66°).
(2) Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or access shall be illuminated with
freestanding luminaries. Freestanding luminaries are permitted to be a maximum of thirty feet (30') in
height with a three foot (3') support, for a maximum height from the ground of thirty three feet (33').
When a luminaire is located within five hundred feet (500') of a protected residential property, the
maximum permitted luminaire height shall be twenty five feet (25'). All measurements shall be taken
from the average elevation of the finished grade within ten feet (10') of the structure or fixture to the
highest point of the luminaire. All luminaries must have a total cutoff angle equal to or less than
ninety degrees (90°). The use of exterior lighting with a cutoff angle greater than ninety degrees (90°)
shall be permitted only when the police department and planning and redevelopment administrator
find the following:
a. That the lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this article;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety, and
welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.
(3) In no instance shall low pressure sodium fixtures be used to illuminate nonprotected residential
property unless the police department finds the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this article;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety, and
welfare or create a nuisance; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 616/735
c. The color distortion effect of low pressure sodium lighting will not create a hindrance to crime
prevention and investigation.
35.3b Intensity Of Lighting:
(1) The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting from a property shall not exceed one
foot-candle when measured at any boundary line with an adjoining property. This provision may be
waived by the issuing authority when:
a. The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose of this article;
b. The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety, and welfare
or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.
(2) All parking lot and parking structure lighting located within three hundred feet (300') of a
protected residential property line may be illuminated not more than one hour before the start of
business and shall be extinguished within one hour after the end of business except as approved by
the police department after finding the following:
a. The property has been identified as an area where the incidence or potential for crime warrant
additional lighting;
b. Additional lighting is required to increase visibility of a property which is not readily accessible
for police during routine patrol; and
c. The use of timers, sensors, or other devices that produce a reduced lighting level that does
not conflict with the stated purpose in this article.
35.3c Glare/Illumination: In all zoning districts, any lighting shall be arranged to reflect the light away
from adjoining property. A person shall not conduct a use that has a source of illumination that produces
glare clearly visible beyond a property line or creates a sensation of brightness within a visual field so as
to cause annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of vision. The use of lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers,
or prismatic control devices shall be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting to facilitate
compliance with this requirement.
35.3d Parking Structures: Luminaries used for illumination of designated pedestrian walkways in parking
structures shall be of a significantly different color value than luminaries used for illuminating vehicle
parking and drive aisles.
35.4 Compliance: Any new "permanent lighting" (defined as existing for more than 90 days) installed
after the effective date hereof shall be in compliance with the requirements of this appendix. Any existing
permanent lighting located at one- and two-family residential uses shall conform to these illumination
performance standards. Any existing permanent lighting for any use other than one- and two-family uses
that does not comply with the requirements in this appendix shall be considered legally noncomplying
and may remain, subject to the following provisions:
35.4a Alterations To Existing Lighting:
(1) When policies and support structures are removed and replaced for reasons other than acts of
God or accidents, they must be replaced with luminaries, policies and supports that comply with this
article; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 617/735
(2) When luminaries are replaced, they must be replaced with luminaries that comply with all
provisions of this article.
35.4b Removal And Replacement Of Parking Lot Surface: When less than fifty percent (50%) of the
gross area of the parking lot surface on a particular site is removed and replaced, only the parking area
replaced must be provided with lighting in compliance with this article. If greater than fifty percent (50%)
of the parking area on a particular site is removed and replaced at one time, the entire parking lot on the
site where the construction activity occurs must be in full compliance with this article.
(1) A parking lot or portion thereof is "removed and replaced" when any portion of the existing
parking surface material is removed and a new surface is installed.
35.4c New Parking Lots Or Parking Lot Additions: When a new parking lot or addition to an existing
parking lot is constructed, the new lot or lot addition must be provided with lighting in compliance with
this article.
35.4d New Structures, Additions, Or Replacements: When a site is improved with new structures, or
additions to, or replacements of existing structures, the lighting for the new structure, addition or
replacement on the site must be upgraded with complying lighting. The parking lot lighting must be
upgraded with complying lighting over a portion of the parking area that is equivalent to the amount of
parking that would be required for the new structure, addition or replacement. In the event that the new
structure, addition or replacement is accompanied by new or replaced parking area, the amount of
upgraded lighting area shall be that required under this article.
35.4e Change Of Type Of Occupancy: When the type of occupancy of a site is changed, the lighting for
the site shall be upgraded, to comply with this article for the structure and the parking lot be upgraded for
the required parking for the occupancy as established in this code. For the purpose of determining the
type of occupancy of a site, the occupancy classifications of this code shall be utilized.
35.4f Unoccupied Sites: When a site has been unoccupied for a period of one year, the lighting shall be
upgraded to fully comply with this article prior to any reoccupation of the site.
35.4g Development Application: When a development application is made for a site, the city council may
as a condition of approval require compliance with any or all of the performance standards of this article
and the extent of compliance required in such cases may be greater than that otherwise required in this
article, if deemed reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and to achieve the
proposes of this article.
35.5 Point Of Measurements: Any light intensity measurement taken at the property line shall be
measured at the greatest point of illumination of said property line. Any measurements to determine the
minimum and maximum lighting levels internal to a site will be measured by positioning the meter
horizontally at ground level at the greatest and least points of artificial illumination.
35.6 Applicability: Modifications to the requirements of this article may be approved as part of a final
development plan for a planned development overlay district, pursuant to the provisions provided:
35.6a That any deviations from lighting standards established by this article are clearly delineated in the
plan submission reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council;
35.6b That any deviations are consistent with the purposes of this article;
35.6c That the minimum light level proposed provides a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the
illumination required in this article;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 618/735
35.6d That the height of support poles above grade does not exceed the maximum permitted by this
article by more than twenty five percent (25%), except that no development shall be allowed for
increased support pole height within five hundred feet (500') of a protected residential property; and
35.6e That no increase in glare occurs as a result of deviation from the adopted standards. (Ord. 98-
2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXVI. LANDSCAPE AND
BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS
36.1 Site Plans: If a building or parking lot permit is applied for and no zoning action is required, an
administrative site plan approval will be required.
36.2 Site Plan Review: An application for a building or parking lot permit shall promptly be forwarded to
the planning and redevelopment administrator. Review must be completed within fifteen (15) days of the
receipt by the city of a complete site plan review application. If, in the judgment of the planning and
redevelopment administrator, the site plan review application does not contain sufficient information to
enable the planning and redevelopment administrator to properly carry out its responsibilities, the
planning and redevelopment administrator may request additional information from the applicant. In that
event, the fifteen (15) day period previously referred to shall be suspended, pending the receipt of all
information requested by the planning and redevelopment administrator.
36.3 Appeal Process: If the planning and redevelopment administrator approves a site plan, a building or
parking permit may then be issued. If the planning and redevelopment administrator does not approve a
site plan, the applicant may appeal the planning and redevelopment administrator's decision to the city
council. A notice of appeal must be filed with the planning and redevelopment administrator no later than
fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the planning and redevelopment
administrator.
36.4 Exemption From Site Plan Requirements: One- and two-family residences are exempt from
citywide site plan review requirements. In addition, site plans shall not be required for renovation or
expansion of an existing structure or use unless access points would be changed or a substantial
increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
36.5 Parking Lots:
36.5a Permits For Off Street Parking Lots: No person shall expand an existing parking lot or construct a
new parking lot of five (5) spaces or more without having first obtained a written permit therefor, issued
by the planning and redevelopment administrator, or his designee representative. Prior to obtaining a
permit for such expansion or new construction, the applicant shall submit to the planning and
redevelopment administrator or his designated representative, a landscape/site plan as required in this
appendix, and plans showing the construction specifications for all off street parking lots and he shall
provide for proper inspection of construction.
36.5b Construction: All off street parking lots required to obtain a permit as identified in the above
subsection shall be laid to the line and grade of, and shall conform to surface thickness and other
specifications of the planning and redevelopment administrator or his designated representative.
36.5c Landscaping And Screening Requirements For Off Street Parking Lots: The provisions of this
subsection for the installation and maintenance of landscaping and screening requirements are intended
to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial, industrial and conservation areas, and to
enhance the aesthetic and visual image of the city.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 619/735
(1) Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be set back ten feet (10') from the front property
line(s). Landscaping requirements with the front yard(s) include that the yard be seeded or sodded
with lawn. Rock cover may be used, but may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the landscaped
front yard setback. In addition, one canopy tree for every five (5) parking spaces and a minimum of
five percent (5%) ground cover landscape coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers shall be
required.
The ten foot (10') front yard setback may be reduced to five feet (5') if there is a continuous twenty
six inch (26") solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge provided. Sodding, rock ground cover, canopy tree
and ground cover landscape coverage requirements will still be applied if a solid wall/fence is
provided. Sodding and/or rock ground requirements will still be applied if a shrubbery fence is
provided.
(2) Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be set back five feet (5') from side and rear
property lines. Landscaping requirements within the side and rear yards include that the yard be
seeded or sodded with lawn. Rock ground cover may be used, but may not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the landscaped side and rear yard setback. In addition, one canopy tree for every five (5)
parking spaces and a minimum of five percent (5%) ground landscape coverage of shrubs and
evergreens/conifers shall be required.
When a side and/or rear yard is adjacent to a residential use, a continuous four foot (4') solid
wall/fence or shrubbery hedge shall also be provided with the five foot (5') setback yard. If a four foot
(4') shrubbery hedge is provided, canopy tree and ground landscape coverage shall not be required.
(3) Wherever landscaping and screening requirements may interfere with traffic vision, the height
and placement shall be determined by the city engineer.
(4) Trees and other landscaping shall be of a species which are hardy to the area and have
measured diameters of such identified in the minimum standards for plantings section of this
appendix. Prohibited trees are identified in section 36.8 of this article.
(5) Subject to the approval of the planning and redevelopment administrator, alternate landscaping
plans may be substituted for consideration.
(6) A landscape/site plan will be required to be submitted for staff review prior to issuing a parking
lot development permit for parking lots of five (5) spaces or more. The following basic standards
should be set:
a. Drawn to scale;
b. Identify location of landscaping or other features;
c. Specify nature of materials (i.e., species, variety, etc.);
d. Specify number of plants, shrubs, trees, etc., by species.
(7) Landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris,
and provide a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation. It shall
be the owner's responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
36.5d Appeal Process: If the planning and redevelopment administrator approves a site plan, a parking
lot permit may then be issued. If the planning and redevelopment administrator does not approve a site
plan, the applicant may appeal the staff decision to the city council. A notice of appeal must be filed with
the planning and redevelopment administrator no later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the
applicant of the staff decision.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 620/735
36.6 Buffer Yard Requirements:
36.6a Intent: The provisions of this section are to provide specific landscape screening and buffer yard
requirements to reduce the incompatibility between zoning districts of different intensity and type. These
buffer yards will lessen the adverse impact of more intense land uses upon residential areas and/or
other areas of less intense use by reducing noise, visual and other environmental impacts.
36.6b Requirements: In addition to landscaping and screening requirements for off street parking areas,
buffer yard standards will also apply for site plans requiring a zoning change, special use permit and
nonexempt site plan review requirements. The buffer yard requirement is determined by the difference
between the zoning district of the subject property and the zoning district of adjacent properties. The
specific requirements are identified in the following sections and the accompanying table: "Schedule Of
Buffer Yard Requirements". Landscaping and screening requirements for off street parking areas apply
to the side of the property abutting a public street right of way. A list of prohibited trees is provided in the
section entitled "prohibited trees".
36.6c Description Of Buffer Yards A Through D:
(1) Type A Buffer: The standard buffer within type A is eight feet (8') wide and contains the
following number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. One canopy tree;
b. One understory tree;
c. Six (6) shrubs;
d. One evergreen/conifer.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer widths
to provide a type A buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings reflected as a multiplier
of the required plant units per one hundred feet (100'). The alternatives include the following:
a. Twenty foot (20') wide buffer with fifty percent (50%) of the required plant units per one
hundred feet (100').
b. Sixteen foot (16') wide buffer with sixty percent (60%) of the required plant units per one
hundred feet (100').
c. Twelve foot (12') wide buffer with eighty percent (80%) of the required plant units per one
hundred feet (100').
d. Four foot (4') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the required plant units and a
continuous hedge set back three feet (3') from the property line or fence.
(2) Type B Buffer: The standard buffer with type B is ten feet (10') wide and contains the following
number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. Two (2) canopy trees;
b. Two (2) understory trees;
c. Six (6) shrubs;
d. Two (2) evergreens/conifers.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 621/735
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer widths
to provide a type B buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings. Type B buffer
alternatives range from a twenty five foot (25') wide buffer with fifty percent (50%) of the required
plantings to a five foot (5') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the required plantings and a
continuous hedge or fence.
3) Type C Buffer: The standard buffer within type C is fifteen feet (15') wide and contains the
following number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. Three (3) canopy trees;
b. Two (2) understory trees;
c. Nine (9) shrubs;
d. Three (3) evergreens/conifers.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer widths
to provide a type C buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings. Type C buffer
alternatives range from a twenty five foot (25') wide buffer with sixty percent (60%) of the required
plantings to a six foot (6') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the required plantings and a
continuous fence.
(4) Type D Buffer: The standard buffer within type D is fifteen feet (15') wide and contains the
following number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. Three (3) canopy trees;
b. Two (2) understory trees;
c. Fifteen (15) shrubs;
d. Five (5) evergreens/conifers.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative buffer widths
to provide a type D buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings. Type D buffer
alternatives range from a twenty five foot (25') wide buffer with sixty percent (60%) of the required
plantings to an eight foot (8') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the required plantings and a
continuous fence.
36.7 Minimum Standards For Plantings:
36.7a Canopy Trees: Two inches (2") diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and ten feet (10') in
height when planted.
36.7b Understory Tree: One inch (1") diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and six feet (6') in
height when planted.
36.7c Shrubs: Twenty four inches (24") in height when planted; forty percent (40%) or more must reach
a mature height of six feet (6') or more.
36.7d Evergreens/Conifers: Two inches (2") in diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and six feet
(6') in height when planted. Twenty feet (20') minimum height at maturity.
36.8 Prohibited Trees: The following weak wooded trees and generally undesirable trees for urban
conditions shall be prohibited for use in meeting any of the landscaping/screening requirements for off
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 622/735
street parking areas and/or buffer yard requirements:
Ailanthus (tree of heaven)
Box elder
European mountain ash
European white birch
Gingko, fruit bearing
Hawthorne
Mulberry
Pin oak
Poplar
Purple-leaf plum
Russian olive
Siberian elm
Silver maple
Sweet gum
Willow
36.9 Maintenance Of Landscaping And Screening: Buffer yard landscaping and screening must be
maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris and provide a healthy, neat and orderly
appearance at least equal to the original installation. It shall be the owner's responsibility to see that the
landscaping is maintained.
36.10 Schedule Of Buffer Yard Requirements:
ZONING OF ADJACENT PROPERTY
Subject Property R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7 O-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 U-1 ORT C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
R-1
R-2
R-3
N N N N N N N N N N N N N
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
A N N N N N N N N B B N N
O-1 A A N N N N N N N B B N N
B-1 B A N N N N N N N B B N N
B-2 C B N N N N N N N B B N N
B-3 C B C N N N N N C B B N N
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 623/735
B-4 C C C N N N N A C B B N N
U-1 C C N N N N N N N B B N N
ORT D D N N N N N N N B B N N
C-1 N N N N N N N N N N N N N
C-2 A N N N N N N N N N N N N
I-1 C C D B A N N B C C C N N
I-2 D D D B A A A C C D D N N
36.10a Approximate buffer yard requirement:
A - Eight feet (8') in width;
B - Ten feet (10') in width;
C - Fifteen feet (15') in width;
D - Fifteen feet (15') in width;
N - No buffer required.
36.10b Position of property abutting public right of way is governed by landscaping for parking lot
requirements.
36.11 Appeal Process: If the planning and redevelopment administrator approves a site plan, a building
permit may then be issued. If the planning and redevelopment administrator does not approve a site
plan, the applicant may appeal this decision to the city council. A notice of appeal must be filed with the
planning and redevelopment administrator or his/her designee no later than fifteen (15) days after
receipt by the applicant of the staff decision. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXVII. VALIDITY AND REPEAL
Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this appendix be declared by the courts to be
invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this appendix as a whole or any part thereof, other than
that which is so declared to be invalid. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this appendix are hereby repealed. (Ord. 98-2002, 11-25-2002)
ARTICLE XXXVIII. WHEN EFFECTIVE
This appendix shall take effect and be in force from and after the earliest period allowed by law. (Ord.
98-2002, 11-25-2002)
APPENDIX B
SUBDIVISIONS 1, 2, 3
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1-1. Purpose.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 624/735
In accordance with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 through 5/11-12-12, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.) this
ordinance regulates the subdivision and development of land in order to implement the City of Rock
Island comprehensive plan and official map. Thus this ordinance assists in achieving the following
specific objectives:
(a)To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare;
(b)To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly layout and use of land; and to
create an environment conducive to the productive development of the city;
(c)To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be properly monumented and
recorded;
(d)To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and buildings;
(e)To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible extent;
(f)To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new developments by preventing undue
concentration of population;
(g)To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution, flooding, stormwater runoff, or erosion
and sedimentation;
(h)To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid traffic congestion by
requiring the proper location, design, and construction of streets and sidewalks;
(i)To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater
sewers, and other utilities and services; and
(j)To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be made available to serve the
residents of new developments; [and]
(k)[To] provide for the acceptance of lands for public rights-of-way.
Section 1-2. Jurisdiction.
This ordinance shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City of Rock Island and within all
unincorporated territory located within one and one-half (1.5) miles of said limits, provided such territory
is not located within the subdivision jurisdiction for another municipality. (See 65 ILCS 5/11-2-9 for state
requirements concerning jurisdictional boundary lines.)
Section 1-3. Interpretation.
Every provision of this ordinance shall be construed liberally to achieve the purposes outlined in section
1-1.
Section 1-3.1. More Restrictive Requirements Apply.
Whenever the requirements of this ordinance differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted ordinance
or regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
Thus, in accordance with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-11), whenever this ordinance imposes higher
standards than the county subdivision ordinance, said higher standards shall supersede the county
regulations in the unincorporated territory located within the City of Rock Island's subdivision jurisdiction.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 625/735
This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, deed restriction, or any other
private agreement or restriction; provided, that, where the provisions of this ordinance are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Where the
provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction, or private agreement or restriction impose duties
and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this ordinance or the
determinations of the city in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this ordinance, and such private
provisions are not inconsistent with this ordinance or determinations thereunder, then such private
provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this ordinance and determinations made thereunder.
The city does not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the plat and its
supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature of the document and the approval
process an intent to give the city enforcement rights over same.
Section 1-4. Disclaimer of Liability
(a)Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no officer, board member, agent, or
employee of the City of Rock Island shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this ordinance. (See "Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act," 745 ILCS 10/1-101.)
(b)Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City of Rock Island, as
a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this ordinance, shall be
defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
Section 1-5. Variances
When the subdivider can show that a provision of this ordinance, if strictly adhered to, would cause
unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion of the city plan commission, because of topographical or
other conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the city plan commission may recommend a variance or modification to the council. The
subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance or modification of the action. Any variance or
modification thus authorized shall be attached to and made a part of the final plat.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Section 2-1. Construction of Terms.
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this ordinance, the following rules shall be
observed:
(a)Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in section 2-2; terms not defined in section 2-2 shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rock Island [Appendix A]; if any
term is not defined either in section 2-2 or in the Zoning Ordinance, said term shall have its standard
English dictionary meaning.
(b)Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders.
(c)Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
(d)Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 626/735
(e)The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
(f)Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely to facilitate general reference
and in no way limit the substantive application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
(g)References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within that section; but a reference
to a particular subsection designates only that subsection.
(h)A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms shall not be limited to the
enumerated class unless expressly limited.
Section 2-2. Selected Definitions.
Administrator: The official appointed to administer this Land Subdivision Ordinance, or his duly
authorized representative.
Alley: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of
premises that front on a nearby street.
Amendment: A change in the provisions of this ordinance, properly effected in accordance with state law
and the procedures set forth herein.
Area Gross: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for subdivision/development,
including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses.
Block: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways (except alleys,
pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless exterior boundary is a street, highway, or
way) or bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
Centerline Offset: The distance between the centerlines of two (2) roughly parallel streets, measured
along the third street with which both said "parallel" streets intersect.
Collector Street: A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of residential traffic and for access to
abutting properties, and on which the speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
Comprehensive Plan: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the city council to guide and
coordinate the physical and economic development of the City of Rock island. The comprehensive plan
includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the location, character, and extent of
highways, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial land
uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
Cross-Slope: The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way rather than in the direction traffic
moves on said right-of-way.
Cul-de-Sac: A street having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and having the other end permanently
terminated by a turnaround for vehicles; the term may also be used to refer solely to said turnaround.
Curb and Gutter Integral: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the channel for leading off surface
water, constructed of poured concrete as a single facility.
Dedicate: To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or improvement to the City of Rock
Island or other public entity without compensation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 627/735
Develop: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to undertake any
activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
District, Zoning: A portion of the territory of the City of Rock Island wherein certain uniform requirements
or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance [Appendix A].
Easement: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for certain limited purposes.
Erosion: Tide wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or gravity.
Escrow Deposit: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of
improvements within a subdivision.
Frontage: The boundary of a lot along a public street.
Frontage Road: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway (usually a limited-access
highway), used for access to abutting lots.
Grade: The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a percentage. Synonym for
"slope."
Improvement Plans: The engineering plans showing types of materials and construction details for the
structures and facilities to be installed in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
Improvements: Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catch basin, newly planted
tree, off-street parking area, or other facility necessary for the general use of property owners in a
subdivision.
Intersection: The point at which two (2) or more public rights-of-way (generally streets) meet.
Local Street: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used for access to abutting
property.
Lot: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of development or
transfer of ownership. A "lot" may or may not coincide with a "lot of record."
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front, side, and rear lines of a lot.
Lot, Corner: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their full length upon streets.
Lot of Record: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision recorded with the Recorder of
Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois, in accordance with state law.
Lot, Through: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately
parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Maintenance Bond: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the City of Rock Island,
guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed improvements for the two-year period following their
dedication.
Marginal-Access Street: A local dead-end street providing access to ten (10) or fewer dwelling units.
Minor Arterial Street: A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate volumes of traffic from
local streets to arterial streets and which may or may not be continuous.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 628/735
Official Map: The official map may show indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility
sites which may be indicated on the official map may include but are not limited to: sites for new
trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school sites; public building sites; and sites for future
storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility easements.
Performance Bond: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the City of Rock Island,
guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
Plat, Dedication: A plat required for the dedication to the city of all right-of-way easements, and public
improvements outside of a subdivision plat or within a special use classification.
Plat, Final: The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of the subdivision which, if approved,
may be filed with the Rock island County Recorder of Deeds.
Plat, Preliminary: Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and supportive material indicating the
proposed layout of a subdivision.
Prefiling Conference: A conference held between the developer and appropriate city staff prior to
submission of a preliminary or final plat.
Principal Arterial Street: A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy
volumes of traffic on a continuous route with intersections at grade, and on which traffic-control devices
are used to expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
Reserve: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by the City of Rock Island (or other
government entity) for public purposes.
Right-of-Way, Public: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated to the City of Rock Island
or other unit of government for streets, alleys, and other public improvements.
Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has
been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Setback, Front: The horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the building line.
Minimum setback requirements are set forth in the Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A].
Sewerage System, Private: A sewer system including collection and treatment facilities established by
the developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area.
Sidewalk: A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards of this ordinance.
Soil: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock which can
be readily excavated.
Stop Order: An order used by the administrator to halt work-in-progress that is in violation of this
ordinance.
Street: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar
designations, but excludes an alley or way for pedestrian use only.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed
location on the ground. All buildings are structures but not all structures are buildings.
Stub Street: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for future continuation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 629/735
Subdivider: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or other group or combination
acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined
in this article.
Subdivision: Any division of land into two (2) or more lots, any of which is less than five (5) acres, or any
transfer involving an easement of ingress or egress, except as set forth in the Plats Act, 765 ILCS 205/1.
Subdivision, Minor: A division of land into two (2) but not more than five (5) lots, all of which front upon
an existing street, and not involving any new streets, other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or
other provisions for public areas and facilities.
Topography: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
Utility: A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or
service which is of consequence and need and which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within
its service area. A utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes, without limitation, the following
services or commodities:
1. Electricity;
2. Gas, oil, or steam;
3. Water;
4. Sanitary sewerage;
5. Storm sewerage;
6. Telephone or telegraph;
7. Cable television and other communication lines;
8. Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly stated.
Vacate: To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision or portion thereof, and to so note
on the final plat recorded with the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds (765 ILCS 205/6 through
205/8).
Variance, Subdivision: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and improvement standards set
forth in this ordinance.
ARTICLE III. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Section 3-1. Applicability of Article.
No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Rock Island other than land that is specifically
exempted from the requirements of the Illinois Plats Act (765 ILCS 205/1(b)) shall be subdivided or
developed except in compliance with the regulations of this article and the applicable provisions of state
law. (See 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8; 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.). No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed
until:
(a)The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the city council and recorded in the office of
the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 630/735
(b)The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been improved in accordance with the
requirements of this article or until a performance bond or other security has been posted to assure
the completion of such improvements.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of this section.
Section 3-2. Suitability for Subdivision Generally.
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough topography, adverse soil
conditions, or other features which will be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless
the subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems caused by the
adverse land conditions.
Section 3-3. Lot Requirements.
All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot area and dimensions requirements of the
zoning district in which said subdivision is located; land that is under water or proposed for street
improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every corner and through lot
shall be large enough to permit compliance with the district's front setback requirements on every side of
the lot that faces a street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation of
unbuildable parcels.
Section 3-3.1. Access and Relationship to Street.
Land shall be subdivided in such a way that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of section
3-5. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street right-of-way lines or radial to curved street
right-of-way lines except where a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
Section 3-4. Permanent Reference Monuments.
Sec. 3-4.1. Materials, Size, and Location.
(a)Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four (4) inches in diameter or square and
forty-two (42) inches long, shall be set at the extreme corners of subdivisions,
(b)Steel pins, not less than one-half (0.5) of an inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches long, with a survey
marker cap showing the land surveyor's registration number, shall be set at locations in accordance
with the Plat Act,
Sec. 3-4.2. Resetting Monuments.
Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset.
Section 3-5. Street Design Standards.
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street system indicated in the
municipal comprehensive plan and official map, and shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular
form below. For divided boulevards, the developer shall submit an acceptable plan for maintenance to
the city planning commission.
Table of Street Design Specifications
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 631/735
Type of
Street
Permitted On-Street
Parking
Required Rightof-
Way
Required Pavement
Width (B-B)
Maximum/ Minimum
Grades
Alley None Minimum:
0.5%
20 ft. 18 ft. Maximum: 10%
Marginal-
Access
None 50 ft. Minimum:
0.5%
20 ft. Maximum: 10%
Local One side 50 ft. 27 ft. Maximum: 10%
Street Two sides 50 ft. 31 ft. Minimum: 0.5%
Collectors Both sides
Minimum: 0.5%
60 ft. 40 ft. Maximum: 10%
Minor
Arterials
None 80 ft. lanes 11 ft. Minimum: 0.5% Maximum: 5%
Principal
Arterials
None 100 ft. lanes 12 ft. Minimum: 0.5% Maximum: 5%
Divided None 70 ft. 14 ft. Maximum: 10%
Boulevard Minimum: 0.5%
Sec. 3-5.1. Horizontal Curvatures.
All changes in horizontal alignment shall be conducted with a horizontal curve with the following
minimum centerline radius, designated "R":
(A)For principal, minor and collector streets (design speed = 35 mph), R shall equal five hundred (500)
feet;
(B)For local streets (design speed = 30 mph), R shall equal one hundred twenty-five (125) feet; and
(C)For alleys, R shall equal one hundred (100) feet.
Sec. 3-5.2. Through Traffic Discouraged.
Marginal-access and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid
rectangular gridiron street pattern should be avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac, or
U-shaped streets, shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable street layout.
Sec. 3-5.3. Limited Access to Arterials.
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission
may recommend to the city council that access to said arterial may be limited by one of the following
means:
(A)The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street and front onto a parallel local street
(double-frontage lots), coupled with the installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip
along the rear lot lines of such lots;
(B)A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and generally at right angles to
the arterial street; or
(C)A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting strip, but having access thereto at
suitable points.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 632/735
Sec. 3-5.4. Dead-End Streets.
(A)Temporary stub streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for the continuation of streets
between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic,
effective fire and police protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
comports with the municipal comprehensive plan. If the adjacent property is owned by the developer
(under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the street must dead end temporarily, the right-ofway
shall be extended to the property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future
streets shall be reserved. A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of any temporary
dead-end street. If the adjacent property is under another ownership there should be a permanent
dead end.
(B)Permanent dead-end streets: Culs-de-sac shall have a maximum length of seven hundred fifty (750)
feet. A cul-de-sac turnaround, having a minimum right-of-way diameter of ninety-eight (98) feet, a
minimum pavement return radius of twenty-five (25) feet, and a pavement diameter of seventy-five
(75) feet, shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end street.
Sec. 3-5.5. Alleys.
Alleys shall be prohibited in single-family residence districts. Alleys may be required in multiple-family
districts and in commercial industrial districts unless other adequate provisions for service access are
made. Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of any dead-end alley.
Sec. 3-5.6. Intersections.
(A)Only two streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point.
(B)Right angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles; in no
case shall two (2) streets intersect at an angle of less that eighty (80) degrees or more than one
hundred (100) degrees. An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall be
approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom.
(C)Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever
practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs
with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except
where the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either intersection.
Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart.
(D)Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the minimum curb radius at the
intersection of two (2) streets shall be fifteen (15) feet where both streets are marginal access or
local and at other intersections, not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
(E)Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of one-half of one (0.5). In hilly terrain,
an area having not greater than a two (2) percent slope for a distance of sixty (60) feet from the
nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an
intersection.
(F)Cross-Slope: The cross slopes of all streets, including intersections, shall not exceed three (3)
percent.
(G)Adequate sight lines: where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation, the
developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of
the public right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance in accordance with
the following chart:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 633/735
30 mph: 130 feet each way from intersection.
35 mph: 155 feet each way from intersection.
For design speeds exceeding 35 mph, sight distance will be determined based upon AASHTO
criteria.
Sec. 3-5.7. Reverse Curves.
A tangent at least fifty (50) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on local streets and one
hundred (100) feet long on collector streets.
Sec. 3-5.8. Road Dedications and Reservations and Improvements to Existing
Streets.
(A)New perimeter streets: Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or
avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the
other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The planning commission
may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire
required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries.
(B)Existing roads: Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the comprehensive
plan, official map, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road
that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads as are
specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision and to reserve for public use any portion of
the right-of-way determined not to be specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision.
(C)Excess right-of-way: Right-of-way in excess of the standards set forth in the Table of Street Design
Specifications shall be required to be dedicated when:
(1) Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes; or
(2) Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed to construct overpasses,
underpasses, and approaches thereto.
(D)"Specifically and uniquely attributable" defined. For purposes of this section, the phrase "specifically
and uniquely attributable" shall mean as a minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned singlefamily
for residential uses in the comprehensive plan shall require marginal access, local, or collector
streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for multifamily residential
uses in the comprehensive plan shall require local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal
arterial streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for commercial uses
in the comprehensive plan shall require local, collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets,
depending on whether same is a neighborhood, community, or regional area; and that areas
currently zoned or to be zoned for industrial uses in the comprehensive plan shall require collector,
minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on the size of the industrial area.
Section 3-6. Street Improvement Standards.
All new streets shall be graded, curbed, and surfaced in accordance with the standards of Illinois
Department of Transportation and the provisions of the subsections below.
Sec. 3-6.1. Curb and Gutter.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 634/735
All streets shall be bounded by concrete curbs and gutters.
Sec. 3-6.2. Pavement.
All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the minimum standards as indicated below:
(A)Alleys:
1. Six-inch-thick non-reinforced concrete.
(B)Marginal-access, local:
1. Six-inch-thick reinforced portland cement concrete pavement; or
2. Seven-inch-thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
3. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation specifications and
satisfactorily meeting the city engineer's specifications.
(C)Collector, Minor Arterial:
1. Seven-inch-thick reinforced portland cement concrete: or
2. Eight-inch-thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
3. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation specifications and
satisfactorily meeting the city engineer's specifications.
(D)Principal arterial:
1. Eight-inch-thick reinforced portland cement concrete; or
2. Nine-inch-thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
3. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting department of transportation specifications and
satisfactorily meeting the city engineer's specifications.
The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume, subgrade or other conditions
show justifications for increased thickness. A subbase or base shall be constructed in accordance with
the appropriate articles of the standard specifications when required by the city engineer. A subbase or
base with an underdrain system may be required in areas where a combination or proposed street grade
and soil type may lead to subgrade erosion and pavement undermining. The city may require additional
engineering documentation to establish that the above standards are appropriate for the reasons stated
in this paragraph.
Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these standard specifications and in conformity with
the lines, dimensions and grades shown on the plans and to the form and dimensions shown on the
detail drawings included with and being part of these specifications.
Section 3-7. Blocks.
(A)Block Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots having the
minimum depth required by the zoning district regulations; provided, that this requirement may be
waived in blocks adjacent to local collector or collector streets, railroads, or watercourses.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 635/735
(B)Block Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand (1,000) feet nor shorter than three hundred
(300) feet.
Section 3-8. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall be installed at the time the lot is
developed or prior to issuance of the occupancy permit.
Sec. 3-8.1. Sidewalk Construction Standards.
(A)Relationship to curb: Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot inside the right-of-way line or on a line to
be given by the city engineer when it is impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as
aforesaid.
(B)Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide.
(C)Thickness of concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four (4) inches thick,
except that across driveways the thickness shall be increased to six (6) inches.
(D)Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten (10) percent.
(E)Ramps at intersections: Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at all intersection so as to
enhance the mobility of handicapped individuals. Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the
Illinois Capital Development Board.
Section 3-9. Utilities.
All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be placed in the right-of-way or in
easements, and shall be provided underground, unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
Sec. 3-9.1. Responsibility.
For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the appropriate
utility companies for the proper installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas, electrical,
and communications service.
Sec. 3-9.2. Requirements.
All underground electric distribution circuits installed by the utility company within the city shall be
installed in accordance with the Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and
Communication Lines, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, and General
Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines, Illinois Commerce
Commission.
Sec. 3-9.3. Enforcement.
The building inspector shall not issue any occupancy permits until all utilities have been installed in the
subdivision.
Sec. 3-9.4. Exceptions.
The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply in the following instances:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 636/735
(A)Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric transmission circuits shall not be required to
be installed underground.
(B)Any service which is considered by the utility company to be unfeasible for undergrounding, due to
high voltage or inordinately high and unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when authorized by
the city council.
(C)When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding to be extremely and
unjustifiably high, services may be provided overhead when authorized by the city council.
(D)When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing development in which the
primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the new subdivision may use the overhead lines
with the following provisions:
1. The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall be installed underground.
2. All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed underground.
(E)When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area which is fully developed with
overhead electric and communication service, the building may use the overhead service line if it
completes the development of the area.
(F)Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial purposes may be provided overhead.
Sec. 3-9.5. Exemptions. The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the
requirements of the [this] ordinance:
(A)Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
(B)Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures, authorized by the city council, crossing or
entering any portion of a district from which overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in
an area in which overhead wires are allowed.
(C)Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or similar device, and
extending from one location on the building to another on the same building, or to an adjacent
building without crossing any public street or right-of-way.
(D)Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing communication service.
(E)Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment installed above ground, used to
distribute communication and electric service in underground systems.
Section 3-10. Water Facilities.
(A)Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system adequate to serve all
lots within the subdivision. The water distribution system shall be designed according to standard
specifications and shall be approved by the city engineer and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. Whenever a water main is extended it shall be extended across the entire frontage of the
property being subdivided and it shall be connected to any other mains which front on or are adjacent
to the subdivision to provide for looping of the water system.
(B)The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the expected fire flow requirement within the
subdivision based upon the intended zoning and expected land use in accordance with the Uniform
Fire Code, latest adopted edition. Also taken into consideration when determining the size of pipe to
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 637/735
be installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by downstream properties based on
anticipated development of such properties based on the comprehensive plan for such expansion
areas.
(C)Individual service connections within single-family residential subdivisions shall be extended from the
main to within one (1) foot of the lot line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and
clearly marked with a fence post or similar material to facilitate their locations.
(D)Upon written request to the city engineer, the city will perform fire flow tests on the existing water
mains to be extended and provide the data to the subdivider's engineer.
Sec. 3-10.1. Fire Hydrants.
Fire hydrants of the type approved by the city engineer shall be installed according to standard
engineering practices and shall be placed at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet.
Section 3-11. Sanitary sewers.
All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, and must be approved by the ACO.
Sec. 3-11.1. When Public System Available.
(A)Whenever the subdivision any point of which is within three hundred (300) feet of an existing publicly
owned sewer main or other collection system and who have the right to extend public sewer mains or
private sewer laterals from said property to said existing publicly owned sewer main or other
collection system either by way of street, alley, public way, public easement, or private easement, the
subdivider shall construct sewer mains, where technically feasible, which shall be connected to such
public sewer and shall provide sewer to all lots within the subdivision.
(B)All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard engineering practices.
(C)Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended across the entire frontage or
frontages of the property to be improved by the extension unless the city has determined, because of
land contours or the presence of other mains, that no other property can be technically or needs to
be served by such an extension.
Sec. 3-11.2. Interim Disposal Systems.
Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as required by section 3-11.1, the developer shall construct
a sanitary sewer system to serve all lots within the subdivision and shall provide sewage treatment by
means of an approved sewage treatment plant which shall be operated and maintained by the developer
until such time as the system can be connected to the publicly owned system. Said system shall be
temporarily capped. Where the land covered by the preliminary plat contains not more than ten (10) lots,
individual sewage disposal systems may be used and must be installed according to applicable laws and
regulations of the appropriate approving agency.
Section 3-12. Easements.
Sec. 3-12.1. Utility Easements.
Easements at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided for public and private utilities along the front
right-of-way lines of the public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty (20) feet
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 638/735
wide; and if along lot lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
Sec. 3-12.2. Drainage Easements.
Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall be established along any natural drainage channel
and in any other locations where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and minimum widths of said
easements shall be determined by the municipal engineer.
Section 3-13. Drainage and Storm Sewers.
The planning commission shall not recommend the approval of plat unless the city engineer determines
that the proposed provisions for stormwater drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision.
Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with existing and planned drainage
improvements elsewhere so as to form an integrated city system. The stormwater drainage system shall
be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system and shall meet the following design criteria:
(A)Principal and minor arterial streets:
(1) Flow from a ten-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty (20) feet of the pavement.
(2) Flow from a fifty-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
(B)Collector streets:
(1) Flow from a ten-year storm shall not inundate the center ten (10) feet of the pavement.
(2) Flow from a fifty-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
(C)Local streets:
(1) Flow from a ten-year storm shall not top the curb.
(2) Flow from a fifty-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
Sec. 3-13.1. Catch Basins or Inlets.
Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be constructed so that the majority of surface water shall be
intercepted before reaching the intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four hundred
(400) feet of the pavement.
Sec. 3-13.2. Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas.
A culvert or other drainage facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire
drainage area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance with the city's
standard specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined on the basis of the maximum development
of the upstream area that is permitted or to be permitted under the comprehensive plan.
Sec. 3-13.3. Areas Subject To Flooding :
Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the city council may require
appropriate protective measures, including the filling of the flood prone area to a level equal to the
regulatory flood elevation, if any.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 639/735
Section 3-14. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control:
In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and sedimentation control regulation shall
be observed:
(A)The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and shall protect downstream
property from sedimentation deposits during the construction of the subdivision. Practices contained
in "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" shall be
employed in the preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be approved by
the city engineer prior to any earth-disturbing activity taking place.
Section 3-15. Dedications For Public Use:
The city council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer without compensation) to the
city of Rock Island or other appropriate governmental entity suitable parcel(s) of land within the
subdivision for public purposes provided such facilities are otherwise required herein. Any such
dedicated area shall be shown on the final plat.
Sec. 3-15.1. Reservations For Public Use 1:
Besides requiring the developer to dedicate parcels for public purposes, the city council may require
that he reserve land for parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public purposes in locations designated
in the city's comprehensive plan. Since public acquisition of reserved land requires compensation, it
is not essential that the need for such land be uniquely and specifically attributable to the subdivision.
(Ord. 90-92, 12-17-1990)
(A)Adopted : (Rep. by Ord. 99-97, § 1, 11-15-1999)
(B)Planned Public Improvements To Be Shown On Map : The official map may show indication of sites
for planned public facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the official map may
include, but are not limited to, sites for new trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school
sites; recreational sites; public building sites; and sites for future storm drainage, electrical or other
public service or utility easements.
Availability Of Sites For Planned Public Improvements :
(1) Whenever the official map indicates the necessity for providing a site for a planned public
facility, the council may require that the site for the public use be designated on the subdivision plat
before granting approval to such plat; and, furthermore, that the site be held for that specific public
use for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat. When such designation has
been required, the council shall notify the responsible public agency in writing of the designation
within ten (10) days.
(2) Whenever a site for public use, shown on the official map, has been required to be indicated on
a subdivision plat, the responsible agency having jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so
designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one
year from date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within such period of one year,
the land so designated may then be used by the owners in any other manner consistent with this
chapter, the zoning ordinance 1, or any other provision of this code or other ordinance of the city.
(C)Amendments Or Additions To The Official Map : Amendments to the official map, including the
indication of additional public sites to be shown on the map, shall be considered amendments to this
appendix and, therefore, shall be as specified in this appendix for amendments to this appendix. Any
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 640/735
public agency requesting the establishment of the official map of a future public site or easement
which is not included in the comprehensive plan shall indicate to the plan commission the need for
the site in the particular location specified. The plan commission, before making a favorable
recommendation for the inclusion on the official map of such site by the council, shall find that this
public site location is determined to be necessary to provide public service consistent with the
comprehensive plan of the community and shall so indicate in its minutes.
ARTICLE IV. PLATS AND PLANS
Section 4-1. Prefiling Conference:
Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a prefiling conference may be held between the developer and
appropriate city staff. The developer shall present a concept sketch of the proposed development. City
staff shall use a standardized checklist to review the proposed development for conformance to the
subdivision ordinance.
Section 4-2. Preliminary Plats:
Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to subdivide any land located within
the subdivision jurisdiction of the city of Rock Island shall file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said
subdivision with the planning and redevelopment administrator at least three (3) weeks prior to a
regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission.
He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with the appropriate soil and water
conservation district. Said district shall have not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it
might wish to make to the planning commission 1.
Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion of that tract is to be submitted for
final plat approval, a preliminary plat of the entire tract shall be submitted.
All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the subsections below.
Exception : A preliminary plat shall not be required for:
(A) Minor subdivisions; or
(B) Land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois Plats Act 2 as now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 4-2.1. Information Required :
Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in Illinois at a scale of one
hundred feet (100') or less to the inch provided the resultant drawing does not exceed thirty six inches
by twenty four inches (36" x 24"). Said preliminary plat, together with the supporting data, shall provide
all of the following information:
(A) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and registered land surveyor;
(B) Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
(C) Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and proposed setbacks;
(D) North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 641/735
(E) Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
(F) Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot (2') contour data for land
having slopes of zero to four percent (4%), five foot (5') contour data for land having slopes between
four (4) and twelve percent (12%), and ten-foot contour data for land having slopes of twelve (12)
percent or more;
(G) Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural drainageways, railroads,
cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, buildings, areas subject to flooding, etc.;
(H) Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and alleys;
(I) Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
(J) All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
(K) Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, and any
appurtenances thereto;
(L) Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and proposed utilities;
(M) Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or dedicated for schools,
parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
(N) Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots within the subdivision numbered
sequentially;
(O) For all contiguous holdings of the owner, including land owned by the same person, corporation,
firm, entity, partnership, or un incorporated association or owned by different corporations, firms,
partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations in which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or
a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association, with an indication of the portion proposed for subdivision, an affidavit of
ownership, which shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the county recorder of
deed's office or other official records, the name and address and telephone number of the legal
owner of the property, the subdivider, if different from the legal owner, the land surveyor and
engineer, and the agents of any of these persons; the name and address and telephone number of
the contract owner, if any, of the property and the date the contract of sale was executed; and, if any
corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers, and stockholders owning more than
five (5) percent of any class of stock of each corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete list of
the names of the trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone numbers of all beneficiaries
of the trust;
(P) The location by township, range, section, or by other legal description;
(Q) A list of requested variances and justifications.
Sec. 4-2.2. Utility Company Notification.
It is the subdividers responsibility to notify the appropriate public utilities. Proof of notification shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat to the city for city approval.
Sec. 4-2.3. Planning Commission Action.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 642/735
The planning commission shall either recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
application for the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of said application or the filing of
the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the planning commission and
the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8) If the planning commission
recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat, they shall furnish to the applicant within the ninety-day
period a written statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
ordinance and/or the official map. If the planning commission recommends approval of the preliminary
plat, it shall promptly so inform the city council.
Sec. 4-2.4. Appeals Process.
If the preliminary plat is not approved, the planning and redevelopment administrator shall write "Not
Approved" and the date of the planning commission's action on the prints, and shall transmit to the
subdivider one (1) print with a letter stating the reasons for the disapproval. The subdivider may transmit
an amended plat to the planning commission for consideration.
If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the planning commission on the preliminary plat,
then the subdivider may appeal the decision to the city council. An appeal must be made by letter
addressed to the mayor and city council, stating the reasons for the appeal. Said letter must be received
by the planning and redevelopment administrator no less than ten (10) days following the date of the
planning commission's decision. The letter of appeal shall be placed on the next regular city council
meeting agenda after it is received by the planning and redevelopment administrator. The planning and
redevelopment administrator shall also provide to the city council the preliminary plat, the planning
commission's meeting minutes pertaining to the plat, and the reports and recommendations made to the
planning commission by the planning and redevelopment administrator. The city council shall have thirty
(30) days from the time the appeal is first placed on its agenda either to: reaffirm the planning
commission's decision on the preliminary plat, to approve the preliminary plat as submitted by the
subdivider, or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications.
Sec. 4-2.5. Action by the City Council.
If the planning commission has recommended approval of a preliminary plat, the city council, by
resolution, shall either accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after their next regularly scheduled
meeting following the planning commission's action. If the city council rejects the preliminary plat, their
resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this ordinance. The city clerk
shall attach a certified copy of the council's resolution of approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat.
One (1) copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the clerk, one (1) copy shall be filed with the
planning and redevelopment administrator, and one copy shall be given to the subdivider. City council
approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for recording.
Section 4-3. Improvement Plans.
After the city council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to submission of the final plat, the
subdivider shall furnish four (4) copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed
within or in conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the city engineer for review. These plans and
specifications shall be signed and sealed by the registered professional engineer responsible for their
preparation. Until the city engineer certifies in writing that the proposed improvements conform to
generally accepted engineering practices and to the standards imposed in this ordinance:
(A)The city engineer shall not issue any permit to allow construction of said improvements; and
(B)The city council shall not act upon the application for final plat approval.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 643/735
Sec. 4-3.1. Information Required.
Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue line prints not larger than thirty-six (36) inches by
twenty-four (24) inches. These plans and the related specifications shall provide all of the following
information:
(A)Topography of the tract, both before and after development, at the same scale as required in the
preliminary plat;
(B)Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all streets;
(C)Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
(D)Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements, including curbs/gutters and catch basins;
(E)Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
(F)Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
and fire hydrants, showing connections to any existing or proposed utility systems;
(G)Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities;
(H)Locate area(s) for removal of trees six (6) inches or larger;
(I)All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
(J)High-water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the tract; and
(K)Such other information as the city engineer may reasonably require to perform his duties under this
section.
Sec. 4-3.2. Inspections Required.
The subdivider/developer shall notify the city engineer of both the start and completion of construction of
approved improvements.
(A)The city engineer shall inspect said improvements while they are under construction. If he determines
that they are being built in violation of this ordinance, he shall promptly notify the administrator, who,
in turn, shall issue a stop order. All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions
of this article shall be inspected during the course of construction by the city engineer or a duly
designated deputy selected and retained by the subdivider and approved by the city. All fees and
costs connected with such inspection and in reviewing the plan and specifications for such
improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees and cost shall be set at the prevailing rate.
(B)In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector shall maintain a daily diary in a
standard format acceptable to the city engineer. Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided to
the city engineer on a weekly basis during construction.
(1) Content: The daily entries shall include at least the following information:
(a) Weather conditions.
(b) Site conditions.
(c) Contractor's working hours.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 644/735
(d) Inspector's hours on the site.
(e) An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor that day.
(f) Specific information about material tests taken.
(g) Description of any problems.
(2) Purpose: The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information for the developer's engineer
and the city engineer to recommend acceptance of the improvements by the city council and provide
actual construction records of any problems that may develop.
(3) Format: The general format of the diary must be approved by the city engineer before
construction begins.
(C)The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
(1) Storm and sanitary sewer and water main improvements:
(a) Inspect all materials and documents pertinent items such as pipe manufacturer, class, and
size.
(b) Reject any defective material and ensure that it is not used on the job.
(c) Observe the actual pipe laying operation to ensure that all joints are properly made, the pipes
are true to line and grade, and the bedding and backfill are done according to the specifications.
(d) Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, location of all service laterals,
backfilling, and location of all utilities installed and encountered. Location measurements shall be
of the accuracy and type required by the city engineer.
(e) Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by the specifications.
(2) Street improvements.
(a) Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base, and embankment compaction tests.
(b) Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
1. Check and document subgrade depth checks.
2. Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
(c) Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the city engineer for approval prior to
connecting paving operations.
(d) Inspect all concrete pours.
1. Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and slump measurements.
2. Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results of the tests.
(e) Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
1. Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 645/735
2. Perform at least one (1) asphalt extraction test and one (1) sieve analysis from an asphalt
sample taken on the job site.
(C)The city engineer shall also inspect required improvements upon their completion. The City of Rock
Island shall not accept any improvement until the city engineer has certified that it complies with this
ordinance.
Sec. 4-3.3. Filing As-Built Records.
The improvements will not be recommended for acceptance until the following is provided for the city
engineer:
(A)Copies of all daily diary entries.
(B)Copies of all material test results.
(C)Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible as-built improvements construction plans of all
public improvements.
(D)Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was accomplished within reasonably
close conformance to the plans and specifications, and that the as-built plans accurately reflect
actual field conditions.
(E)A labor and material payment and maintenance bond posted prior to construction by the contractor of
a subdivider for the installation of all public improvements, using forms provided by the city engineer.
(F)Permanent easements or agreements granted to the city for all public improvements that are not
constructed in dedicated right-of-way, using forms provided by the city engineer.
(G)Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to permanent items, e.g. fire hydrants
or manholes. The sewer and water services shall be marked with a four-feet by four-feet marking,
that stands five (5) or six (6) feet tall, including a curb notch.
Sec. 4-3.4. Privately Developed and Operated Facilities.
Where the subdivision is to contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas,
or other physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public agencies, provision should be
made by trust agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper
public agencies, for jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation and
reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision.
Section 4-4. Assurance for Completion of Required Improvements.
The city council shall not approve any final plat (and, hence, said final plat shall not be entitled to
recording) until:
(A)All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been completed by the
subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected by the city engineer, and dedicated to the City of
Rock Island or other appropriate entity; or
(B)In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer has provided the City of Rock
Island with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory completion and dedication of all required
improvements.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 646/735
(C)Necessary title assurances have been given.
Sec. 4-4.1. Forms of Assurance.
The required legal assurance may be a performance bond, an escrow deposit or a letter of credit. Every
performance bond shall be approved as to form by the city attorney, and posted with the city clerk. Any
funds held in escrow shall be deposited with an approved escrow agent.
Sec. 4-4.2. Amount of Bond or Deposit.
The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal to the city engineer's estimate of the costs of
constructing the uncompleted portion of the required improvements plus all required inspections fees.
Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
(A)An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending institution guaranteeing to the City of
Rock Island the avail ability of the escrow funds from time to time upon demand; or
(B)Interest-bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to serve as an escrow agent.
Sec. 4-4.3. Eligible Sureties.
No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he has been approved by the State of Illinois to act as
a surety on public works improvements.
Sec. 4-4.4. Term of Assurance, Extension.
The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. If all the
required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year period, the city engineer,
with the advice and consent of the city council may extend said bond/escrow agreement for one (1) year
only.
Sec. 4-4.5. Release of Bond/Escrow Deposit
(A)The city engineer may release up to ninety (90) percent of the amount of the performance
bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization from the city engineer. The amount which
the city engineer authorizes to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements actually
completed in accordance with approved plans.
(B)The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall not be released until:
(1) The city engineer has certified in writing that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed; and
(2) Said improvements and corresponding right-of-way have been accepted by and dedicated to the
City of Rock Island or other appropriate entity.
Sec. 4-4.6. Failure To Complete Improvements.
If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year period (or threeyear
period, in the case of an extension), the city engineer, with the assistance of the city attorney, may:
(A)Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the City of Rock Island an equal amount to
the cost of completing the required improvements (as estimated by the city engineer) or the amount
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 647/735
of the bond not theretofore released, whichever is less; or
(B)Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete the required improvements,
and to return the balance (if any) of such funds to the subdivider/developer.
Section 4-5. Final Plats.
The Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of a subdivision located within
the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Rock Island until said final plat has been approved by the city
council. The city council shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that it is in compliance
with all pertinent requirements of this ordinance, including those set forth in the subsections below.
Sec. 4-5.1. Filing, Time Limits.
The subdivider of every subdivision who desires final plat approval shall file six (6) black or blue line
prints of the final plat and supporting data with the planning and redevelopment administrator not later
than one (1) year after preliminary plat approval has been granted.
Sec. 4-5.2. Information Required.
Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the State of
Illinois on new linen tracing cloth or polyester-based film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater
than one hundred (100) feet equals one (1) inch, provided that the resultant drawing shall not be less
than eight and one-half (8 1/2) inches by fourteen (14) inches and shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
inches by thirty-six (36) inches square. The final plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the
following information.
(A)North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
(B)Name of subdivider and subdivision;
(C)Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the tract tied to section or 1/4
section corner;
(D)Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which provide a survey of the tract,
closing with an error of closure of not more than one (1) foot in fifteen thousand (15,000) feet and
provide a copy of the closure calculations;
(E)Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name, plat book, and page number;
(F)Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries of the subdivision;
(G)Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements, areas to be reserved, and lot lines
with accurate dimensions, angles, or bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points
of tangency, central angles, and accompanying legal descriptions;
(H)Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
(I)Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
(J)Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot areas;
(K)Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
(L)Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 648/735
(M)Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lots;
(N)The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest, whether recorded or not, in the
property being subdivided, together with formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all
streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and easements, signed by all parties of interest or
their authorized agents, in a form approved by the city attorney, if the plat is proposed for final
approval without improvements in place and accepted with a deed of dedication to the public in fee
simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title
insurance policy or title opinion form [from] a licensed attorney showing that those signing the plat
are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to signing the plat, a title policy for
the local government in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be
dedicated to the public; and
(O)Monument identification.
Sec. 4-5.3. Modifications and Exceptions.
If the final plat is under one (1) ownership and is no more than five (5) lots, no formal commission
approval is needed and the plans can go directly to the city council unless there are new streets, other
public improvements, or easements of egress or ingress.
Sec. 4-5.4. Certificates Required.
As required by State law (765 ILCS 205/2; 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8), the following certificates shall be
executed on the final plat;
(A)Owner's certificate: The following is an example of the owner's certificate:
State of Illinois )
Rock Island County ss. )
City of Rock Island )
Know all men by these presents, that we/I, (name(s) of owner(s), owner(s) and proprietor(s) of the land
shown on the accompanying plat and described in the accompanying certificate of the surveyor do
hereby certify that I/we have caused said survey to be made and acknowledge the said plat as correct,
and do hereby adopt and accept the same and cause it to be known as (name of subdivision).
Easements are hereby dedicated for the use of the City of Rock Island, and public facilities franchise to
do business within the City of Rock Island, as indicated on the plat and marked drainage and utility
easement to install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain drainage ways, drainage structures, gas,
water, sewer pipes, conduits, cable, poles and wires, overhead and underground, with all necessary
braces, guys, anchors and other appliances for the purpose of serving the subdivision and other
property with gas, water, sewer, electric and telephone service and to overhang all lots with aerial
service wires to serve adjacent lots, together with the right to enter upon lots at all times to install, lay,
construct, renew, operate and maintain said gas, water and sewer pipes, conduits, cables, poles, wires,
braces, guys, anchors and other appliances, and to trim and keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or saplings
that interfere or threaten to interfere with said public utility equipment, but same may be used for
gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not interfere with the use of said easement for
public utility purposes.
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions would be inserted here upon
the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation of the city plan commission or the council; important
provisions are those specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use,
the minimum habitable floor area.)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 649/735
Sidewalks shall be constructed at the time the structure is constructed or at the direction of the Board
of Local Improvements recommended to the City Council of the City of Rock Island.
All streets, alleys, and public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated
to the public.
Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines and the
property lines of the streets there shall be erected or maintained no building structure.
The foregoing covenants (or restrictions), are to run with the land and shall be binding on all parties and
all persons claiming under them until (25 year period is suggested), at which time said covenants (or
restrictions) shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless by vote of a
majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these covenants (or restrictions), in whole or
in part. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants (or restrictions), by judgement or court order,
shall in no way affect any of the other covenants (or restrictions), which shall remain in full force and
effect.
In witness whereof, we hereunto affix our hands and seals this day of , A.D. 19 .
(Seal)
(Seal)
(B)Irrevocable offers of dedication forms:
(1) The following form shall be placed upon a final plat of a subdivision whenever said plat is
approved upon submission of a subdivider's bond or escrow agreement as provided for in section [4-
4.2] :
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the City of Rock Island,
in fee simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat, all the streets, local government uses,
easements, parks, and required utilities shown within the subdivision plat and construction plans in
accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated and recorded in the Office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois.
By
Date
(2) The following form shall accompany any final plat set forth in (1) above and shall be presented for
recording simultaneously with any such plat, but shall be recorded immediately prior to the recording
of the plat.
OFFER OF IRREVOCABLE DEDICATION
Agreement made this day of , 19 , by and between , , having office and place of business at , hereinafter
referred to as "Developer", and the City of Rock Island a municipal corporation having its principal office
at 1528 Third Avenue, hereinafter designated as "City;"
WHEREAS, the City is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled , dated , and made by ; and
WHEREAS, said plat and the construction plans associated therewith designated certain property
interests and public improvements consisting of to be dedicated to the City free and clear of all
encumbrances and liens, pursuant to the provisions of Appendix B of the Rock Island Code of
Ordinances; and
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 650/735
WHEREAS, the Developer, simultaneously with final plat approval or before, shall post a subdivider's
bond with the City for the construction and payment therefor, maintenance, and dedication of said
interests and improvements; and
WHEREAS, the Developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said improvements and interests in
land to the City as more particularly described in Schedule attached hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Developer has delivered deed of dedication to the City to be held in trust by it for the
said improvements and interests inland as described herein;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the City's approval of said subdivision plat, it is mutually agreed
as follows:
(a)The Developer herewith delivers to the City deed of dedication in fee simple absolute unless
otherwise called for on the plat for the premises and improvements described in Schedule attached
hereto, said delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City to be held by the City in trust until
the acceptance or rejection of such offer of dedication by the City Council.
(b)The Developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is irrevocable and can be accepted by the
local government at any time.
(c)The Developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of the land and improvements
pursuant to the Subdivider's Bond and the provisions of Appendix B of the Rock Island Code of
Ordinances and any conditions of approval of said subdivision and upon acceptance by the City of
the offer of dedication shall furnish, within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City of said
acceptance of the offer of dedication, to the City a title insurance policy issued by a licensed title
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois in the amount of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), certifying that the premises are free and clear of all liens, and encumbrances
and that fee simple title or other specific interest reposes in the City and shall furnish to the City a
check for all necessary fees and taxes to record the deed(s) heretofore delivered.
(d)That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with the land and shall be binding on all assigns,
grantees, successors, or heirs of the Developer.
CITY OF
(Seal)
Mayor
Attest:
City Clerk
Approved as to Form:
City Attorney DEVELOPER
Attest:
(Seal)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 651/735
(C)Notary public's certificate:
State of Illinois )
ss. )
County of )
I, , a Notary Public in and for the County aforesaid, do hereby certify that (owners) are personally
known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that
they appear before me this day in person and acknowledge that they signed and sealed the same as
their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release waiver of
the right of homestead.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of , 19
Notary Public
(D)Surveyor's certificate: The following surveyor's certificate shall accompany or be placed on the final
plat:
State of Illinois )
ss. )
Rock Island County )
I, , an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, hereby certify that the annexed plat is a true and correct
representation of a survey made by me or under my direction according to the surveying laws of the
State of Illinois and the Subdivision Ordinance, or the following described property to wit:
Monuments as shown on the plat are set or will be set within 30 days after the completion of the required
improvements and their acceptance by the City, and such monuments are or will be sufficient to enable
the survey to be retraced and will occupy the positions shown thereon.
(1) (No) part of the property covered by this plat of subdivision is located within a special flood hazard
area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
In witness I hereunto set by hand and seal this day of , A.D. 19 .
(E)County clerk's certificate:
I, , County Clerk of Rock Island County, Illinois, do hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes
against any of the real estate included within this plat.
County Clerk
Date
(F)Certificate of city council:
I, , Mayor of the City of , do hereby certify that the plat shown hereon was duly presented to the city
council and approved at a meeting of same held on date .
Mayor
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 652/735
Attest:
City Clerk
(G)City clerk's certificate: The following form shall be used for certification by the city clerk:
I, , City Clerk in and for the said City of , do hereby certify that all due assessments have been paid upon
the real estate described on the accompanying plat.
In witness whereof, I hereunto set by hand and official seal this day of , A.D. 19 .
City Clerk
(H)Certificate to approve subdivisions of five lots or less: The following form shall be used for the
approval of subdivisions of five (5) lots or less by the planning and redevelopment administrator in
accordance with section 4-5.3.
We, the undersigned City Engineer and Planning and Redevelopment Administrator, do hereby certify
that the accompanying plat has been examined and found to be in compliance with the requirements of
the Subdivision Ordinance and recommend approval of this plat by the City of Rock Island.
City Engineer
Planning and Redevelopment
Administrator
(I)Roadway access and sewage disposal systems:
(1) The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where roadway access is to a highway
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation or another relevant local highway
authority.
This plat approved with respect to roadway access under provisions of 765 ILCS 205/2.
Agency
Title
Date
(2) The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where any part of the platted land will
not be served by a public sewer system.
This plat is approved with respect to sewage disposal systems under provisions of 765 ILCS 205/2.
Agency
Title
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 653/735
Date
(J)Required disclosures to be on face of final plat: The following disclosures are to be placed on the face
of the final plat:
(1) Either of the following, depending upon which is the most appropriate, shall be placed upon the
face of the final plat by a registered professional engineer and the owner or his duly authorized
attorney:
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters both within and around this
subdivision will not be changed by the construction of same or any part thereof.
(seal)
Registered Professional Engineer
Registration No.
Owner or Attorney
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters either within or around this
subdivision will be changed by the construction of same or parts thereof but adequate provision has
been made to collect and divert said surface waters to public drains or private drains to which the owner
has legal access and said provisions are such that the capacity of no natural or man-made drain will be
exceeded and no damage to adjoining properties will incur because of said provisions.
(seal)
Registered Professional Engineer
Registration No.
Owner or Attorney
(2) In addition to one of the above, the owner or subdivider shall disclose on the face of said
subdivision final plat the following if a bond or escrow agreement is provided:
I hereby disclose and give notice to all that this subdivision has been approved by the City upon the
condition that I post bond or enter into an escrow agreement to secure installation of all improvements
required by said City. The terms of same allow me a period of two (2) years to install said improvements
or provide the City the right to install same to the extent of funds provided by such security. City
ordinances do not permit, however, occupancy of any premises until adequate provision for access for
water and sanitary sewerage are made.
Owner or Subdivider
(3) Also, any disclosure required by state or federal statute shall be displayed upon said plat.
Sec. 4-5.5. Action by City Council.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 654/735
The city council shall either approve or disapprove the application for final plat approval by resolution
within sixty (60) days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of required supporting
data, whichever date is later, unless the city council and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this
time limit. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8). The city council shall not approve any final plat unless:
(A)The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat if required; and
(B)The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and improvements standards of this
ordinance and the official map; and
(C)To the city council's knowledge and belief, the final plat compiles with all pertinent statutory
requirements; and
(D)Either of the following has been met:
1. All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted, and dedicated; or
2. The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of assurance as stated in section 4-4.1.
If the city council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat
fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
Section 4-6. Maintenance of Improvements.
The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the subdivision for a period of one (1)
year and provide a one-year maintenance bond prior to acceptance and dedication to the City of Rock
Island or other appropriate entity. Said bond shall be in the amount determined by the city engineer to be
sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of one (1)
year from the date of their acceptance and dedication. If at any time during the one-year period the
improvements are found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/developer's
expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs within ninety (90) days after demand is
made upon him by the city engineer, the City of Rock Island shall use the maintenance bond to make the
necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the
subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the end of the one-year period, the maintenance
bond shall be released.
ARTICLE V. OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
Section 5-1. Enforcement Officer, Duties.
The planning and redevelopment administrator, referred to herein as the administrator, is hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 5-2. Amendments.
Amendments to this ordinance may be proposed by any member of the city council, and planning
commission member, or any party in interest. Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed
form in the administrator's office. The planning and redevelopment administrator shall promptly transmit
each proposal, together with any comments or recommendations he may wish to make, to the city
planning commission for a public hearing.
Sec. 5-2.1. Public Hearing, Notice.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 655/735
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable
time after said proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the
hearing, and the nature of the proposed amendment shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation with the
City of Rock Island.
Sec. 5-2.2. Advisory Report, Action by City Council.
Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the planning commission shall submit an advisory
report to the city council. The city council shall act on the proposed amendment at a regularly scheduled
meeting following submission of this report. Without another public hearing, the city council may either
pass, modify or reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the planning commission for
further consideration.
Section 5-3. Penalties.
(A)Any person who is convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(B)Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this municipality from taking any other lawful action
that may be necessary to secure compliance with this ordinance.
Section 5-4. Repeal.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are to the extent of such conflict hereby
repealed.
Section 5-5. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article [ordinance]. The
city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the article [ordinance] and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in this article [ordinance] of
any such invalid section, subsection, clause, phrase or word.
Section 5-6. Publication.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after passage, approval, and, if required by law,
publication in the manner provided by law.
Section 5-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after its final passage, approval, and publication as
provided by law. (65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.)
APPENDIX C
FRANCHISES
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 656/735
ARTICLE I. CABLE TELEVISION 2
Section 1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Rock Island Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance."
Section 2. Definitions.
The words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
(a)Basic cable shall mean that tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the
retransmission of off-air broadcast and television signals.
(b)Cable Act collectively means that Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Action of 1992, as amended.
(c)Central business district shall mean that area encompassed by the Mississippi River on the north,
Fifth Avenue on the south, Fifteenth Street on the west and Twenty-Fourth Street on the east.
(d)Channel means a frequency in the electro-magnetic spectrum capable of clearly and effectively
carrying an audio-data or an audio visual television signal, and as defined by the FCC Rules and
Regulations.
(e)Company or grantee means TCI of Illinois, Inc. or its lawful successor.
(f)Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to
interference within a fully functional television receiver of a subscriber and which permits a subscriber
by an appropriate channel selector to receive all signals referred to under the ordinance.
(g)Council means the governing body of the City of Rock Island.
(h)Expanded CATV service means that tier of service that includes satellite delivered and other cable
television programming, not including pay-per-view, pay-per-event, or other programming offered on
a transactional basis only.
(i)FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, established by the Communications Act of
1934, as amended, and shall include any successor agency or other agency with respect to the
federal regulation and licensing in connection with the subject matter of this ordinance.
(j)FM services means broadcast of audio signals only on a broad band standard FM frequency.
(k)Grant means the right, privilege and franchise provided in subsection (a) of section 3 of this
ordinance.
(l)Gross receipts means the receipts derived by the company from all services generated by the system
facilities, within the municipality or from the use of the system facilities within the municipality,
including, but not limited to, alarm or signal transmission, advertising revenue, charges to subscribers
for basic cable premium programming, FM services, expanded CATV services, installation charges,
and any and all receipts received from any source whatsoever for use of the system facilities for
transmission of electronic or microwave impulses. Data transmission by the company shall also be
included in "gross receipts" if another utility company or companies providing the same type of
service are also required to pay to the municipality a percentage of their gross receipts comparable
to that paid by the company.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 657/735
(m)Municipality means the City of Rock Island.
(n)Person means any individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
(o)Potential subscriber means those persons within the current jurisdiction of the grant franchise who are
not subscribers or who have refused system services.
(p)Premium programming means any commercial free programming, including but not limited to, movies,
concerts, variety acts, sporting events and the like for which an additional charge is made.
(q)Public rights-of-way means all sidewalks, streets and alleys in the municipality which are dedicated to
the municipality for street, highway, sidewalk, lighting, drainage, utility, or cable television purposes,
and all public ways and places contiguous thereto.
(r)Subscriber means any person receiving and paying for service from or using the system under the
grant pursuant to this ordinance.
(s)System means community antenna television system as defined in Chapter 24 Section 11-42-11 of
the Illinois Municipal Code, and as amended from time to time.
(t)System facilities means a system composed of, without limitation, antenna, cable, wires, lines, towers,
amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or wired for the
purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributed by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave
or other means, audio and/or visual radio, television, electronic or electrical signals to and from
subscribers.
Section 3. Grant of franchise.
(a)The municipality to the full extent that it may do so, hereby grants to the grantee a nonexclusive
franchise which authorizes the grantee to construct and operate a system in, along, among, upon,
across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and
for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across, or along any public way and all extension thereof and additions thereto, such
poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, values, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or
appurtenant to the system, subject to city ordinances relating to location and construction of
proposed improvements.
(b)The term of the grant shall be fifteen (15) years commencing on September 1, 1994.
(c)The grant shall be non-exclusive. The municipality may make additional grants within the scope of its
powers, however, the municipality will not authorize or permit another entity to operate within the
franchise area except under conditions and terms consistent with those contained in this franchise
agreement. Costs that are incurred by the company to their system such as the moving, relocating or
strengthening of poles, relocating attachments, placing underground facilities shall be reimbursed to
the company by any other entity that receives a franchise.
Section 4. Jurisdiction of grant or franchise.
(a)The grant shall apply within the corporate limits of the municipality, including all territory hereafter
annexed to the municipality.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 658/735
(b)The company shall be required to extend the system to and to offer the services of the system to
potential subscribers within all area of the municipality where there are at least a total of thirty-two
(32) residential dwelling units and/or occupied commercial or industrial structures per line mile.
(c)Notwithstanding the grant, the company shall obtain all necessary federal, state, and local
government permits, licenses, and other required authorizations in connection with the
establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the system and system facilities.
(d)The company shall be required to extend service to any area subdivided or constructed after the
effective date of this ordinance in accordance with the criteria set forth in this section 4. No
subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a
subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty
(150) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscriber's, or of less than
eight (8) residences per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet of
trunk or distribution cable, service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid
of construction including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of determining the
amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by the grantee and subscribers in the
area in which service may be expanded, the grantee will contribute an amount equal to the
construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual
number of residences per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet of its
trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals eight (8) residences. Subscribers who
request service hereunder will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata
basis. The grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction
borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
(e)Grantee agrees to extend its system into the central business district (CBD) of the municipality in
order to provide services to residences and businesses. Such extensions shall be conducted in
construction phases based on the demand for service. Grantee shall provide the municipality with a
schedule of proposed extensions no later than April 1 of each year construction is planned. Prime
Star or another comparable system may be provided in lieu of the expansion of the system facilities
to service the CBD.
Section 5. Rates.
The municipality may regulate rates as expressly permitted by federal law and FCC rules and
regulations.
Section 6. Rate payment.
(a)Unless the company provides a longer time, subscribers shall pay connection charges to the
company at the time the installation is made.
(b)Unless the company provided a longer time, subscribers shall pay monthly in advance for system
services on or before the first (1st) day of the month in which the company is to provide services.
Section 7. Franchise fee.
(a)The company shall pay to the municipality for the right, privilege and franchise in connection with the
grant, an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross receipts for the quarter-year (or in the case
of the first quarter-yearly payment, part of a quarter-year as the case may be), preceding July 1,
October 1, January 1, and April 1 of each year, such payment to be payable to the municipality within
forty-five (45) days following the end of the quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a
statement under oath from an official or representative of the company having the requisite
knowledge to make such a statement certifying the gross receipts upon which the payment is based.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 659/735
The franchise fee may be subject to renegotiation during the review periods established by Section
10. Any change made in the franchisee fee as a result of this negotiation shall be reasonable and
such fee shall not exceed any existing franchise fee of comparable systems in Illinois.
(b)Delinquent payments shall bear interest at the rate of one (1%) per month with the minimum
delinquency being a one (1) month interest charge.
(c)Within one hundred fifty (150) days of the end of each fiscal year of the company, the company shall
file with the council an annual report prepared, certified and audited by an independent certified
public accountant or officer of the company showing the financial status of the company from the
system for the report period.
(d)Upon termination of the grant or at the expiration of the term provided in Section 3(b) or otherwise,
the company shall continue to make the quarter-yearly statements and certifications and the annual
reports as provided in this section until such time as all payments due the municipality under this
ordinance have been paid and accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the municipality.
Section 8. Records.
(a)All financial records of the company in connection with its activities within the boundaries of the
municipality shall be maintained in a manner which permits distinguishing receipts earned within a
municipality from receipts earned by the company in other municipalities.
(b)The municipality shall have the right upon ten (10) business days' written notice to the grantee, during
regular business hours on dates and at frequencies mutually convenient to the grantee and the
municipality, to inspect all or any part of the grantee's records and documents pertaining to the
franchise fee, and engineering records and documents of every kind in connection with the grant, the
system, the system facilities, and the company's undertakings with respect to this ordinance.
(c)The company upon request shall file with the municipality a copy of all petitions and applications
submitted by the company to any governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction with respect to
any matter affecting the system, system facilities, or the company's undertakings with respect to this
ordinance.
(d)At least thirty (30) days prior to construction of any part of the system or system facilities in public
right-of-way, the company shall file with the municipality copies of maps, plats or other drawings
which accurately show the nature of the proposed construction or improvements. Such copies shall
show all existing public or private improvements. Upon completion of such construction, the company
shall submit "base maps" plans which also show existing public or private improvements.
(e)The company shall file with the municipality a copy of its annual report as provided to stockholders.
(f)The company shall file annually with the municipality copies of all rules, regulations, terms and
conditions established or imposed by the company in connection with the establishment,
construction, operation and maintenance of the system.
Section 9. System standards.
(a)The company shall establish and construct the system in accordance with the highest standards of
the art of cable communications and in accordance with the highest standards of code of conduct
with respect to businesses of size and type like that of the company.
(b)The company through the system shall provide effective and efficient service in accordance with the
rules and regulations of all governmental units and agencies having regulatory and licensing
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 660/735
authority in connection with the system.
(c)The company through the system shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from material
distortion and interference on accordance with FCC standards.
(d)The company shall not interrupt all or any part of the services of the system in the absence of
absolute need or emergency circumstances.
(e)The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system, including system facilities,
so as to at all times meet FCC technical standards, including without limitation specifications for
frequency boundaries, visual carriers, frequency levels, aural carrier frequency levels, channel
frequency response, terminal isolation and radiation. The company agrees to undertake and
complete an upgrade of the cable tv system which shall include fiber optic technology. Upon
completion the cable tv system shall have a capacity of seventy-two (72) channels. The rebuild shall
include all residential areas of the city limits as it exists as of the date of the signing of this
agreement. Upon the completion of the rebuild, as those boundaries exist as of the date of this
agreement shall be entitled to service at standard installation and monthly charges. This rebuild shall
be completed by December 31, 1997.
(f)The company shall establish, construct, operate, and maintain the system in accordance with all
applicable national, state, and local building and safety codes. In the absence of any otherwise
applicable building and safety code, the company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the
system in accordance with the most recent edition of the National Electrical Safety Code and the
National Electrical Code.
(g)The system shall be designed, established, constructed, operated and maintained for a twenty-fourhour-
a-day continuous operation.
(h)The system shall produce for receipt on subscribers' receivers, which are in good working order,
either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) that are free from any
significant interference, distortion, or ghosting which would cause any material degradation of video
or audio quality.
(i)The system shall be capable of providing emergency override alerts whereby the municipality or other
governmental units or agencies designated by the municipality may be able to issue a bulletin on all
channels simultaneously. The municipality shall indemnify and hold the grantee harmless from any
and all claims arising out of the use or non-use by the municipality or other governmental units or
agencies of the capability provided herein.
(j)The company shall not be liable for interruptions in service caused by strikes, war, civil commotion,
Acts of God, and other causes beyond the control of the company.
(k)The grantee shall abide by federal law, FCC rules and regulations, state and local law with respect to
obscene programming.
(l)The system shall have a minimum capacity of fifty-two (52) channels.
(m)The system shall have the capacity for two-way interactive communications.
(n)The system shall provide at least one (1) non-commercial access channel. Use of said channel to be
provided free of charge.
(o)The grantee shall provide a basic level of service including at a minimum, broadcast television
programming as may be available and for which consent may be reasonably obtained and the one
(1) non-commercial public access channel as specified in section 9(n) as amended.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 661/735
(p)Company shall provide equipment, and personnel for live coverage of weekly city council meetings
and a rebroadcast each week on the public access channel.
Section 10. Review sessions.
Every two (2) years from the anniversary of this agreement, the municipality shall schedule and hold a
public meeting or meetings with the company to review the performance by the company under the
franchise and to consider the need for an increase of channel capacity in the system.
Section 11. Use of municipal streets.
(a)All systems facilities erected, constructed or placed by the company within the municipality shall be
located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the streets, alleys, and other public ways and
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or public ways and places, and not to interfere with
existing public utility installations. All service lines shall be underground in those areas of the
municipality where both utilities providing telephone or electric service are underground at the time of
installation. In areas where telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of
installation, the company may install its service above ground. If, subsequently, the telephone and/or
electric utility facilities go underground, the affected facilities of the company shall go underground
simultaneously.
(b)In case of any disturbances of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at
its own expense, and in the manner required by the municipal ordinances or policies, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street or alley disturbed. In case of any
disturbance on either private or public property, the land surface, including plantings and trees, shall
be restored by the company to substantially its previous condition.
(c)If at any time during the period of the franchise the municipality shall lawfully elect to alter or change
the grade or location of any street, alley, or other public ways, the company shall, upon reasonable
notice by the municipality, remove, relay, and relocate affected system facilities at its own expense,
and in each instance comply with the requirements of the municipality.
(d)The company shall not place system facilities above or below ground where the same will interfere
with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits
or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the
municipality.
(e)The company may be required by the municipality to permit joint use of poles owned by company
located in the streets, alleys or other public right-of-way of the municipality by utilities insofar as such
joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor.
(f)The company shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the municipality,
temporarily move affected system facilities to permit the moving of buildings, the expense of such
temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting such removal, and the company shall be
given not less than seventy-two (72) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
(g)The company shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing municipality ordinances, to
trim any trees upon and overhanging public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at the option of the municipality after
notification to the company such trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction,
at the expense of the company.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 662/735
(h)The municipality shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon any pole owned by
the company its own equipment, including but not limited to, a police and fire system and emergency
services disaster agency, on the condition that such equipment does not interfere with the company's
establishment construction, operation and maintenance of the System. The municipality shall
indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the company against and from any and all claims, demands,
actions, suits, proceedings, damages, costs or liabilities of any kind and nature whatsoever arising
out of such use of the company's poles, conduits, or other property.
(i)If the company seeks to construct and maintain its cables and other system facilities on or above
public or private property, and an easement for such use has already been granted to a telephone
company, electric or other public utility, said easement shall, if at all possible, be interpreted so as to
grant the company the same rights and privileges as have been granted to the telephone and electric
companies and other public utilities. In such easements, the words "telephone" or "telephone
company", "electric company", and the like, shall be interpreted to include the company. The
company shall not be required to install cable to service areas where the required easements are not
reasonably obtainable.
Section 12. Business office and service calls.
(a)The company shall establish, operate and maintain in the municipality a business office and agent for
the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the
establishment, construction, maintenance and operation of the system and the payment of
subscribers' service charges. The office shall have a listed telephone and shall be open during
reasonable business hours. The company must receive service calls on a twenty-four-hour basis.
(b)The company will allow the city to air a reasonable number of public service announcements each
year. The company will provide the production services.
(c)The company shall respond to and resolve subscribers' complaints or requests for service in
connection with repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities. The company shall
respond as soon as possible on such complaints or requests, but in any event not more than twentyfour
(24) hours after receipt of the complaint.
(d)The company shall file with the municipality copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with
the handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The company shall, in writing, furnish to
subscribers at the time they connect to the system information concerning procedures for making
inquiries, requests and complaints about the system. The information shall at least include names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the business office and agent. The company shall provide
such information as will reasonably permit subscribers to effectively submit inquiries, requests and
complaints and to obtain satisfactory resolution or handling in connection therewith, especially in
connection with the quality of the company's delivery of services.
(e)The company shall keep full records in connection with all complaints and requests for service in
connection with the system. Minimally, such records shall identify the person in contact, the subject
matter in question or the action taken by the company in connection with the contract.
Section 13. Supervision of the company.
(a)Unless specifically otherwise provided in this ordinance, or unless the municipality shall otherwise
specify, all administrative actions required to be taken or which shall or may be taken by the
municipality in connection with the system shall be taken by the city manager or such other person
designated by the city manager.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 663/735
(b)Unless specifically otherwise provided in this ordinance, or unless the municipality shall otherwise
provide, all filings with the municipality required by this ordinance shall be made the city manager or
such other person designated by the city manager.
Section 14. Liability, insurance and indemnity.
(a)The company hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and save whole and harmless the municipality and
its officers and employees from liabilities and related expenses (including reasonable attorney's fees)
of any kind which may arise out of or from the establishment, construction, operation and
maintenance of the system or system facilities or the execution and implementation of this ordinance.
The municipality shall notify the company in the event any person shall in any way notify the
municipality of any claim or demand in connection with the system, the system facilities or this
ordinance from which the company may be subject to liability under this section or otherwise. The
undertaking in connection with the subsection (a) includes liabilities or claims of liability with respect
to property damage, personal injury, invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, the
violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any
other right of any person, and failure of the company to comply with the provisions of any federal,
state or local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the company in connection with this
ordinance. The company shall have the right to defend, settle, or compromise any claims or
demands arising hereunder and the municipality shall cooperate fully therein.
(b)The company shall keep the system and system facilities continuously insured against such risks as
are customarily insured against by businesses of like size and type, including but not limited to:
(i) Insurance upon the repair or replacement basis if available, and otherwise to the full insurable
value of the system facilities (with reasonable deductible provisions) against loss or damage by fire
and lightening, with uniform standard extended coverage endorsement, limited only as may be
provided in the standard form of extended coverage endorsement at the time in use in the state.
(ii) Insurance to the extent of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence against liability for
bodily injury including death and to the extent of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use, occurring on, arising out of
or in any way related to the system and system facilities.
(iii) During any period of construction, adequate coverage to meet liability under the Illinois Structural
Work Act.
(iv) Workmen's compensation insurance within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance of
not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
(v) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss
of use occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to the system.
This subsection (b) shall not be a limit on the company's undertaking provided in subsection (a) of
this section.
(c)The company shall have the municipality and its officers and employees included as additional
insureds on all insurance policies referred to in this section. The company shall file with the
municipality insurance certificates verifying the required coverage under such policies. All such
policies shall provide that the issuing insurance company will not cancel them without thirty (30) days'
prior written notice to the company and the municipality. All such policies shall be taken out and
maintained with generally recognized responsible insurance companies qualified to do business in
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 664/735
the state of Illinois and carrying a rating of A-11 in the most recent publication of Best's Insurance
Guide.
Section 15. Right to privacy.
(a)Neither the company nor any other person, agency, or entity shall monitor or arrange for the
monitoring of any cable line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose
other than the provision of service or services or the preventive maintenance of the system without
the specific authorization of affected subscribers. In all respects in connection with the system, the
company and the municipality shall protect the rights of privacy of subscribers consistent with the
requirements of the Cable Act, federal, state and local law and regulations.
Section 16. Compliance with local, state and federal jurisdiction.
(a)The company shall establish, construct, operate and maintain the system subject to the reasonable
supervision of the municipality, and in strict compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
(b)If at any time the powers of the municipality, state or federal government or any agency or office
thereof in connection with the system are duly transferred to or later reside in any other board,
authority, agency or official, shall have the power rights and duties previously vested in addition to
any other which they may acquire.
(c)Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the company shall at all times comply with all
state and federal laws, rules and regulations, or any administrative agency thereof; provided,
however, if any such ordinance, law, rule or regulation shall require the company to perform any
service in conflict with the provisions and terms of this ordinance or of any law, rule or regulations,
then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof the company shall notify the municipality of the
point of conflict believed to exist.
Section 17. Establishment, construction and operation.
(a)Upon acceptance pursuant to section 27 of this ordinance, the company shall expeditiously proceed
to establish, construct and operate the system in accordance with the terms provided herein.
(b)The time for the establishment, construction and operation of the system and the provision of services
to subscribers as provided in section 9 of this ordinance shall be in accordance with the schedule set
forth attached hereto and designated as Schedule C [Not set out herein].
Section 18. Assignment or transfer.
(a)The company shall not be permitted to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of the franchise, without the
prior written consent of the city, except that transfers to a corporation which merges with the
company, acquires substantially all of the assets of the company, owns more than fifty percent (50%)
of the stock of which is owned by persons or entitles that own over fifty percent (50%) of this stock of
the company shall not require the consent of the municipality.
(b)The consent or approval of the municipality to any such assignment, lease, transfer, sub-lease,
pledge or mortgage shall not constitute a waiver or lease of the rights of the municipality in and to
public right-of-way.
(c)Nothing in this section shall prohibit a mortgage or pledge of system facilities or any part thereof or a
leasing by the company of system facilities or part thereof for financing purposes in connection with
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 665/735
construction of the system. Any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject and subordinate to
the rights of the municipality and subscriber under this ordinance.
Section 19. Revocation.
(a)In addition to all other rights, powers or remedies pertaining to the municipality in connection with this
ordinance or otherwise, the municipality reserves the rights to terminate, cancel and revoke the
franchise and all rights and privileges of the company under this ordinance in the event the company:
(i) Violates any material provisions of this ordinance or any rule, order or determination of the
municipality made pursuant to this ordinance, except where such violation, other than of subsection
(ii) or (iii) below, is without fault of the company or through excusable neglect; or,
(ii) Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; or
(iii) Fails for a seven-day period to provide service to all subscribers in the service area except for
strikes, war, civil commotions, acts of God, or other causes beyond the reasonable control of the
company; or
(iv) Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this ordinance or practices any fraud or deceit upon
the municipality or subscribers; or
(v) Fails to establish, construct and operate the system substantially in compliance with schedule in
subsection (b) of section 17 of this ordinance, due consideration having been given the nature and
cause of any delays.
(b)Such termination, cancellation and revocation shall be by ordinance after a hearing before the
council. The municipality shall give the company at least sixty (60) days notice of the hearing. The
company shall have an opportunity before the council to be fully heard and be given a reasonable
period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to cure any and all defaults, omissions, breaches, or
causes for termination, cancellation or revocation. The council shall make findings of fact in
connection with any termination, cancellation or revocation.
(c)Upon expiration, or termination, cancellation or revocation of this franchise, if the company has not
been granted an extension or renewal thereof and accepted the same, the company may enter upon
the streets of the municipality for the purpose of removing therefrom its property and otherwise, in
removing its property, the company shall within six (6) months, at its own expense, leave the streets
in as nearly as possible as good a condition as that prevailing immediately prior to the company's
removal of its property. This shall not be a limit upon any other remedies the municipality may have in
connection with the company's performance under this ordinance.
Section 20. Reservation of rights.
(a)Renewal of the franchise granted by this ordinance shall be governed by and comply with the
provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act,
unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted
or superseded by provisions of any subsequent federal or state law. Should the provisions of Section
626 of the Cable Act be eliminated and not superseded or preempted by some subsequent federal or
state law then the grantee and the municipality agree that:
(a) During the six-month period which begins with the 36th month before the franchise expiration, the
franchising authority may on its own initiative, and shall at the request of the cable operator,
commence proceedings which afford the public in the franchise area appropriate notice and
participation for the purpose of12/
20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 666/735
(1) Identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests; and
(2) Reviewing the performance of the cable operator under the franchise during the then-current
franchise term.
(b) (1) Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (a), a cable operator seeking renewal of a
franchise may, on its own initiative or at the request of a franchising authority, submit a proposal for
renewal.
(2) Subject to Section 624 of the Cable Act, any such proposal shall contain such material as the
franchising authority may require, including proposals for an upgrade of the cable system.
(3) The franchising authority may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted.
(c) (1) Upon submittal by a cable operator of a proposal to the franchising authority for the renewal of
a franchise, the franchising authority shall provide prompt public notice of such proposal and, during
the four-month period which begins on the completion of any proceedings under subsection (a),
renew the franchise or, issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed
and, at the request of the operator or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding,
after providing prompt public notice of such proceeding, in accordance with paragraph (2) to consider
whether-
(A) The cable operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing
franchise and with applicable law;
(B) The quality of the operator's service, including signal quality, response to consumer
complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services
or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs;
(C) The operator has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities,
and equipment as set forth in the operator's proposal; and
(D) The operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and
interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(2) In any proceeding under paragraph (1), the cable operator shall be afforded adequate notice
and the cable operator and the franchise authority, or its designee shall be afforded fair opportunity
for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues
raised in the proceeding under subsection (a)), to require the production of evidence, and to
question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding.
(3) At the completion of a proceeding under this subsection, the franchising authority shall issue a
written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such
proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the cable operator. Such decision shall state
the reasons therefor.
(d) Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one (1) or more adverse findings made
with respect to the factors described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (c)(1), pursuant
to the record of the proceeding under subsection (c). A franchising authority may not base a denial of
renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under subsection
(c)(1)(A) or on events considered under subsection (c)(1)(B) in any case in which a violation of the
franchise or the events considered under subsection (c)(1)(B) occur after the effective date of this
title unless the franchising authority has provided the operator with notice and the opportunity to cure,
or in any case in which it is documented that the franchising authority has waived its right to object,
or has effectively acquiesced.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 667/735
(e) (1) Any cable operator whose proposal for renewal has been denied by a final decision of a
franchising authority made pursuant to this section, or has been adversely affected by a failure of the
franchising authority to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section, may
appeal such final decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of Section 635 of the Cable Act.
(2) The court shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds that-
(A) Any action of the franchising authority is not in compliance with the procedural requirements
of this section; or
(B) In the event of a final decision of the franchising authority denying the renewal proposal, the
operator has demonstrated that the adverse finding of the franchising authority with respect to
each of the factors described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (c)(1) on which the
denial is based is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence, based on the record of the
proceeding conducted under subsection (c).
(f) Any decision of a franchising authority on a proposal for renewal shall not be considered final
unless all administrative review by the state has occurred or the opportunity therefor has lapsed.
(g) For purposes of this section, the term "franchise expiration" means the date of the expiration of
the term of the franchise, as provided under the franchise, as it was in effect on the date of the
enactment of this title.
(h) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) through (g) of this section, a cable operator may
submit a proposal for the renewal of a franchise pursuant to this subsection at any time, and a
franchising authority may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment,
grant or deny such proposal at any (including proceedings pursuant to this section have
commenced). The provisions of subsections (a) through (g) of this section shall not apply to a
decision to grant or deny a proposal under this subsection. The denial of a renewal pursuant to this
subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal submitted in accordance with subsections
(a) through (g).
(b)In addition to the specific rights of inspection otherwise provided for in this ordinance, the municipality
shall also have the right to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with
the terms, provisions, and conditions of this ordinance and other relevant provisions of law.
(c)From time to time the municipality may amend this ordinance. No such amendment shall be effective
as to the company until the company files with the municipality an acceptance, with specific
references to the ordinance amending this ordinance, substantially in the form set forth in section 27.
(d)In the event the company fails to perform in accordance with any of the provisions of this ordinance
and the franchise is revoked as provided in section 19, then it is understood and agreed that the
municipality shall be entitled to the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) as liquidated damages.
The company shall have a period not to exceed ninety (90) days to cure any and all defaults,
omissions, breaches or causes of revocation.
Section 21. Termination of service.
Upon termination of system service to any subscriber, the company, upon written request, shall without
charge promptly remove all system facilities from the property of such subscriber.
Section 22. Construction.
Principles concerning the construction and interpretation of this ordinance shall be as follows:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 668/735
(a)All ordinance or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are to that extent hereby
repealed.
(b)If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof is for any reason held invalid, illegal,
unconstitutional, or unenforceable, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this ordinance to
any extent, each provision of this ordinance being a separate, distant and independent part.
(c)In connection with all decisions to be taken or made under this ordinance by the municipality, due
consideration shall be given the respective interests of the municipality, the company, subscribers
and potential subscribers. The interests of potential subscribers except for potential subscribers who
have not refused system service, shall be secondary to the interests of subscribers, the company
and the municipality.
(d)To the extent that any fee or monetary payment by the company or another person under this
ordinance shall be declared or found to be excessive as relates to a license or franchise, such fees
or monetary payments shall be considered to be taxes.
(e)Words in the present tense include the future.
(f)Words importing the singular number may extend to and include plural, words importing the plural
number may extend to and include the singular, and words in the masculine gender shall include
female gender.
(g)The company shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms, conditions and provisions of
this ordinance by any failure of the municipality upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to
seek compliance with any such terms, conditions or provisions.
(h)The specification in this section of principles to apply in the construction and interpretation of this
ordinance shall not be a limitation as to others.
(i)Whenever this ordinance shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the
company, such time may be deemed of the essence and any failure of the company to perform within
time allotted may be sufficient grounds for the municipality to terminate, cancel and revoke the grant
or use other remedies.
Section 23. Public buildings.
The company agrees to and shall furnish without installation charge on a standard installation not
greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from existing cable system and monthly service fee,
basic service, a live connection and one (1) converter to the city hall and one connection to all fire
houses, public works buildings, and any other municipal buildings designated by the city council; to all
library buildings; and to all public and parochial elementary, secondary and college level schools located
within the municipality. The public buildings so served shall be responsible for all additional internal
wiring from such energized connection source.
Section 24. Notices.
All notices herein provided for shall be sent prepaid registered or certified mail addressed to the parties
as follows:
To the city:
City Manager
City of Rock Island
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 669/735
1528 Third Avenue
Rock Island, IL 61201
To the company:
TCI of Illinois, Inc.
2750 11th Street
Rock Island, IL 61201
With a copy to:
TCI Great Lakes, Inc.
Attn: Franchise Director
111 Pfingsten Road, Suite 400
Deerfield, IL 60015
Section 25. Exclusive jurisdiction.
(a)No community antenna television system shall be erected, maintained or operated in the City of Rock
Island without the passage of a franchise ordinance granting the same.
(b)Upon enactment of this ordinance, the following actions by any person, corporation or unincorporated
association shall be unlawful and subject to criminal penalty as described in subsection (iii) below:
(i) The unauthorized connection, whether physically, electronically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of a system facilities within the municipality for the purpose of taking or
receiving television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds, or for the purpose of enabling
others to receive such signals, pictures, programs or sounds.
(ii) The willful tampering with, removal of, or injury to any cables, wires or equipment, used for
distribution of television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds without consent of the system
owner.
(iii) Violators of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this section is committed,
continued or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction of any such
violation, such violator shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
or by imprisonment. Any equipment or structure erected or maintained and any work commenced or
continued in violation of this ordinance shall be and is hereby declared unlawful.
(c)This ordinance shall become effective on October 1, 1994.
Section 26. Acceptance:
(a)Except as expressly provided otherwise in this ordinance, the company herein shall have no recourse
whatsoever against the municipality for any loss, cost or expense or damages arising out of the
terms, conditions and provisions or requirements of this ordinance or because of the municipality's
enforcement of this ordinance.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 670/735
(b)The company expressly acknowledges that upon accepting the right, privilege and franchise granted
by this ordinance, it did so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the municipality in connection with the system and this ordinance. By the acceptance of
this franchise, the company agrees that it will not at any time set up against the municipality in any
claim or proceeding any provision, condition or term of this ordinance as unreasonable, arbitrary or
void or that the municipality had in power of authority to make such provision, term or condition a part
of this ordinance.
(c)The company by acceptance of the right, privilege and franchise under this ordinance, acknowledges
that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or provision or other
statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the municipality concerning any term or
condition of this franchise not expressed herein.
(d)The company further acknowledges by acceptance of the right, privilege and franchise that it has
carefully read the terms and conditions of this ordinance and is willing to and does accept all
reasonable risks of the meaning of the provisions, terms and conditions herein.
(e)In the event the company shall accept the right, privilege and franchise to establish, construct,
operate and maintain the system in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions, terms and
conditions of this ordinance, the company shall execute an acceptance in substantially the form as
follows:
CITY OF ROCK ISLAND, ILLINOIS TCI OF ILLINOIS, INC.
BY: BY:
City Manager Authorized Representative
DATE: DATE:
ATTEST: ATTEST:
City Clerk
DATE: DATE:
ARTICLE II. GAS
ARTICLE III. ELECTRICITY
Sec. 1. Purpose:
The franchise heretofore granted to Iowa Illinois Gas and Electric Company, to acquire, construct, erect,
maintain and operate in the city of Rock Island, Illinois ("city"), is extended in the name of MidAmerican
Energy Company ("the company") for a period of five (5) years, such that said amended franchise shall
continue in effect until December 12, 2024, at which time said franchise shall terminate and expire. Upon
approval and acceptance by the company of this amended franchise the terms of this amended
franchise shall become binding upon the parties in substitution of the franchise granted in 1994. The city
hereby extends and grants the company a franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in
the city of Rock Island, Rock Island County, Illinois ("city"), the necessary facilities for the production,
distribution, transmission and sale of electric energy for public and private use; to use and occupy the
public streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and rights of way of the city for such purposes. The
city council reserves to itself the right to extend this franchise to other public places upon request of the
company. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 671/735
Sec. 2. Definitions:
As used in this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given in this section, unless the context or use clearly indicates another or different meaning is
intended:
City: The city of Rock Island.
Clerk: The clerk of the city of Rock Island.
Competent Authority: Means and includes any governmental body or forum vested by law with authority
to do the act or make the order, rule or regulation involved.
Corporate Authorities: The mayor and city council of the city of Rock Island.
Electric System: A system for the production, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity for lighting,
heating, power and other purposes within the corporate limits of the city.
Generating Facilities: Those facilities used or constructed by the licensee for the purpose of generating
or producing electric energy.
ICC: The Illinois commerce commission or other authority succeeding to the regulatory powers of the
Illinois commerce commission.
Liability: Includes, but is not limited to, actual or claimed loss or damage to property or injury to or death
of persons; actual or claimed responsibility for such loss, damage, injury or death; and any and all
judgments, decrees, costs and expenses of every sort and kind incident to such loss, damage, injury,
death or responsibility, including, but not limited to, court costs, fines and attorney fees.
Licensee: MidAmerican Energy Company.
MidAmerican Energy Representative: The person or persons, designated by the licensee, responsible
for the performance of the licensee's duties under this ordinance and who shall be available and
accessible to the city.
Municipal Representative: The person or persons designated by the city to be responsible for the
implementation of this ordinance on behalf of the city.
Other Ways: Rights of way within the city that are under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental
entity other than the city.
Person: One or more individuals, associations, firms, partnerships, trusts, private corporations, municipal
corporations, receivers, or trustees.
Public Property: All real property and all improvements thereon, owned, leased to, leased by or
otherwise controlled by the city.
Public Ways: The surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public
right of way, including, but not limited to, any street, highway, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, path, alley,
waterway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway or other public right of way including public utility easements or
rights of way over which the city has jurisdiction, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or
improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the city in which the city holds rights sufficient,
without consent of any other person, to permit licensee the use thereof for the purpose of installing or
maintaining licensee's electric system.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 672/735
Utility Facilities: Include, but are not limited to, licensee's land, structures, equipment, and systems
located within the city and used in the generation, production, transportation, distribution or delivery of
electricity. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 3. Rules Of Construction:
(a)This ordinance shall be construed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number.
(2) The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
(3) The provisions of this ordinance shall be read as a whole so as to effect the purposes of this
ordinance.
(4) Section headings are descriptive and used merely for the purpose of organization. Where
inconsistent with the text, section headings are to be disregarded. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 4. Rights Granted:
(a)Grant Of Right To Use Public Ways And Public Property: The city hereby grants to the licensee the
right, permission and authority to construct, operate and maintain in and through the city the
licensee's electric system and to construct, operate and maintain all such utility facilities as may be
necessary or convenient for such electric system, in, upon, along, over, across, above and under the
public ways and public property in the city, for the period of time and upon the terms and conditions
hereinafter specified.
(b)Emergency Access To Public Ways And Public Property: In the event of an emergency which the
licensee reasonably believes poses a threat of immediate harm to the public, to the reliability of
electric service, or to any of the utility facilities, the licensee is hereby granted access to the public
ways and public property, without a permit, to ameliorate the threatened harm. The licensee shall
promptly advise the city of the emergency.
(c)Exemption From Parking Restrictions: While used in the course of installation, repair and
maintenance work on the utility facilities, licensee's vehicles shall be exempt from parking restrictions
of the city. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 5. Conditions Of Grant:
(a)Construction And Location Of Facilities:
(1) The licensee or any person acting on its behalf may construct, repair, maintain, renew or replace
utility facilities located in the public ways, on public property, or on other ways, subject to the
following conditions:
a. The licensee shall obtain a permit in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city. The
licensee shall include with its permit application such plans and schedules for restoration of the
public ways or public property as the city may reasonably require by ordinance.
b. The licensee shall obtain all necessary approvals from any competent authority for the
performance of said work, and such work shall be performed in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved or prescribed by the competent authority.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 673/735
(2) After the effective date of this ordinance, electric service lines at or below seven thousand six
hundred twenty (7,620) volts installed in new subdivisions shall be placed underground. New (but not
replacement) overhead electric service lines at or below seven thousand six hundred twenty (7,620)
volts, of a length of one block or more, and installed in the city but outside new subdivisions, shall be
discussed with the city prior to installation, except in the case of emergency. Underground facilities
shall be placed so as not to interfere unnecessarily with travel on or access to the public ways.
(3) Unless specifically permitted by the city, all utility facilities installed under this ordinance shall be
located so as not to injure any drains, sewers, catch basins, water pipes, pavements or other public
improvements.
(4) Any utility facilities in the public ways that have been, or are at any future time, acquired, leased
or utilized in any manner by the licensee are deemed authorized by and subject to this ordinance.
(5) Prior to filing any application with a competent authority for the construction of any generating
facilities or transmission lines of sixty nine thousand (69,000) volts or greater within the city, the
licensee shall meet with the city to discuss such plans.
(b)Relocation Or Removal Of Facilities:
(1) Upon receiving at least thirty (30) days' notice from the city, the licensee shall, at no expense to
the city, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities in public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration: a) is reasonably necessary for the public use of such public ways; b)
is reasonably necessary for the public use of other property of the city; c) is reasonably necessary for
the operations of the city; or d) is reasonably necessary for the redevelopment of city property
located in the east/west alley connecting 19th and 20th Streets south of 1st Avenue; provided,
however, that in item d) of this subsection licensee shall not be required to bear the costs to remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of its utility facilities in an amount greater than the cumulative
public financial support contributed to the redevelopment project. The city will make reasonable effort
to engineer any such project either so as not to require any such removal, relocation, change or
alteration or, if that is not reasonably feasible, so as to minimize the licensee's expenses in making
such removals, changes or alterations.
(2) Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to move along or across the public ways, any vehicle,
equipment, structure or other object of such height or size as will interfere with any of the licensee's
overhead facilities, the licensee shall temporarily remove such overhead facilities from such place as
must necessarily be crossed by such vehicle, equipment, structure or other object provided that: a)
the licensee shall receive at least twenty four (24) hours' notice thereof from the municipal
representative; b) the licensee shall have received payment for such removal, except as provided in
subsection (b)(1) of this section; and c) such temporary removal shall be done at such time of the
day or night as will least interfere with the licensee's use of such wires and poles for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the city and the successful operations of the licensee's electric system.
(c)Restoration Of Public Ways Or Public Property:
(1) When the licensee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting the public
ways or public property, it shall, at no expense to the city, restore such public ways or public property
according to chapter 13, article III, division 2, of this code.
(2) If the licensee fails to restore the public ways or public property as required by subsection (c)(1)
of this section, the city may, after communications with the MidAmerican Energy representative and
after affording the licensee a reasonable opportunity to correct the situation, give seven (7) days'
written notice to the licensee, and thereafter restore at licensee's cost such public ways or public
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 674/735
property. No such prior written notice shall be required in the event that the city determines that an
emergency situation exists.
(d)Trimming Of Trees And Vegetation: From time to time, when the licensee believes it to be warranted
by existing conditions, the licensee shall, at its own expense, have the right to trim the trees and
vegetation growing upon or overhanging any of the public ways or public property in the city where
utility facilities are erected. Licensee shall use its best efforts to provide the city with advance notice
of scheduled tree trimming within the city.
(e)Use Of Utility Facilities: The licensee shall, when requested by the city, permit its distribution poles to
be used for the suspension and maintenance of the city's wires, as may be reasonably required by
the city. The city shall be entitled to make such use without charge. Such use of the utility facilities
shall be under the supervision and direction of the licensee so as not to materially interfere with the
licensee's present or reasonably contemplated usage of the utility facilities. Such use may not be for
the purpose of transmitting electricity by the city or any person. The city agrees to save and keep
harmless the licensee from any and all liability incurred by the licensee as a result of the city's use of
the utility facilities pursuant to this subsection.
(f)Abandoned Facilities: The licensee shall, as soon as practicable, remove from the public ways and
public property all aboveground wires and supports whose use is abandoned and shall, as soon as
practicable, remove or board up or render reasonably inaccessible all other utility facilities whose use
is abandoned or discontinued. The licensee shall take reasonable steps to prevent abandoned utility
facilities from becoming nuisances. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 6. Service Considerations:
(a)Duty To Provide Electricity: The licensee shall furnish electricity within the city to the city, to the
inhabitants thereof, and to any person doing business in the city in accordance with the rates, tariffs,
rules, regulations, terms and conditions approved from time to time by the ICC. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1,
12-22-2008)
Sec. 7. Administration:
(a)Representatives:
(1) The licensee shall maintain such offices and facilities, as it deems adequate for the purposes of
providing the city with twenty four (24) hour service pertaining to the operation of the utility facilities.
The licensee shall provide the city with the telephone number or numbers at which a MidAmerican
Energy representative can be reached twenty four (24) hours a day.
(2) The city shall provide the licensee with the telephone number or numbers at which a municipal
representative can be reached twenty four (24) hours a day.
(3) The city and the licensee shall promptly notify the other in the event that any of the information
required under the foregoing sections is changed, so as to keep such information current at all times
while this ordinance remains in effect.
(b)Facilities Maps: Upon the request of the city, the licensee shall provide the city with a current set of
maps showing the location of all utility facilities installed in or under public ways within the corporate
limits of the city, provided that the licensee shall not be required to prepare maps to comply with this
provision if no such maps exist.
(c)Disclosure Of Documents Or Information: The city agrees that no documents or information provided
to the city by the licensee in accordance with this ordinance shall be made available to the public if
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 675/735
such documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the freedom of
information act, the federal energy regulatory commission critical energy infrastructure requirements
pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, and section 5-108 of the public utilities act, as such
statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time.
(d)Notices:
(1) Notice To City: Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from the licensee to the city under
this ordinance shall be made in writing and mailed to the city manager at the following address:
City Manager
City of Rock Island
1528 3rd Avenue
Rock Island, IL 61201
(2) Notice To The Licensee: Unless otherwise specified herein, all notices from the city to the
licensee under this ordinance shall be made in writing and mailed to its president at the following
address:
President
MidAmerican Energy Company
P.O. Box 657
Des Moines, IA 50303
(3) Changes In Person Or Place For Notification: In the event that either the city or the licensee
changes the person to whom written notices are to be directed or the address to which such notices
are to be sent, the party making the change shall promptly notify the other party of such change in
writing.
(e)Coordination Of Construction Activities: The licensee and the city shall exercise their best efforts to
coordinate to the extent practicable the timing of the construction activities of each so as to minimize
any inconvenience to the other or to the public that might otherwise occur. At the written request of
the city, the licensee shall meet once each calendar year with the city and such other users of the
public ways as may be invited by the city to discuss scheduling of construction in the public ways.
(f)Notice Of Boundary Changes: The city shall notify the licensee in writing of any ordinance, statute or
court or administrative action that causes a change in the city's boundaries. Failure to give such
notice excuses the licensee both from noncompliance with this ordinance and from the noncollection
of municipal utility taxes within the area affected until such notice is given.
(g)Notice Of Requests For Rate Changes: The licensee shall notify the city of any application the
licensee files with the ICC to effectuate any general increase in its electric rates. Upon the written
request of the city, the licensee shall send the city such portions of the application filed with the ICC
as are requested by the city. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 8. Municipal Rights Reserved:
(a)Police Powers: The city expressly reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the
provisions contained herein, such ordinances, rules and regulations as the corporate authorities may
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 676/735
deem necessary in the police power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the city's
citizens and their properties.
(b)Regulation Of Public Ways: The city expressly reserves the right to enforce reasonable regulations
concerning access to or use of the public ways, as may from time to time be provided by ordinance,
including requirements for permit applications. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 9. Term And Termination:
(a)Term: The franchise granted by this ordinance shall be for a term of twenty five (25) years from its
effective date and is hereby extended for an additional five (5) years through December 12, 2024.
(b)Acceptance: The licensee shall accept this ordinance by filing with the clerk an unconditional written
acceptance hereof, to be duly executed according to law. The failure of the licensee to so accept this
ordinance within thirty (30) days of enactment shall be deemed a rejection hereof by the licensee,
and the rights and privileges herein granted shall absolutely cease and determine unless said period
of time shall be extended by an ordinance duly passed by the corporate authorities for that purpose
before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.
(c)Effective Date: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon the licensee's filing of its
acceptance as provided hereinabove or upon its passage and publication as required by law,
whichever is later.
(d)Amendments: No revision, modification or amendment of this ordinance shall be effective unless it
has been passed by the corporate authorities and accepted by the licensee in writing.
(e)Termination: Except as otherwise provided herein or by law, the rights and obligations of the licensee
under this ordinance shall terminate upon the end of the term of this ordinance.
(f)Rights Upon Termination:
(1) Upon any termination of its rights and obligations under this ordinance, the licensee shall not
refuse to provide electric service pursuant to licensee's tariffs to any potential customers within the
city unless a petition for abandonment has been filed with and approved by the ICC.
(2) Notwithstanding the termination of the licensee's rights and obligations hereunder, by forfeiture or
otherwise, the licensee shall remain subject to all other applicable regulations and authority of the
city, without limitation, as long as the licensee continues to provide electrical service within the city or
the licensee's utility facilities remain in the public ways or on public property.
(3) Any claims for indemnification for liability incurred by the city, its boards, committees,
commissions, officers, agents and employees arising from any incidents that occurred on or before
the termination of this ordinance shall survive the termination, provided that such claims for
indemnification are timely made. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 10. Indemnification:
(a)Indemnification: The licensee shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its boards, committees,
commissions, officers, agents and employees from any and all liability arising from licensee's
negligent placement or negligent maintenance of its utility facilities in the public ways or on public
property pursuant to this ordinance. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
Sec. 11. Miscellaneous Provisions:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 677/735
(a)Transfer And Assignment:
(1) Except in the event of the merger, consolidation or reorganization of the licensee, the licensee
shall not have the right to assign its rights and privileges under this ordinance or to otherwise transfer
it in any manner whatsoever without the prior written approval of the city pursuant to an ordinance
enacted by the corporate authorities.
(2) In the event of a transfer or assignment of the licensee's rights and privileges under this
ordinance, all provisions of this ordinance which are obligatory upon, or which inure to the benefit of,
the licensee shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the benefit of any and all successors and
assigns of the licensee.
(b)Ordinance As Contract: This ordinance shall have the effect of and shall be a contract between the
city and the licensee and shall be a measure of the rights and obligations of the city as well as of the
licensee.
(c)Paramount Regulatory Authority: The licensee and the city understand that the general operations of
the licensee are under the jurisdiction of the ICC and the federal energy regulatory commission. The
licensee has agreed to perform the duties and obligations set forth in this ordinance, provided that
such performance does not violate any applicable regulatory provision or any applicable statutes,
ordinances, judgments or decrees of any administrative or judicial tribunal.
(d)Scope Of Ordinance: No privilege or exemption is granted or conferred to licensee by this ordinance
unless specifically provided herein. The permission and authority granted by this ordinance are not
intended to limit or modify any agreement, franchise, license or permit previously granted by the city
to any other person for the use or occupancy of the public ways, and the licensee shall therefore
exercise the rights granted by this ordinance in such a manner as shall neither unreasonably
interfere with the rights nor endanger or impair the property of other contractors, franchisees,
licensees and permittees in the public ways. The city agrees to require other contractors,
franchisees, licensees and permittees of the city to exercise their rights under such agreements,
franchises, licenses and permits in such a manner as shall neither unreasonably interfere with the
rights nor endanger or impair utility facilities of the licensee located in the public ways.
(e)Severability: If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, the
invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this ordinance.
(f)Repealer: All ordinances, resolutions or orders, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance, or containing provisions granting any right, privilege or license to the licensee or to any of
its predecessor companies are hereby repealed.
(g)Force Majeure: The licensee shall not be deemed in violation of this ordinance for the delay in
performance or failure to perform in whole or in part its obligations under this ordinance due to strike,
war or act of war (whether an actual declaration is made or not), insurrection, riot, act of public
enemy, fire, flood or other act of God or by other events to the extent that such events are caused by
circumstances beyond the licensee's control and are not caused by gross negligence on the part of
the licensee or any person acting on its behalf. In the event that the delay in performance or failure to
perform affects only part of the licensee's capacity to perform its obligations under this ordinance, the
licensee shall perform such obligations to the extent it is able to do so in as expeditious a manner as
possible. Licensee shall promptly notify the municipal representative in writing of an event covered by
this section and the date, nature and cause thereof. Furthermore, licensee, in such notice, shall
indicate the anticipated extent of such delay and the obligations under this ordinance to be affected
thereby. (Ord. 089-2008, § 1, 12-22-2008)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 678/735
APPENDIX D
STORM WATER CONTROL
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
DIVISION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, ABBREVIATIONS AND
DEFINITIONS
Sec. 1-1. Authority:
These regulations provide for the regulation of matters relative to the management of storm water within
the city of Rock Island and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Its provisions include, but are not limited to,
regulating drainage installations and improvements, requiring the preservation and enhancement of
certain natural environmental features, requiring the installation of drainage improvements in
developments, regulating uses, maintenance, and activities in floodplains and flood hazard areas,
requiring permits, payment of fees and assurances of completion, and providing for inspections and
control of work. The requirements, standards and specifications herein provided are in addition to any
other applicable legal requirements. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-2. Purposes:
(a)To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm drainage system within the city of
Rock Island.
(b)To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards
of flooding.
(c)To preserve property values by protecting new and existing buildings and improvements to buildings
from damage due to storm water flow.
(d)To assure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase flood or drainage hazards to
others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion.
(e)To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, and to protect water quality.
(f)To prevent the discharge of contaminated storm water runoff and illicit discharges from industrial,
commercial, residential, and construction sites into the storm drainage system within the city of Rock
Island.
(g)To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste,
lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system.
(h)To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products.
(i)To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners of construction sites
within the city of Rock Island.
(j)To enable the city of Rock Island to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permitting requirements for storm water
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 679/735
discharges. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-3. Abbreviations:
The following abbreviations when used in this appendix shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best management practices
CFR Code of federal regulations
FEMA Federal emergency management agency
HHW Household hazardous waste
IDPH Illinois department of public health
IEPA Illinois environmental protection agency
MS4 Municipal separate storm sewer system
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
NRCS Natural resources conservation service
RISWCD Rock Island soil and water conservation district
SWP3 Storm water pollution prevention plan
USDA U.S. department of agriculture
USEPA U.S. environmental protection agency
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-4. Definitions:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases as used in this appendix,
shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
Adverse Impacts : Any negative impact on plant, soil, air or water resources affecting their beneficial
uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, quality, and quantity.
Applicant : Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure
official approval of a development or permit to carry out construction of a new development or
redevelopment from the city of Rock Island.
Base Flood Elevation : The elevation at all locations delineating the level of flooding resulting from the
100-year frequency flood event, which has a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 680/735
in any given year. The base flood elevation at any location is defined in the city of Rock Island floodplain
ordinance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) : Here refers to management practices and methods to control
pollutants in storm water. BMPs are of two (2) types: "source controls" (nonstructural) and "treatment
controls" (structural). Source controls are practices that prevent pollution by reducing potential pollutants
at their source, before they come into contact with storm water. Treatment controls remove pollutants
from storm water. The selection, application and maintenance of BMPs must be sufficient to prevent or
reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering the storm drainage system. Specific BMPs may be imposed
by the city of Rock Island and are discussed further in article III of this appendix.
Building Official : The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of the international building code for the city of Rock Island.
Building Permit : A permit issued by the city of Rock Island, for the construction, erection or alteration of
a structure or building and the related ground and surface preparation prior to and after completion of
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
Bypass Flows : Storm water runoff from upstream properties tributary to a property's drainage system
but not under its control.
Certify Or Certification : Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests were performed, and
that such inspections and tests comply with the applicable requirements of this appendix.
Channel : Any defined river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, on
stream lake or impoundment, abandoned mine, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into
which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
Channel Modification : The alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of
its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), filling,
widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the manmade clearing of debris or removal of trash.
Clearing : Any activity which removes the natural vegetative ground cover.
Commercial : Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
Compensatory Storage : An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the
floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed
within the floodplain.
Conduit : Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether
open or closed.
Construction Site : Any location where clearing, grading, filling, etc., activity occurs.
Contaminated : Containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
Contractor : Any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a construction site,
including any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited
to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material
suppliers delivering materials to the site.
County : The county of Rock Island, Illinois.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 681/735
Dam : As defined by the Illinois department of natural resources office of water resources.
Detention Basin : A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of storm water
runoff and the controlled release by gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or
storm.
Detention Time : The amount of time storm water is held within a detention basin.
Development : Any manmade change to real estate or property, including:
(1) The division or subdivision of any duly recorded parcel of property.
(2) Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building valued at
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(3) Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
(4) Construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
(5) Redevelopment of a site.
(6) Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, drilling, mining or other nonagricultural
alterations of a ground surface.
(7) Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste.
(8) Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency, direction, or velocity of storm water
flows from a property.
Discharge : Any addition or release of any pollutant, storm water or any other substance whatsoever into
storm drainage system.
Discharger : Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge,
including, without limitation, any owner of a construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic Sewage : Sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and laundry sources, including
waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks.
Drainage Plan : A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which describes the
existing storm water drainage system and environmental features, including grading, as well as
proposed alterations or changes to the drainage system and environment of a property.
Dry Basin : A detention basin designed to drain after temporary storage of storm water flows and to
normally be dry over much of its bottom area.
Earthwork : The disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing, grading, or excavation activities.
Erosion : The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall, flowing water, wind or wave
action.
Excavation : Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material, is
cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the
conditions resulting from such actions.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 682/735
Excess Storm Water Runoff : The volume and rate of flow of storm water discharged from a new
development or redevelopment which is or will be in excess of that volume and rate which existed before
development or redevelopment.
Existing Grade : The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
Facility : Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a
discharge of a pollutant.
Fertilizer : A substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available
to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating
growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two (2) or more fertilizers.
Fill : Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material, is deposited, placed, replaced,
pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
Final Grade : The vertical location of the ground surface after grading work is completed in accordance
with the plans.
Fire Protection Water : Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any
person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or test fire equipment.
Garbage : Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and
sale of produce and other food products.
Grading : The excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from
any excavation or fill.
Ground Water : Any water residing below the surface of the ground or percolating into or out of the
ground.
Harmful Quantity : The amount of any substance that the public works director determines will cause an
adverse impact to storm drainage system or will contribute towards the failure of the city of Rock Island
to meet the water quality based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4.
Hazardous Substance : Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302.
Hazardous Waste : Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40
CFR part 261.
Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) : Any material generated in a household (including single and
multiple residences) that would be classified as hazardous pursuant to the IEPA.
Hydrograph : A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit, the flow rate with respect to
time.
Hydrograph Method : This method estimates runoff volume and runoff hydrographs for the point of
interest by generating hydrographs for individual sub areas, combining them, and routing them through
stream lengths and reservoir structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution, runoff curve
number, time of concentration, and travel time are included.
Illegal Discharge : See definition of Illicit Discharge.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 683/735
Illicit Connection : Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit
discharge to enter the storm drainage system.
Illicit Discharge : Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is prohibited under this appendix.
Impervious Surface : That area of property that is covered by materials other than soil and vegetation
and that has no intended capacity to absorb storm water, such as parking lots, roadways, driveways,
sidewalks, patios, tennis courts, roofs and other structures.
Industrial Waste (Or Commercial Waste) : Any wastes produced as a byproduct of any industrial,
institutional or commercial process or operation, other than domestic sewage.
Infiltration : The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
Jurisdiction : The city of Rock Island, Illinois.
Loessal Soil : A sediment, commonly nonstratified and unconsolidated, composed predominately of silt
sized particles with accessory clay and sand.
Lot : An individual platted parcel in an approved subdivision.
Major Drainage System : That portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows beyond
the capacity of the minor drainage system.
May : Discretionary.
Mechanical Fluid : Any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of machinery, vehicles and any other
equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum products, oil and fuel.
Minor Drainage System : That portion of a drainage system designed for the convenience of the public.
It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels, and swales and, where manmade, is to
be designed to handle the 10-year runoff event.
Mitigation : When the prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional measures are required to
offset the development, including those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
storm water drainage and development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare.
Examples of mitigation include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage, soil erosion and
sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning (Or Mobile Washing) : Power washing, steam cleaning, and any
other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for
commercial purposes or related to a commercial activity.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) : The system of conveyances, including roads, streets,
curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins
and ponds owned and operated by the city of Rock Island and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage.
NPDES : The national pollutant discharge elimination system.
NPDES Permit : A permit issued by EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
Natural : Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without intervention by
man.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 684/735
Natural Drainage : Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by unnatural causes.
Notice Of Violation : A written notice detailing any violations of this appendix and any action expected of
the violators.
Oil : Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to: petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil,
motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
100-Year Event : A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
1-Year Event : A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one hundred percent (100%) probability of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
Owner : The person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land including the contract seller and
contract purchaser.
Parcel : A contiguous lot or tract of land under one ownership. A lot or tract of land is land intended as a
unit for the purpose of development or transfer of ownership.
Peak Flow : The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit.
Permittee : Any person to whom a building permit or a grading and drainage permit is issued.
Person : Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide : A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or migrate any
pest.
Pet Waste (Or Animal Waste) : Excrement and other waste from domestic animals.
Petroleum Product : A product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is
capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor
gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and
#2 diesel.
Pollutant : Any substance attributable to water pollution, including, but not limited to, rubbish, garbage,
solid waste, litter, debris, yard waste, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste,
domestic sewage, industrial waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical fluid,
oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze, surfactants, solvents, detergents,
cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals, toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator
waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, soil and sediment.
Pollution : The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination
of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life,
property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the
water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Positive Drainage : Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property including depressional areas
that may also be drained by storm sewer.
Potable Water : Water that has been treated to drinking water standards and is safe for human
consumption.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 685/735
Private Drainage System : All privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces, structures or systems,
excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey storm water, including, but not limited to, roofs, gutters,
downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch
basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any
ground surface.
Public Improvement Plans : Engineering drawings subject to approval by the city engineer for the
construction of public improvements.
Public Works Director : The public works director for the city of Rock Island or his/her designee.
Qualified Person : A person who possesses the required certification, license, or appropriate
competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, and/or experience to
perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements
and generally accepted industry standards for such activity.
Release : To dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into
the storm drainage system.
Rubbish : Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: 1) combustible waste materials,
including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and
similar materials; and 2) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum
cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600
to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary Sewage : The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city of Rock
Island sanitary or combined sewer system and passes through the sanitary or combined sewer system
to a city of Rock Island sewage treatment plant for treatment.
Sanitary Sewer : The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and
domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a city of Rock Island sewage treatment plant
(and to which storm water, surface water, and ground water are not intentionally admitted).
Sediment : Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported naturally by water, wind,
gravity, or equipment tracking (tires, vehicles).
Sedimentation : The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in bodies of water or storm water drainage systems.
Septic Tank Waste : Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks.
Shall : Mandatory.
Site : The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including
adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Slope Disturbance Line : The line which delineates relatively level building areas from areas where
slopes exceed seven percent (7%) and where special precautions must be taken.
Small Quantity Generator Waste : Any hazardous waste generated by a small quantity generator as
defined by IEPA.
Solid Waste : Any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material, including solid, liquid,
semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 686/735
mining or agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional activities.
State : The state of Illinois.
Storm Drainage System : All surfaces, structures and systems that contribute to or convey storm water,
including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface water, ground water, waters of the state and
waters of the United States.
Storm Sewer : A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
Storm Water : Runoff resulting from precipitation.
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) : A document that describes the best management
practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants.
Stream : Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade drainageway which has
a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially
or intermittently.
Stripping : Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, by spraying
or clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
Subdivision Development : Includes activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into two
(2) or more lots and includes all construction activity taking place thereon.
Surface Water : Water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface of the ground, including
oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams, puddles, channelized flow and runoff.
10-Year Event : A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten percent (10%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
Time Of Concentration : The elapsed time for storm water to flow from the most hydraulically remote
point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest in that watershed.
Tributary Watershed : All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a given point.
2-Year Event : A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having two percent (2%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. A 24-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
Uncontaminated : Not containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
Used Oil (Or Used Motor Oil) : Any oil that as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties.
Utility Agency : Private utility companies, the city of Rock Island or contractors working for private utility
companies or the city of Rock Island, engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility distribution
lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and
communication services.
Vacant : Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or
maintenance of the land itself.
Wastewater : Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a
facility.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 687/735
Water Of The State (Or Water) : Any ground water, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the
territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that
are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water Quality Standard : The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for
desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by state or federal regulatory standards
to be necessary to protect those uses.
Waters Of The United States : All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be
susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb
and the flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all
impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all
tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR section 122.2; but
not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the
requirements of the federal clean water act.
Watershed : All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same channel, lake, marsh, storm
water facility, ground water or depressional area.
Wet Basin : A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary
storage of storm water runoff.
Wetlands : Defined by regulation as "those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions". Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. For general, but not inclusive, locations of
designated wetlands refer to mapping prepared jointly by the U.S. department of interior, fish and wildlife
service and the Illinois department of natural resources, office of resource conservation; national
wetlands inventory mapping, 1987. More specific wetland information is published in the Rock River
wetlands special area management plan, by the bistate regional commission in cooperation with the
natural resources conservation service (NRCS), the U.S. fish and wildlife service and the U.S. army
corps of engineers. The applicant may be required to provide a field investigation by a qualified wetland
delineator.
Yard Waste : Leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris that result from
landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing operations. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 2. PROHIBITED ACTIONS
Sec. 1-5. Surface Water:
Surface water shall be allowed to travel its natural or preregulated course unless changes are allowed
by means of a grading and drainage permit or grading and drainage plans approved by the public works
director. It shall be unlawful for any person to force surface water off that person's property and onto a
neighboring property or to prevent surface water which would have entered that person's property from
doing so without approval granted by a grading and drainage permit. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-6. Easements:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 688/735
No buildings or permanent structures, including impervious surfaces, may be placed wholly or in part
within an easement that has been granted for access to drainage facilities of any type, including
agricultural drainage conduit, without the written approval of the public works director; provided,
however, streets, sidewalks and driveways may be allowed to cross easements by the shortest possible
route, provided that other requirements are met. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-7. Obstruction Of Watercourse:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain any obstruction within a watercourse or drainage
facility of any type, except as may be specifically authorized by this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 1-8. Discharge:
No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm drainage system any discharge that is
not composed entirely of uncontaminated storm water, except as allowed in listed exemptions of this
appendix. Common storm water contaminants include trash, yard waste, stones, earth, concrete, wood,
lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste and sediment. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-9. Exempted Discharges:
The following discharges are exempt from the regulations in this appendix:
(1) Water line and fire hydrant flushing.
(2) Landscape irrigation.
(3) Rising ground waters.
(4) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration.
(5) Uncontaminated pumped ground water.
(6) Discharges from potable water sources.
(7) Foundation drains.
(8) Air conditioning condensate.
(9) Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).
(10) Springs.
(11) Water from crawl space pumps.
(12) Footing drains.
(13) Storm sewer cleaning.
(14) Water from individual car washing on properties residential zoned.
(15) Routine external building wash-down which does not use detergents.
(16) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 689/735
(17) Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.
(18) Residual street wash water.
(19) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(20) Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
(21) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred
(unless all spilled material has been removed). (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-10. Pollutant Discharge:
Notwithstanding the listed exemptions of this division, any discharge shall be prohibited by this appendix
if the discharge in question has been determined by the public works director to be a source of pollutants
to the storm drainage system.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage
system are prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in
the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-11. Line Connect:
No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic sewage or industrial waste, to the
storm drainage system, or allow such a connection to continue. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-12. Interference:
No person shall interfere with best management practices (BMPs) implemented pursuant to this
appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 3. REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISCHARGERS
Sec. 1-13. Private Drainage System Maintenance:
The owner of any private drainage system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion
repairs, maintenance of vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-14. Minimization Of Irrigation Runoff:
Irrigation systems shall be managed to reduce the discharge of water from a site. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-
22-2004)
Sec. 1-15. Cleaning Of Paved Surfaces Required:
The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as required to prevent the
buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or
debris is a violation of this appendix. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum
sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this appendix.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 690/735
This section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction activities, which are otherwise
specified. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-16. Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning Operations:
Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning operations shall not discharge to the storm drainage system in
violation of this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-17. Maintenance Of Equipment:
Any leak or spill related to equipment maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to
prevent the potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and equipment must be maintained to
reduce leaking fluids. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-18. Materials Storage:
In addition to other requirements of this appendix, materials shall be stored to prevent the potential
release of pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of hazardous substances
is prohibited. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-19. Pet Waste:
Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or sanitary sewage in a timely manner, to prevent
discharge to the storm drainage system. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-20. Pesticides, Herbicides And Fertilizers:
Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations
and applicable laws. Excessive application shall be avoided. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-21. Prohibition On Use Of Pesticides And Fungicides Banned From
Manufacture:
Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the manufacture of which has been either voluntarily
discontinued or prohibited by the U.S. environmental protection agency, or any federal, state or local
jurisdiction. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-22. Open Drainage Channel Maintenance:
Every person owning or occupying property through which an open drainage channel passes shall keep
and maintain that part of the drainage channel within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the
drainage channel. In addition, the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures
adjacent to a drainage channel, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the drainage channel. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-23. Release Reporting And Cleanup:
Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in or may
result in illegal discharges to the storm drainage system shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 691/735
hazardous material, said person shall comply with all state, federal, and local laws requiring reporting,
cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the release. In the event
of such a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the public works director no later
than the close of the next business day. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-24. Authorization To Adopt And Impose Best Management Practices:
The city of Rock Island may adopt and impose requirements identifying best management practices
(BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause a discharge of pollutants to the storm
drainage system. Where specific BMPs are required, every person undertaking such activity or
operation, or owning or operating such facility shall implement and maintain these BMPs at their own
expense. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 4. INSPECTIONS AND PLAN MODIFICATIONS
Sec. 1-25. Inspections:
The city of Rock Island shall make inspections as required and shall notify the grading and drainage
permit holder in the event that the work fails to comply with the requirements of this appendix. The
notification of any deficiencies in the work or violations of this appendix shall be posted at the site and
mailed to the owner of the site by ordinary mail.
The owner of the site shall notify the public works director:
(1) Two (2) working days prior to the start of any land disturbing activities,
(2) Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control measures (including perimeter
controls and diversions), and
(3) After final stabilization and landscaping and prior to removal of temporary sediment controls.
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-26. Special Precautions:
If at any stage of the grading of any development site the city of Rock Island determines by inspection
that the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any
property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the city of Rock Island shall require, as
a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as is
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall
not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction, cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations
of a certified professional in erosion and sediment control or a professional engineer, which may be
made requirements for further work.
Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not
complete, work shall be stopped and the grading and drainage permit holder required to install
temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or
the public safety. On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the public works
director shall specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that the
operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or
devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-27. Amendment Of Plans:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 692/735
Major amendments to storm water drainage and detention or grading and drainage plans shall be
submitted to the public works director and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans. Field modification of a minor nature may be authorized and documented
by the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 5. RESPONSIBILITY
Sec. 1-28. Applicant:
The applicant for a grading and drainage permit shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to
persons or property otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-29. Jurisdiction:
The city of Rock Island or its officers or agents, will not be made liable for such damage, by: 1) the
issuance of a grading and drainage permit under this appendix, 2) compliance with the provisions of that
grading and drainage permit or conditions attached to it by the public works director, 3) failure of the city
of Rock Island to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, 4) failure of the city of Rock
Island officials to recommend denial or to deny a grading and drainage permit, or 5) exemptions from
grading and drainage permit requirements of this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 6. MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Sec. 1-30. Responsibility For Maintenance:
The city of Rock Island will maintain those drainage facilities that are on public land and have been
dedicated and accepted for maintenance or stipulated by agreement for maintenance by the city of Rock
Island. All other drainage facilities, when located on other than public property, shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the property on which they exist or the owner of the drainage facility, regardless of
whether or not dedicated easements exist over said facilities.
The responsible party shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed to achieve compliance with
conditions of this permit. Proper operation and maintenance includes effective performance, adequate
funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and appropriate quality assurance procedures.
Abandonment and alteration, either structural or operational, of all facilities and systems shall occur only
following application and issuance of a permit. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 7. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 1-31. Right Of Entry And Sampling:
(a)Whenever the appropriate official has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or
upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this appendix, the appropriate
official shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the
discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. In the event that the owner or occupant
refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the city attorney of the city of Rock Island is
hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
(b)The appropriate official shall have the right to set up on the property of any discharger to the storm
drainage system such devices that are necessary to conduct sampling of discharges. (Ord. 33-2004,
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 693/735
§ 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-32. Notice Of Violation:
Whenever an authorized enforcement person determines that a person has violated or failed to meet a
requirement of this appendix, the enforcement person will order compliance by written notice of violation
to the responsible person. Posting the written notice on the property will constitute written notice.
Whenever possible, a copy of the notice of violation will be mailed by ordinary mail or e-mail when an
address has been provided through appropriate permitting procedures.
The notice of violation shall include:
(1) The name of the responsible person or property owner.
(2) The date and location of the violation.
(3) A description of the violation.
(4) Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the violation.
(5) The deadline within which the required actions must be completed.
(6) Enforcement actions that may be taken by the city attorney of the city of Rock Island.
(7) Notice date.
(8) Any person receiving a notice of violation may file a written appeal to the public works director
within fifteen (15) days of the notice date. The public works director will affirm, modify or rescind the
notice in writing, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the appeal. If the recipient of a notice of
violation is dissatisfied with the outcome of the appeal to the public works director, the appeal
process outlined in division 9 of this article will be followed. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-33. Action Without Prior Notice:
Any person who violates or fails to meet a requirement of this appendix will be subject, without prior
notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified in this appendix when attempts to contact
the person have failed and the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent danger to the environment or to the health or welfare
of persons or to the storm drainage system. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-34. Enforcement Actions:
Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a notice of violation, or fails to comply with an appeal
decision of the public works director, will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement actions:
(1) Stop Work Order : The public works director may issue a stop work order to the owner and
contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at the construction site and distributing the
order to all city of Rock Island departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site.
Unless express written exception is made, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction
activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or
continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A notice of violation shall accompany the
stop work order, and shall define the compliance requirements.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 694/735
(2) Abatement Of An Illicit Connection : The public works director may terminate an illicit connection.
Any expense related to such abatement shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner.
(3) Abatement Of A Violation On Private Property : When a property owner is not available, not able
or not willing to correct a violation, the public works director may enter private property to take any
and all measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent
or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the public works director to enter upon the
premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such abatement shall be fully reimbursed by
the property owner.
(4) Recovery Of Costs : Within thirty (30) days after abatement by the public works director, the
public works director shall notify the property owner of the costs of abatement, including
administrative costs, and the deadline for payment. The property owner may appeal the recovery
costs as outlined in division 9 of this article.
(5) Termination Of Utility Services : After lawful notice to the customer and property owner
concerning the proposed disconnection, the public works director shall have the authority to order the
disconnection of city of Rock Island water, sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services, upon a finding
by the public works director that the disconnection of utility services will remove a violation of this
appendix that poses a public health hazard or environmental hazard.
(6) Criminal Prosecution : Any person who violates or continues to violate a prohibition or
requirement of this appendix shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and
shall be subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-35. Criminal Penalties:
Any person violating this appendix shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a
minimum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00). Each separate day on which a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-36. Other Legal Action:
Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the city of Rock Island, if any person
violates this appendix, the city attorney of the city of Rock Island may commence an action for
appropriate legal and equitable relief including damages and court costs. The city attorney of the city of
Rock Island may seek a preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the
activities on the part of the discharger. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-37. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
This appendix is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this appendix and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-
22-2004)
Sec. 1-38. Separability:
The provisions and sections of this appendix shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion
of this appendix shall not affect the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 8. IMPLEMENTATION
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 695/735
This appendix is effective upon passage with the following exceptions:
Sec. 1-39. Subdivision Improvements:
The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit are waived for a period of five (5) years
after the passage date hereof if the preliminary plat of a subdivision was approved by the city council
prior to the passage date hereof. All other requirements of this appendix shall remain in effect. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004; Ord. 092-2005, § 1, 11-7-2005)
Sec. 1-40. Nonsubdivision Improvements Requiring A Building Permit:
The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for nonsubdivision related improvements
requiring a building permit are waived for the duration of the building permit if the building permit was
issued prior to the passage date hereof. All other requirements of this appendix shall remain in effect.
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-41. Improvements That Previously Did Not Require A Permit:
The requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for construction that did not require a
permit prior to the passage date hereof are waived for a period of one year if the construction
commenced prior to the passage date hereof. All other requirements of this appendix shall remain in
effect. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 9. VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Sec. 1-42. General Procedures:
The storm water board of appeals, after a public hearing, may: 1) determine and vary the requirements
and regulations of this appendix in harmony with their general purpose and intent, where the storm water
board of appeals make written findings of fact in accordance with the standards herein after prescribed
and further, find that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of requirements and regulations of this appendix, and 2) uphold, modify or overrule the
decision of the public works director.
A written application for a variance from the requirements of this appendix or an appeal of a decision by
the public works director shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the time that the applicant became aware
of the need for the variance or the decision. The application shall fully state the grounds of the request
and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Each application shall be filed with the public works director.
And said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of eighty dollars ($80.00) toward the
costs of processing the application. Should the application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal
notice thereon, such fee will be returned upon the written request of the applicant.
The storm water board of appeals shall give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of
such hearing by insertion in a daily newspaper published in the city of Rock Island and shall also give
notice delivered personally or by mail at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the
applicant or appellant and to the public works director and to the respective owners of record of property
adjoining or adjacent to the premises in question. Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by
agent, or by attorney.
The refiling of denied requests for variance or appeals denied by the storm water board of appeals, that
are not substantially or materially different from the previously filed request or appeal, shall not be
accepted from the same or different person for the following periods of time:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 696/735
(1) For a six (6) month period from the date of the first decision by the storm water board of appeals.
(2) For a one year period from the date of subsequent decisions by the storm water board of appeals.
The public works director shall determine whether a request is substantially or materially different and
submittable, although the storm water board of appeals may, by majority vote, reverse a decision of the
public works director to not accept a request following a denied request or appeal.
The public works director will review and transmit recommendations to the storm water board of appeals,
which shall review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the variance. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1,
3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-43. Variances:
The storm water board of appeals shall not vary the requirements and regulations of this appendix
unless evidence is presented that proves that the following three (3) situations exist:
(1) The land in question is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is
subject to such title limitations or record, that it is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply
with all of the requirements of this appendix; and
(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of
the applicant; and
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare, environment or injurious
to other property in the vicinity of the subject's property.
The storm water board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for variance within
sixty (60) days after the application for a variance is received by the public works director. Within sixty
(60) days after the public hearing, the storm water board of appeals shall approve the variance with the
conditions it deems necessary, disapprove the variance or take other such action as appropriate. (Ord.
33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-44. Appeals:
The storm water board of appeals shall consider each application for modification to the decision of the
public works director at a public meeting within sixty (60) days after the appeal application is received by
the public works director. Within sixty (60) days after the public meeting, the appropriate entity shall
uphold, modify or overrule the decision of the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 1-45. Storm Water Board Of Appeals:
(a)Creation, Membership And Procedure : A storm water board of appeals consisting of five (5)
members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by city council. Members shall be appointed
for a term of two (2) years except that the city council may remove any member of the board for
cause prior to the expiration of his/her term.
(1) The board shall elect its own chair and vice chair and have the power to adopt rules and
regulations for its own government, not inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this or any
other ordinance of the city of Rock Island. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chair and at such
other times as the board may determine. The chair, or in his absence, the vice chair, may administer
oaths and compel attendance of the witnesses.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 697/735
(2) Meetings of the board shall be open to the public, minutes shall be kept of proceedings, showing
the action of the board and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, or failing to
vote, indicating that fact and records shall be made of the board's examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the city clerk.
(3) Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall act by resolution, and
the concurring vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the public works director, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this appendix, or to effect any variation in the requirements of
this appendix.
(4) The board may call on the city's departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, and
it shall be the duty of such departments to render such assistance to the board as may reasonably be
required.
(b)Judicial Review : All final administrative decisions of the storm water board of appeals shall be subject
to judicial review, pursuant to the provisions of the "administrative review act", approved May 8,
1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord.
33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL
DIVISION 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION
SITES
Sec. 2-1. Responsible Entity:
The owner of a site of construction activity and the contractors working on the construction site shall be
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004; Ord.
094-2006, § 1, 12-18-2006)
Sec. 2-2. Waste Disposal:
Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall
be controlled through the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained
by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste.
Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site is prohibited. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-3. Ready Mixed Concrete:
Ready mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing
or used in transporting or applying ready mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction sites for
proper disposal. Release of these materials is prohibited. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-4. Erosion And Sediment Control:
BMPs shall be implemented to prevent the release of sediment from construction sites. Disturbed areas
shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be managed to
prevent sediment tracking. Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed
immediately. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 698/735
Sec. 2-5. Continued Compliance:
Upon completion of permitted construction activity on any site, the property owner and subsequent
property owners will be responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of this appendix, in
the course of maintenance, reconstruction or any other construction activity on the site. (Ord. 33-2004, §
1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 2. GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 2-6. Permit Exceptions:
Except as exempted below, no person shall commence construction prior to obtaining the appropriate
grading and drainage permit as defined below. The public works director will issue grading and drainage
permits.
In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to circumvent the intent of this appendix,
when a proposed development activity will occur on a lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or
parcels of lands owned by the same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this division will be
applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate ownership parcels.
A grading and drainage permit shall not be required for the following:
(1) Any construction activity below the minimum thresholds for a class 1 grading and drainage permit.
(2) The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a
farm conservation plan approved by the natural resources conservation service, and including the
construction of agricultural structures.
(3) The maintenance of any existing storm water control facility including dredging, levee restoration,
tree removal or other function that maintains the original design capacities of the facility.
(4) The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of any street, road, highway or
interstate highway or other public infrastructure performed by the city of Rock Island. However the
requirements of this appendix will be honored by the city of Rock Island for such improvements. (Ord.
33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-7. Class 1 Grading And Drainage Permit:
Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious surface area (i.e., streets, roof, patio or
parking area or any combination thereof) greater than five hundred (500) square feet and less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet requires a class 1 grading and drainage permit.
The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work
which is described on the approved sketch. A class 1 grading and drainage permit shall be valid for one
year after the date of issuance. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-8. Class 2 Grading And Drainage Permit:
The drainage system for a parcel containing the proposed construction site shall be designed to restrict
the peak rate of discharge from the total parcel (1-hour storm within 1 year) to preproject levels. The
public works director will estimate the peak discharge rates. If the estimated postdevelopment peak
discharge rate must be reduced, the public works director will recommend appropriate storm water
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 699/735
control options. If a mutually acceptable option cannot be developed, the appeal process outlined in
article I, division 9 of this appendix will be followed.
The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work
which is described on the approved sketch. A class 2 grading and drainage permit shall be valid for one
year after the date of issuance.
Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall require a class 2 grading and drainage
permit:
(1) Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious surface area (i.e., streets, roof,
patio or parking area or any combination thereof) greater than or equal to ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and less than one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination
thereof) that will affect an area greater than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) square feet and less
than one acre (43,560 square feet).
(3) Any land disturbing activity that will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards, but does not
otherwise require a class 3 grading and drainage permit.
(4) Any land disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope disturbance line, but does not
otherwise require a class 3 grading and drainage permit.
(5) Construction of one or more single-family dwellings that is/are constructed as part of a subdivision
development with an approved storm water pollution prevention plan. Those that are part of
development for which there is a class 3 grading and drainage permit will not be required to calculate
preproject and postproject discharge rates. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-9. Class 1 And Class 2 Grading And Drainage Permit And Application
Forms:
(a)Name(s), address(es) and telephone numbers of the owner and developer of the site, the
contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant identifying the principal contractor.
(b)Certification that all construction covered by the grading and drainage permit will be undertaken in
compliance with division 1, "General Requirements For All Construction Sites", of this article.
(c)A sketch acceptable to the public works director showing the amount of impervious area being
created.
(d)An application fee as set forth in article V of this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-10. Class 3 Grading And Drainage Permit:
(a)Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall require a class 3 grading and
drainage permit:
(1) Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious surface area (i.e., streets, roof,
patio or parking area or any combination thereof) greater than one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination
thereof) that will affect an area greater than one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) A completed application form shall include:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 700/735
(1) Name(s), address(es) and telephone numbers of the owner and developer of the site, the
contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant identifying the principal contractor.
(2) Certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth
shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
(3) An application fee as set forth in article V of this appendix.
(4) A faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security satisfactory
to the city attorney of the city of Rock Island in an amount deemed sufficient by the public works
director to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and
landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures for such period as specified by the
public works department and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the site on a form acceptable to the public works director. (See sample in
article VI of this appendix.) Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements, the documented
security would be void.
(5) The following information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions
for all applicable developments: a topographic survey of the property at two foot (2') contours (or 1
foot contours for relatively flat areas where additional detail will be required to see drainage designs)
unless otherwise specified or approved by the public works director keyed to a consistent datum
specified by the public works director; and an existing drainage and proposed drainage plan for the
property and one hundred feet (100') surrounding the property at a scale of not more than one
hundred feet (100') to one inch (1"), and including the following (unless otherwise specified by the
public works director):
a. Property boundary, dimensions, and approximate acreage.
b. Building setback lines.
c. All existing and proposed structures and sizes.
d. Square feet of existing and proposed impervious surface.
e. All existing, or proposed easements.
f. All existing, abandoned, or proposed water or monitoring wellhead locations.
g. All existing, abandoned, or proposed water mains.
h. All sanitary or combined sewer lines and septic systems.
i. The banks and centerline of streams and channels.
j. Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins with normal water level elevation.
k. Farm drains and tiles.
l. Location, size and slope of storm water conduits and drainage swales.
m. Detention facilities.
n. Roads, streets and associated storm water inlets including finished grades.
o. Base flood elevation, flood fringe, and regulatory floodway.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 701/735
p. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to its general surroundings at a scale of not
less than two thousand feet (2,000') to one inch (1").
q. Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of licensed professional engineer, date, and name of
person preparing plans.
r. Subwatershed boundaries within the property.
s. Abandoned mines.
t. Soil classifications.
(6) The following certifications and design statements shall be provided:
a. Basis of design for the final drainage system components.
b. A statement giving any applicable engineering assumptions and calculations.
c. A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provision for handling events
greater than the 100-year, 24-hour runoff.
d. Design calculations and other submittals as required by this appendix.
e. A statement of certification of all drainage plans, calculations, and supporting data by a licensed
professional engineer.
(7) A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate vicinity including the
following:
a. The limits of designated regulatory and nonregulatory wetland areas.
b. The location of trees greater than eight inches (8") in diameter in areas to be disturbed.
c. Any designated natural areas or prime farmland.
d. Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
(8) Any and all local, state or federal maps marked to reflect any proposed change in the floodway
delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed
project.
(9) Conditional approval by FEMA or other regulatory agencies of the proposed changes in the
floodway map that have been made if the floodway delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency
flood elevation will change due to the proposed project.
(10) Engineering calculations and data supporting all proposed plans. Hydrologic design shall be
completed in accordance with article III, division 2 hydrologic design criteria of this appendix.
Detention system design shall be completed in accordance with article III, division 3, "Detention
System Design Criteria", of this appendix.
(11) If the project involves channel modification, the following information shall be submitted:
a. A discussion of the purpose and need for the proposed work.
b. Discussion of the practicability of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the
purpose of the proposed work.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 702/735
c. Analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical
and biological conditions of the body of water affected.
d. Additional information as required by this appendix.
(12) Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) prepared in accordance with article IV of this
appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-11. Submittal, Review, And Approval:
If a building permit is also required for the development, the grading and drainage permit application
shall be submitted to the building official at the time application is made for a building permit.
Departments of the city of Rock Island shall coordinate their activities to prevent additional, unnecessary
delays.
(1) Each application for an approved grading and drainage permit shall be reviewed and acted upon
according to the following procedures. The public works director shall:
a. Provide a written evaluation to the applicant regarding the adequacy and effectiveness of the
proposal to address the provisions of this appendix. The public works director may retain the
services of an independent professional to perform this evaluation. The city of Rock Island may
assess a fee for this evaluation service as set forth in article V of this appendix.
b. Attend a preconstruction meeting with the applicant or designated agent to review
implementation of grading and drainage permit.
c. Conduct on site inspections during the active construction phases of and development projects
to determine whether site development is in compliance with the approved grading and drainage
plans, and determine adjustments needed to the approved plans. After construction has been
completed, determine whether permanent site stabilization has been achieved and identify
operation and maintenance needs.
d. Prepare correspondence as needed regarding the effectiveness (or corrective measures
needed) or adequacy of soil erosion and sediment control measures.
e. Consult with land developers, consultants, and contractors concerning the design criteria,
installation and maintenance procedures and other information regarding best management
practices recommended under the provisions of this appendix.
f. After review of the application and required submissions if it is found to be in conformance with
the provisions of this appendix.
1. Approve the grading and drainage permit.
2. Approve the grading and drainage permit subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this appendix, and issue the approval subject
to these conditions.
3. Disapprove the grading and drainage permit, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.
(2) No approval for a grading and drainage permit shall be issued for an intended development site
unless one or more of the following have been obtained as applicable:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 703/735
a. Land use regulations that apply to the development have been approved by the city of Rock
Island where applicable.
b. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the building
official.
c. The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development program previously
approved by the public works director for the area in which the site is situated.
d. All relevant federal, state, and local permits.
e. Applicant is successful in the appeals process.
(3) Failure of the public works director to act on an original or revised application within sixty (60)
days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed and in
compliance with the regulations contained herein, unless such time is extended by agreement
between the public works director and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a revised
plan, development activities may be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by
the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-12. Other Agency Permits:
(a)The public works director shall not issue a grading and drainage permit unless all required federal,
state and drainage district permits have been obtained by the applicant and copies thereof reviewed
by the public works director. The acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant. The granting of a grading and drainage permit under these regulations shall in no way
affect the owner's responsibility to obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance or
code, or to meet the requirements of other city of Rock Island ordinances and regulations, including,
but not limited to: building permits; section 404 of the clean water act; section 106 of the national
historic preservation act; section 10 of the rivers and harbors act; or permitting required by the Illinois
department of natural resources, office of water resources in accordance with the rivers, lakes and
streams act, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes; the soil and water conservation districts act, 70 Illinois
Compiled Statutes; the farmland preservation act, 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes; the Illinois
groundwater protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes; and the national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit (NPDES) and section 401 of the clean water act through the Illinois
environmental protection agency, division of water pollution control; and the threatened and
endangered species act, 16 USC 1531 et seq.
(b)Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined herein, per 92
Illinois administrative code 702 (rules for construction of dams), shall require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit prior to permit being issued by the city of Rock Island. Any development involving work
in waters of the United States, including wetlands and streams as identified and regulated by the
U.S. army corps of engineers, shall require permits or sign-offs from the corps prior to the issuance
of a city of Rock Island permit. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-13. Permit Limitations:
(a)The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work
which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit or on the plans and specifications
approved by the public works director.
(b)The issuance of a permit or the approval of drawings and specifications shall not be construed to be a
permit for, nor an approval of, any violation of or deviation from the provision of these regulations or
any other ordinance, law, rule, or regulation.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 704/735
(c)The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications, shall not prevent the public works
director from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said drawings and specifications or from
stopping unlawful construction operations being carried on thereunder.
(d)The grading and drainage permit shall be valid until the completion date noted in the permit. The
public works director may grant an extension if relevant design and construction standards have not
changed and if in the public works director's opinion, the work approved under the permit does not
unduly adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Otherwise, a new permit
shall be acquired before work is started or continued. The public works director may require
modification of the SWP3 to prevent any increase in erosion or off site sediment runoff resulting from
any extension. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-14. Revocation Of Permits:
(a)The public works director may revoke a permit:
(1) Where there has been any false or inaccurate statement or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit was based.
(2) When work is performed contrary to the provisions of the application or plans on which the permit
is based.
(b)When a permit is revoked, the public works director shall inform the permittee, in writing, of the
specific steps the permittee must take in order to have the permit reissued.
(c)It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized by a permit after revocation of that permit until
that permit is reissued or until a new permit is issued.
(d)In cases where the permittee wishes to appeal the decision of the public works director, the appeal
process outlined in article I, division 9 of this appendix will be followed. An appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the public works director certifies to
the storm water board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 2-15. Retention Of Plans:
Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall be retained as required by Illinois
statute by the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
ARTICLE III. POST CONSTRUCTION RUNOFF CONTROL
DIVISION 1. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES HIERARCHY
Sec. 3-1. Use Of BMPs:
Use of BMPs identified by this appendix, or the use of any other BMPs submitted for approval by the
permittee as a substitute, will be a requirement of this appendix in obtaining approval for subdivisions,
building permits, and grading and drainage permits. Their use will also present an opportunity (in some
cases, when allowed by ordinance) for the permittee to receive credits against their storm water utility
fees. This list of definitions is not exclusive and developers are encouraged to submit alternative BMPs
for approval by the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 705/735
Sec. 3-2. Preserving Regulatory Floodplains, Flood Prone And Wetland Areas:
(a)Buffer Zones : An area along a shoreline, wetland, or stream where development is restricted or
prohibited. The primary function of aquatic buffers is to physically protect and separate a stream,
lake, or wetland from future disturbance or encroachment. The three (3) types of buffers are water
pollution hazard setbacks, vegetated buffers, and engineered buffers.
(b)Conservation Easements : Voluntary agreements that allow an individual or group to set aside private
property to limit the type or amount of development on their property. The conservation easement
can cover all or a portion of a property and can either be permanent or last for a specified time. The
easement is typically described in terms of the resource it is designed to protect (e.g., agricultural,
forest, historic, or open space easements) and explains and mandates the restrictions on the uses of
the particular property. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-3. Minimizing Impervious Surfaces On The Property:
(a)Open Space Design, Conservation Development : A better site design technique that concentrates
dwelling units in a compact area in one portion of the development site in exchange for providing
open space and natural areas elsewhere on the site. The minimum lot sizes, setbacks and frontage
distances for the residential zone are relaxed in order to create the open space.
(b)Narrower Streets : In many residential settings, streets can be as narrow as twenty two (22) to twenty
six feet (26') wide without sacrificing emergency access, on street parking or vehicular and
pedestrian safety. Even narrower access streets or shared driveways can be used when only a
handful of homes need to be served. Use of narrower streets will only be allowed on public streets by
requesting a variance from the city of Rock Island subdivision ordinance.
(c)Eliminating Curbs And Gutters : Elimination of curbs and gutters involves the use of grass swales and
ditches as an alternative to curbs and gutters along residential streets. Eliminating curbs and gutters
from public streets will only be allowed by requesting a variance from the city of Rock Island
subdivision ordinance.
(d)Alternative Turnarounds : Alternative turnarounds are designs for end of street vehicle turnaround that
replace cul-de-sacs and reduce the amount of impervious cover created in residential
neighborhoods. Numerous alternatives create less impervious cover than the traditional forty foot
(40') cul-de-sac. These alternatives include reducing cul-de-sacs to a thirty foot (30') radius and
creating hammerheads, loop roads, and pervious islands in the cul-de-sac center by requesting a
variance from the city of Rock Island subdivision ordinance.
(e)Alternative Pavers : Alternative pavers are permeable surfaces that can replace asphalt and concrete
and can be used for driveways, parking lots, and walkways. Commercially available pavers are used
which contain void spaces for grass or clean, washed stone or gravel. Gravel, cobble, or mulch
parking lots are prohibited. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-4. Storm Water Wetlands, Grassed Swales And Vegetated Filter Strips:
(a)Storm Water Wetlands : Storm water wetlands (a.k.a. constructed wetlands) are structural practices
similar to wet ponds that incorporate wetland plants into the design. Storm water wetlands are
designed specifically for the purpose of treating storm water runoff. A distinction should be made
between using a constructed wetland for storm water management and diverting storm water into a
natural wetland. The latter practice is not recommended because altering the hydrology of the
existing wetland with additional storm water can degrade the resource and result in plant die off and
the destruction of wildlife habitat.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 706/735
(b)Grassed Swales : The term swale (a.k.a. grassed channel, dry swale, wet swale, bio-filter) refers to a
series of vegetated, open channel management practices designed specifically to treat and attenuate
storm water runoff for a specified water quality volume. As storm water runoff flows through these
channels, it is treated through filtering by the vegetation in the channel, filtering through a subsoil
matrix, and/or infiltration into the underlying soils.
(c)Vegetated Filter Strips : Vegetated surfaces that are designed to treat sheet flow from adjacent
surfaces. Filter strips function by slowing runoff velocities and filtering out sediment and other
pollutants. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-5. Infiltrating Runoff On Site:
(a)Sand And Organic Filters : Sand filters are usually two (2) chambered storm water practices; the first
is a settling chamber, and the second is a filter bed filled with sand or another filtering media. As
storm water flows into the first chamber, large particles settle out, and then finer particles and other
pollutants are removed as storm water flows through the filtering medium. There are several
modifications of the basic sand filter design, including the surface sand filter, underground sand filter,
perimeter sand filter, organic media filter, and multichamber treatment train.
(b)Infiltration Trenches : An infiltration trench is a rock filled trench with no outlet that receives storm
water runoff. Storm water runoff passes through some combination of pretreatment measures, such
as a swale and detention basin, and into the trench. There, runoff is stored in the void space between
the stones and infiltrates through the bottom and into the soil matrix.
(c)Infiltration Basins : A shallow impoundment which is designed to infiltrate storm water into the ground
water. Infiltration basins should only be used on small drainage areas (less than 10 acres), and
where soils are highly permeable.
(d)Porous Pavements : Porous pavement is a permeable pavement surface with an underlying stone
reservoir to temporarily store surface runoff before it infiltrates into the subsoil. This porous surface
replaces traditional pavement, allowing parking lot storm water to infiltrate directly and receive water
quality treatment. There are a few porous pavement options, including porous asphalt, pervious
concrete, and grass pavers.
(e)Bioretention : Bioretention areas are landscaping features adapted to provide on site treatment of
storm water runoff. They are commonly located in parking lot islands or within small pockets of
residential land uses. Surface runoff is directed into shallow, landscaped depressions. These
depressions are designed to incorporate many of the pollutant removal mechanisms that operate in
forested ecosystems. During storms, runoff ponds above the mulch and soil in the system. Runoff
from larger storms is generally diverted past the facility to the storm drain system. The remaining
runoff filters through the mulch and prepared soil mix. Typically, the filtered runoff is collected in a
perforated underdrain and returned to the storm drain system. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-6. Providing Storm Water Retention Structures:
(a)On Lot Treatment : A series of practices that are designed to collect runoff from individual residential
or small commercial lots. The primary purpose of most on lot practices is to manage rooftop runoff
and, to a lesser extent, driveway and sidewalk runoff. Although there are a wide variety of on lot
treatment options, they can all be classified into one of three (3) categories: 1) practices that collect
and infiltrate rooftop runoff; 2) practices that divert runoff or soil moisture to a pervious area; and 3)
practices that store runoff for later use.
(b)Retention Basins : Retention basins that are designed to collect and hold storm water runoff, with no
outlet pipes or structures. They are not necessarily infiltration basins, and are best designed to rely
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 707/735
mostly on evaporation. Retention basins are only feasible when special circumstances of land and
soil type are available. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-7. Providing Wet Or Wetland Detention Structures:
Defined and controlled under division 3, "Detention System Design Criteria", of this article. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-8. Providing Dry Detention Structures:
Defined and controlled under division 3, "Detention System Design Criteria", of this article. Detention
basins shall be designed to remove floatables from storm water runoff by providing trash grates or
special outlet structures which separate floatables. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-9. Constructing Storm Sewers:
(a)Manufactured Products For Storm Water Inlets : A variety of products for storm water inlets known as
swirl separators, or hydrodynamic structures. Swirl separators are modifications of the traditional oilgrit
separator and include an internal component that creates a swirling motion as storm water flows
through a cylindrical chamber. The concept behind these designs is that sediments settle out as
storm water moves in this swirling path. Additional compartments or chambers are sometimes
present to trap oil and other floatables. There are several different types of proprietary separators,
each of which incorporates slightly different design variations, such as off line application.
(b)Catch Basin Inserts : Catch basin efficiency can be improved using commercially available inserts,
which can be designed to remove oil and grease, trash, debris, and sediment. Some inserts are
designed to drop directly into existing catch basins, while others may require being installed as part
of the construction of the basin.
(c)In Line Storage Structures : In line storage refers to a number of practices designed to use the
storage within the storm drain system to detain flows. Storage is achieved by placing devices in the
storm drain system to restrict the rate of flow. Devices can slow the rate of flow by backing up flow,
as in the case of a dam or weir, or through the use of vortex valves, devices that reduce flow rates by
creating a helical flow path in the structure. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-10. Water Quality And Multiple Uses:
The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse surface and ground water quality impacts
off site and on the property itself. Detention basins shall incorporate design features to capture storm
water runoff pollutants. All flows from the development shall be routed through the basin (i.e., low flows
shall not be bypassed). Detention of storm water shall be promoted throughout the property's drainage
system to reduce the volume of storm water runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants. The
drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable. Uses considered compatible with
storm water management include open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, fishing,
trails, playing fields), wetlands and water quality mitigation. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
DIVISION 2. HYDROLOGIC DESIGN CRITERIA FOR CLASS 3 PROJECTS
Sec. 3-11. Referenced Standards:
Design standards for hydrologic design shall comply with these regulations and with the applicable
provisions of the IDOT drainage and design manuals. Where the IDOT drainage and design manuals do
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 708/735
not detail requirements, the "Illinois Urban Manual", latest edition, shall be used. Where this appendix
imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by the IDOT drainage and design manuals or those
required by other provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this appendix shall prevail. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-12. Release Rates:
The drainage system for new developments or redevelopments shall be designed to control the peak
rate of discharge from the total property under development for the 2-year, 24-hour, 10-year, 24-hour
and 100-year, 24-hour events (3 recurrence interval events to consider) to preproject levels which will
not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in aggregate with
other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities. Where a detailed hydrologic or
hydraulic model exists, release rates shall be established and incorporated as part of this appendix.
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-13. Drainage System Design And Evaluation:
The following criteria should be used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The design will
provide capacity to pass the 10-year, 24-hour peak flow in the minor drainage system and an overload
flow path (major drainage system) for flows in excess of the design capacity. Whenever practicable, the
storm water systems shall not result in the interbasin transfer of drainage unless no other alternative
exists.
The design rainfall recurrence interval shall be set by the design application as follows:
Detention 100-year
Emergency overflow routing 100-year
Bridges 100-year
Roadway underpasses 50-year
Swales, ditches, and culverts 25-year
Storm sewers 10-year
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-14. Design Methodologies:
An applicable hydrologic design method may be selected from the "IDOT Drainage Manual" with the
following modifications and clarifications. Minor conveyance systems for areas up to one hundred (100)
acres, and major conveyance systems up to ten (10) acres may be designed using the rational formula.
Design runoff rates may be calculated using a continuous simulation model or by event hydrographic
methods. If event hydrographic methods are used they must be HEC-HMS, HEC-1, SCS TR20, or SCS
TR55. Event methods must incorporate the following assumptions:
(1) Antecedent moisture condition 2 (normal moisture).
(2) Huff or SCS type 2 distribution.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 709/735
For design events the Illinois state water survey bulletin 70 (northwest) rainfall data must be used.
Storage volumes for detention must be 24-hour events. Storm water conveyance capacities must be
designed for the critical duration creating the highest peak. The following table lists data from bulletin 70:
FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS (IN INCHES) FOR ZONE 1
ILLINOIS STATE WATER SURVEY, BULLETIN 70
Duration Frequency
2-month 6-month 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-year
48 hour 1.47 2.24 2.80 3.42 4.28 4.96 6.07 7.02 8.07
24 hour 1.40 2.08 2.57 3.11 3.95 4.63 5.60 6.53 7.36
18 hour 1.30 1.92 2.37 2.86 3.63 4.26 5.15 6.01 6.92
12 hour 1.23 1.81 2.24 2.71 3.43 4.03 4.88 5.66 6.51
6 hour 1.06 1.56 1.93 2.33 2.96 3.48 4.20 4.90 5.69
2 hour 0.84 1.23 1.52 1.83 2.33 2.74 3.31 3.86 4.47
1 hour 0.67 0.98 1.21 1.46 1.86 2.18 2.63 3.07 3.51
30 minute 0.52 0.77 0.95 1.15 1.46 1.71 2.07 2.42 2.77
15 minute 0.38 0.57 0.70 0.84 1.07 1.25 1.51 1.76 1.99
5 minute 0.17 0.25 0.31 0.37 0.47 0.56 0.67 0.78 0.89
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-15. Positive Drainage:
All developments must be provided an overland flow path that will pass the 100-year, 24-hour flow within
designated drainage easements or the public right of way with a freeboard of at least one foot (1').
Overland flow paths shall be provided drainage easements unless the flow is contained in the public
right of way. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-16. Culvert, Road And Driveway Crossings:
Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the
culvert. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-17. Vegetated Filter Strips And Swales:
To effectively filter storm water pollutants and promote infiltration of runoff, sites should be designed to
maximize the use of vegetated filter strips and swales, shall be designed to follow criteria in the "Illinois
Urban Manual". Whenever practicable, runoff from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter
strips and swales comprised of native grasses and forbs before being routed to a storm sewer or
detention basin. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-18. Maintenance Considerations:
The storm water drainage system shall be designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Use of
native vegetation is strongly encouraged to reduce maintenance, increase wildlife habitat, and to provide
other benefits. Where nonnative vegetation is used, turfed side slopes shall be designed to allow lawn
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 710/735
mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins shall be provided with alternate outflows, which
can be used to completely drain the pool for sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if drainage
by gravity is not feasible. Presedimentation basins shall be included, where feasible, for localizing
sediment deposition and removal. Site access for heavy equipment shall be provided. A maintenance
plan for the ongoing maintenance of all storm water management system components including
wetlands is required prior to plan approval. The plan shall include:
(1) Maintenance tasks.
(2) The party responsible for performing the maintenance tasks.
(3) A description of all permanent public or private access maintenance easements and overland flow
paths, and compensatory storage areas.
(4) A description of dedicated sources of funding for the required maintenance. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-
22-2004)
Sec. 3-19. Provisions For Agricultural Drainage:
(a)Existing easements for any agricultural drainage systems located underneath areas that will be
developed shall be preserved. If no such easement exists, an easement shall be dedicated for
access and maintenance as provided for in this appendix.
(b)All agricultural drainage systems that serve upstream areas outside of the development and that are
located underneath areas that will be developed shall be replaced with nonperforated conduit to
prevent root blockage, provided, however, that the existing drainage district system may remain in
place with the approval of the appropriate entity.
(c)Agricultural drainage systems that, due to development, will be located underneath streets,
driveways, and other paved areas as allowed by this appendix, shall be replaced with conduits
meeting the city of Rock Island standard specifications, as needed to prevent the collapse of the
agricultural drainage conduit.
(d)Agricultural drainage systems may be relocated within the development area upon the approval of the
public works director. Such relocation shall maintain sufficient slope and capacity to prevent
sedimentation and to prevent an increase in scouring or structural damage to the conduit. Such
relocation shall only be with the consent and approval of the appropriate entity responsible for the
system. If the system is not under the authority of a drainage district, the public works director shall
consider the interests of those landowners who are served by the system. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 3-20. Channel Modifications:
Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water
quality. If the proposed development activity involves a channel modification, it must be demonstrated
that:
(1) Water quality and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification or
the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values.
(2) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize
its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the stream or body of water affected. (Ord. 33-2004,
§ 1, 3-22-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 711/735
DIVISION 3. DETENTION SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA
Sec. 3-21. Referenced Standards:
Design standards for detention basin design and construction shall comply with the provisions of the
following, unless otherwise stated by this appendix:
(1) "IL Urban Manual", latest edition.
(2) "IDOT Standard Specifications", latest edition.
(3) "IDOT Drainage Manual", latest edition.
(4) IL department of natural resources dam safety regulations.
(5) Clean water act (discharges regulated by the United States EPA through NPDES permits).
(6) City of Rock Island standard details and specifications.
(7) The city of Rock Island subdivision, zoning or floodplain ordinances. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 3-22. Detention Storage Requirements:
The design storage to be provided in the detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the runoff
difference before and after development from the 100-year, 24-hour event. All detention basin storage
shall be computed using hydrograph methods utilizing reservoir routing (also called modified puls or
level pool) or equivalent method as described by this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-23. Waiver Of Requirements:
(a)The requirement for storm water detention and release rate does not apply when:
(1) The development is in accord with the approved site plan and is on a lot in a new subdivision for
which detention is otherwise provided.
(2) The development is on a lot or parcel in a subdivision for which detention was provided and
approved prior to the effective date of these regulations.
(b)The requirement for storm water detention and release rate shall be waived by the public works
director when he/she determines it is in the best interest of the city of Rock Island to require a fee in
lieu of detention as described in section 3-35 of this division. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-24. Ownership:
Detention basins are owned by the property owner (often a homeowners' association) unless otherwise
described by this appendix or indicated by the public works director. Property developers shall contact
the public works director to inquire about the ownership and maintenance responsibility of existing
regional detention basins which may affect the development. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-25. Maintenance And Repair Responsibilities:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 712/735
(a)Detention ponds and associated inflow and outflow systems are maintained by the property owner
absent any specific legal agreement to the contrary.
(b)Maintenance agreements may be required at the option of the public works director to define parties
responsible for the maintenance of commercial detention basins.
(c)The detention basin owner shall be responsible for the following items:
(1) An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the attached checklist, shall be submitted
to the public works director.
(2) At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a professional engineer registered in the
state of Illinois. A report of this inspection shall be submitted to the public works director within sixty
(60) days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist items in the
attached checklist. An annual report is not required the year when the five (5) year report is due.
(3) Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of their maintenance responsibilities and
transfer basin maintenance records to the party with active maintenance responsibility.
(4) These requirements shall be effective for all detention basins existing in the city of Rock Island on
the adoption date hereof as well as detention basins constructed after the effective date. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-26. General Basin Design Requirements:
(a)Erosion Control : Temporary and permanent erosion control shall be required for all detention basins
in accordance with this appendix.
(b)Verification And Final Approval :
(1) Erosion protection shall be inspected throughout the project duration.
(2) Detention basin storage volume shall be verified to the satisfaction of the public works director
through as built surveys or other means.
(3) Inflow, outflow and emergency overflow elevations shall be verified through as built surveys.
(4) Final vegetative cover and permanent erosion control shall be inspected for completeness of
cover.
(5) The basin will receive final approval upon fulfillment of subsections (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(4) of this
section, and the anniversary date of maintenance and repair reporting will be recorded as such.
(6) All basins must receive final approval within ninety (90) days of the substantial completion as
determined by the public works director of any of the following:
a. The first phase (as shown on approved plans) of construction of public utilities and roadways in
any approved subdivision project. Detention structures for the ultimate development area must be
constructed during the first phase of the project, and approved at its completion. The detention
structures must then be maintained and repaired in conformance with this appendix, during future
construction phases.
b. Parking areas, floor slabs and/or other impervious areas (as shown on approved plans, and not
including sidewalks) for work on an individual lot requiring an individual permit under this appendix.
Phased construction will be treated as in the above case.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 713/735
c. Mass earthwork or rough grading, if no other phased construction is scheduled to be started
within one hundred eighty (180) days.
(7) Failure to receive final approval as required will be considered a violation of this appendix.
(c)Infiltration Practices : To effectively reduce runoff volumes, infiltration practices including basins,
trenches, and porous pavement and shall follow criteria in the "Illinois Urban Manual" and other
relevant permitting. An appropriate sediment control device shall be provided to remove coarse
sediment from storm water flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches. Storm water shall
not be allowed to stand more than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of the dry
basin's bottom area for the maximum design event to be exfiltrated. The bottom of infiltration basins
or trenches shall be a minimum of three feet (3') above the seasonally high ground water and
bedrock level if practicable. Engineering calculations demonstrating infiltration rates shall be included
with the application.
(d)Side Slopes : The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year, 24-hour capacity should be as level
as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the basin and for stability and ease of maintenance.
Side slopes of detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1)
horizontal to vertical - certain types of basins have different requirements as defined by this
appendix. Detention basin side slopes above normal pool shall be designed with permanent erosion
protection consisting of grass, nongrass vegetation, or other permanent finish. At least six inches (6")
of topsoil must be provided on side slopes above normal pool elevation whenever nonstructural,
permanent erosion control is not being used. Permanent erosion protection shall be aesthetically
suitable to the development or existing surrounding land use.
(e)Overflow Structures : All storm water detention basins shall be provided with an overflow structure
capable of safely passing excess flows at a stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation
grade in the vicinity of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure shall be
equivalent to the 100-year, 24-hour inflow rate. Weirs, dams and specialized outflows shall be
designed by a professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
(f)Detention Basin Outlet Design :
(1) Backwater : Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be
addressed when designing the outlet.
(2) Minimum Detention Outlet Size : Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control
discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of twelve inches (12"). If design release rates call for
smaller outlets, a design that minimizes the possibility of clogging shall be used.
(g)Other Design Requirements :
(1) "Bubble up" outlets are prohibited.
(2) Pumped outlets and other active control structures are discouraged and must be preapproved on
a case by case basis by the public works director.
(3) Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure a full stand of cover vegetation
in minimum time.
(h)Location Requirements :
(1) In subdivisions, detention basins and their 100-year design high water shall be contained within
platted lots dedicated for drainage purposes. In redevelopments, detention basins and their 100-year
design high water shall be contained within a drainage easement.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 714/735
(2) Detention basin lots shall have a minimum of twenty feet (20') of frontage on a right of way for the
purpose of providing unrestricted access for maintenance. Exceptions may be made for infill
development.
(3) A twenty foot (20') minimum setback shall be required from all property lines to the normal pool
elevation which is considered to be the elevation of the water level at the permanent depth of the wet
basin pool rather than the temporary depth during drainage events.
(4) Detention basins shall be provided with a minimum of one foot (1') of freeboard above the 100-
year design water elevation.
(5) There shall be at least two feet (2') of freeboard between the 100-year design water elevation and
all boundaries of the parcel or easement containing the basin.
(i)Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas : Storm water runoff from areas tributary to the
property shall be considered in the design of the property's drainage system. Flows from upstream
areas that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site being
developed.
(j)Upstream Areas Not Meeting Ordinance Requirements : When there are areas not meeting the
storage and release rates of this appendix, tributary to the applicant's property, the following steps
shall be followed:
(1) The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his property using the release rates
and procedures described in this appendix.
(2) Areas tributary to the applicant's property, not meeting the storage and release rate requirements
of this appendix, shall be identified.
(3) Using the areas determined above plus the applicant's property area, total storage and release
rates needed for the combined properties shall be computed using the release rates and procedures
described in this appendix. If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully developed land
cover, based on local zoning, shall be used for the purposes of computing storage.
(4) Once the necessary combined storage is computed the city of Rock Island may choose to pay for
oversizing the applicant's detention basin to accommodate the regional flows. The applicant's
responsibility will be limited to the storage for his property as computed above. If regional storage is
selected by the city of Rock Island, the public works director will work with the applicant to implement
the requirements of this appendix. If regional storage is rejected by the city of Rock Island, the
applicant shall bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever practicable as
determined by the public works director. If the applicant must route upstream flows through his basin
and the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size, the applicant must meet the provisions of
subsection 3-30(3), "On Stream Detention", of this division.
(k)Upstream Areas Meeting Appendix Requirements : When there are areas which meet the storage and
release rate requirements of this appendix, tributary to the applicant's property, the upstream flows
shall be bypassed around the applicant's detention basin if this is the only practicable alternative as
determined by public works director. Storage needed for the applicant's property shall be computed
as described in this appendix. However, if the city of Rock Island decides to route tributary area flows
through an applicant's basin, the final design storm water releases shall be based on the combined
total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas. It must be shown that at no time will the runoff
rate from the applicant's property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property alone.
(l)Early Completion Of Detention Facilities : Where detention or retention are to be used as part of the
drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 715/735
program. Any eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant on a
regular basis and before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-27. Wet Detention Basin Design:
Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove storm water pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically
pleasing, and as much as feasible to be available for recreational use.
(1) Wet Basin Depths : Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep, excluding near-shore banks
and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided they shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over
twenty five percent (25%) of the bottom area to prevent winter kill.
(2) Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes : The side slopes of wet basins at the normal pool elevation shall not
be steeper than five to one (5:1) horizontal to vertical. It is recommended that native aquatic
vegetation be established around the perimeter to provide protection from shoreline erosion. Slopes
below a depth of eight feet (8') are permitted to be two to one (2:1), in accordance with "IDOT
Standard Specifications", section 204.
(3) Permanent Pool Volume : The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at normal depth shall be
equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-year, 24-hour event as a minimum.
(4) Wet Basin Inlet And Outlet Orientation : The distance between detention inlets and outlets shall
be maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of the basin providing that the orientation
does not create undue hardship based on topography or other natural constraints. Designers are
encouraged to use baffles or berms in the basin bottom to prevent short circuiting. There shall be no
low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. The minimum flow length shall be ten feet (10') with a
recommended minimum ratio of two to one (2:1) for width.
(5) Safety Ledge : All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge at least four feet (4') in
width two and one-half (2 1/2) to three feet (3') below the normal water depth.
(6) Aeration : Wet bottom basins shall have a natural or artificial means of aeration.
(7) Dewatering : An outlet structure shall be provided to allow dewatering of the pond for
maintenance. Gravity dewatering is strongly preferred.
(8) Soil Permeability : Wet bottom basin design shall include an evaluation of soil permeability. A
basin liner shall be included in the design if needed to ensure water retention to normal pool
elevation.
(9) Detention/Sedimentation : It is encouraged that consideration of routing runoff from the
development through a stilling basin be considered. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-28. Dry Detention Basin Design:
In addition to the other requirements of this appendix, dry basins shall be designed to remove storm
water pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be available for
multiple uses.
(1) Dry Basin Drainage : Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty percent (80%) of their bottom
area shall have standing water no longer than seventy two (72) hours for any runoff event less than
the 100-year, 24-hour event. Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the wet portion of the basin
bottom. Underdrains directed to the outlet may be used to accomplish this requirement.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 716/735
(2) Minimum Bottom Slope : Dry bottom basins shall have two percent (2%) minimum bottom slopes
or underdrain systems as approved by the city engineer.
(3) Low Flow Channel : Dry bottom basins may include a low flow channel with some form of erosion
protection.
(4) Velocity Dissipation : Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to
minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize resuspension of pollutants.
(5) Dry Basin Inlet And Outlet Orientation : Dry basin inlet and outlet orientation shall be the same as
for wet basins.
(6) Temporary Sediment Trap : A sediment trap shall be constructed at each major inlet to a dry basin
during construction. The temporary sediment trap should be designed in accordance with criteria in
the "Illinois Urban Manual". (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-29. Detention On Prime Farmland:
The placement of detention basins shall avoid the utilization of prime farmland. All detention basin
construction shall examine potential impacts to adjacent agricultural land and shall address measures
that will be implemented to eliminate such impacts and comply with other relevant permitting. (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-30. Detention In Floodplains:
The placement of detention basins within the floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions
about their reliable operation during flood events. However, the storm water detention requirements of
this appendix may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe areas on the project site,
provided the following provisions are met as well as all required state, federal and local permits:
(1) Detention In Flood Fringe Areas : The placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe area shall
require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied by
the detention basin, including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall still
be controlled consistent with the requirements of this division. The applicant shall demonstrate its
operation for all stream flow and floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory
storage along watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All
floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the existing
10-year elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the existing 10-year flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(2) Detention In Floodways : Detention basins shall be placed in the floodway only in accordance
with subsection (3) of this section.
(3) On Stream Detention : On stream detention basins are discouraged but allowable if they provide
regional public benefits and if they meet the other provisions of this appendix with respect to water
quality and control of the 5-year and 100-year, 24-hour events from the property. The volume of
detention shall be provided in addition to the existing stream floodway storage. Further criteria are
presented in section 3-31 of this division. If on stream detention is used in watersheds larger than
one square mile, the applicant will use hydrographic modeling to demonstrate that the design will not
increase the water level for any properties upstream or downstream of the property. Also,
impoundment of the stream as part of on stream detention:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 717/735
a. Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream
areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;
b. Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat;
c. Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures,
and a presedimentation basin;
d. Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of wetlands;
e. Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source management program
throughout the upstream watershed which shall include as a minimum: Runoff reduction "best
management practices" (BMPs) consistent with division 1 of this article;
f. Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge;
g. Shall not contribute to the duration or flood frequency of any adjacent land. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1,
3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-31. Drainage Into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds, And Areas:
Wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes and ponds shall be protected from damaging modifications and adverse
changes in runoff quality and quantity associated with land developments. In addition to the other
requirements of this appendix, the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose
drainage flows into wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes or ponds:
(1) Detention In Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes Or Ponds : Existing wetlands, rivers, streams,
lakes, or ponds shall not be modified for the purposes of storm water detention unless it is
demonstrated that the proposed modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to
perform beneficial functions and shall comply with other relevant permitting. Existing storage and
release rate characteristics of wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes or ponds shall be maintained and the
volume of detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this division shall be in addition to
this existing storage.
(2) Sediment Control : The existing wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes or ponds shall be protected
during construction and as further regulated in division 1 of this article.
(3) Alteration Of Drainage Patterns : Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially
decrease or increase the existing area tributary to wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes or ponds.
Drainage patterns shall not be altered by development to direct runoff off site to other than natural
drainage outlets existing prior to development.
(4) Detention/Sedimentation : All runoff from the development shall be routed through a preliminary
detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture the 2-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least
twenty four (24) hours, before being discharged to the basin. This basin shall be constructed before
property grading begins and shall be maintained throughout the construction process. In addition, the
BMP hierarchy defined in section 3-5 of this article should be followed to minimize runoff volumes
and rates being discharged.
(5) Vegetated Buffer Strip : A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width, preferably
vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the periphery of a
wetland, river, stream, lake or pond. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-32. Street Detention:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 718/735
If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major drainage system, ponding depths shall follow the
criteria below:
(1) Principal And Minor Arterials :
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty feet (20') of the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
(2) Collector Streets :
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center ten feet (10') of the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
(3) Local Streets :
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not top the curb.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1,
3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-33. Parking Lot Detention:
The maximum storm water ponding depth in any parking area shall not exceed six inches (6"). (Ord. 33-
2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-34. Rooftop Detention:
Rooftop storage of excess storm water shall be designed and constructed to meet with the city of Rock
Island building code. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 3-35. Fee In Lieu Of Detention:
(a)For the purpose of satisfying the requirements for storm water detention or compensatory storage for
a development or redevelopment on a property for which detention or compensatory storage was not
previously provided, a fee in lieu of detention or compensatory storage may be assessed against the
development prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be calculated to establish the property's fair
share of costs to provide detention or compensatory storage for the watershed or drainage basin in
which the property exists. The cost figures used for detention shall be actual costs for detention or
compensatory storage being provided by contract or estimated costs for planned detention or
compensatory storage facilities approved by the public works director. All revenues received through
such fees shall be used for no purpose other than defraying public costs associated with providing
detention or compensatory storage facilities.
(b)The city of Rock Island also may require a fee for each acre/foot of detention needed in lieu of the
applicant building a basin on site, provided the property will discharge storm water into existing or
proposed detention facilities with added capacity for the additional runoff. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 3-36. Cooperative Detention:
The city of Rock Island will consider joint detention facilities developed through cooperative efforts that
comply with all requirements of this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 719/735
ARTICLE IV. STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3)
Sec. 4-1. General:
(a)The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property area unless the applicable plans
specifically exclude certain areas from disturbance.
(b)The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWP3 and notification of all contractors
and utility agencies on the site.
(c)SWP3s must be provided for all phases of development, including sanitary sewer construction, storm
drainage system construction, waterline, street and sidewalk construction, general grading and the
construction of individual homes. The class 3 grading and drainage permit holder will not be required
to provide an SWP3 for the activities of utility agencies.
(d)The regulations for construction or postconstruction management will be used for all regulated
construction sites that are contained in the most recent edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual".
(e)The city of Rock Island will use the Illinois department of transportation (IDOT) system of compliance
that is outlined in the "Bureau Of Design And Environment (BDE) Design Manual".
(f)The subsequent owners of individual lots in a subdivision with an approved SWP3 bears the
responsibility for continued implementation of the approved SWP3s for all construction activity within
or related to the individual lot, excluding construction managed by utility agencies. (Ord. 33-2004, §
1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-2. Requirements For Utility Construction:
(a)Utility companies shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this appendix.
(b)Utility companies shall develop and implement best management practices (BMPs) to prevent the
discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction within the city of Rock Island. Disturbed
areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be
managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed
immediately by the utility agency.
(c)Prior to entering a construction site, utility agencies shall obtain a copy of any SWP3s for the project
from the owner. Any disturbance to BMPs resulting from utility construction shall be repaired
immediately by the utility company in compliance with the SWP3. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-3. Required Documentation:
A class 3 grading and drainage permit requires the execution and record maintenance of the following
forms and reports (see also the erosion control plan action matrix, NPDES action matrix - IDOT). The
most current version of the standard forms from the Illinois department of transportation and the Illinois
environmental protection agency (IEPA) shall be used. The approved project erosion control documents
shall be kept on file at the construction site or at a nearby field office and must be made available to the
general public upon request.
(1) A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) using the IDOT SWP3 template (form BDE
2342).
(2) A contractor certification statement (CCS) prepared prior to the start of construction by the
contractor responsible for erosion control using the IDOT CCS template (form BDE 2342a). The
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 720/735
grading and drainage permit holder shall provide the contractor responsible for erosion control with a
copy of the IEPA NPDES statewide permit ILR10.
(3) A notice of intent (NOI) shall be filed at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the start of construction
and shall be prepared by the grading and drainage permit holder (the original sent by certified mail to
the IEPA with transmittal copy to the public works director, and a copy kept in the project erosion
control file). Use the IDOT NOI template (found in forms section of the "IDOT Construction Manual"
WPC 623).
(4) An NPDES/erosion control inspection report (ECIR) shall be prepared by the grading and
drainage permit holder on a weekly basis and after any one-half inch (1/2") rainfall (to be kept in
project erosion control file). Use current IDOT ECIR template (BC 2259).
(5) An incidence of noncompliance (ION) and corrective action shall be filed by the grading and
drainage permit holder within five (5) working days of the incident (the original sent by certified mail
to the IEPA with transmittal copy to the public works director and a copy kept in the project erosion
control file). Use current IDOT ION template (found in forms section of the "IDOT Construction
Manual" WPC 624).
(6) A notice of termination (NOT) shall be filed upon final stabilization of erosion (minimum 70
percent viable vegetative growth) by the grading and drainage permit holder (the original sent by
certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy to the public works director and a copy kept in the
project erosion control file). Use current IDOT NOT template V (found in forms section of the "IDOT
Construction Manual" WPC 621). (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-4. Applicability And Guidelines:
(a)It is the responsibility of the grading and drainage permit holder to prepare and maintain
documentation to meet the NPDES permit requirements for private grading and construction projects.
(b)The public works director shall be given immediate access to all required project NPDES documents.
(c)All notices sent to the IEPA shall be copied to the public works director. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 4-5. Referenced Standards:
Design standards for erosion and sediment control shall comply with the most current provisions of the
USEPA regulations, IEPA regulations, IDOT erosion control/NPDES guidelines and per the "Illinois
Urban Manual", prepared by the United States department of agriculture, natural resources conservation
service unless otherwise stated by this appendix. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-6. General Erosion And Sediment Control Design Features:
The following principles shall apply to all construction undertaken under the authorization of a class 3
grading and drainage permit:
(1) New development or redevelopment shall be designed to create the least potential for erosion.
The disturbance of slopes greater than seven percent (7%) should be avoided wherever possible.
Natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
(2) Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately
adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands are to be left undisturbed wherever
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 721/735
possible. Temporary crossings of watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate
stabilization measures.
(3) Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from any necessary
development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond or wetland. Preventive measures
shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.
(4) The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during
development.
(5) Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate sediment or runoff
control measures shall be installed prior to site clearing and grading and maintained to remove
sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development.
(6) In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of
continuing maintenance must be considered.
(7) Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways should be designed so that their
final gradients and the resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on
site or downstream.
(8) Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional as soon as practical during
development. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with approved permanent measures within seven
(7) calendar days following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance.
(9) Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses shall be vegetated
with an appropriate protective cover prior to development.
(10) All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be properly disposed of and
shall be prevented from being carried off the site by either wind or water.
(11) All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public
or private roadways.
(12) All temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained to function as
intended until the contributing drainage area has been permanently stabilized at which time they shall
be removed within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-7. Materials And Construction Notes:
(a)Silt fence and coconut fiber shall be installed in accordance with the material and construction
requirements of the "Illinois Urban Manual".
(b)Erosion control blankets, bales, seeding and riprap shall be installed in accordance with material and
construction requirements of the "Illinois Urban Manual", latest edition. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-
2004)
Sec. 4-8. Testing And Inspection:
Use the residents' weekly NPDES/erosion control inspection report BC 2259 from the "Illinois DOT
Construction Manual". (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-9. Soil Grading And Drainage Plan Requirements:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 722/735
A soil grading and drainage plan shall be submitted showing all measures necessary to meet the
objectives of this appendix throughout all phases of construction. The development of a soil grading and
drainage plan shall follow the requirements of this appendix and the procedures in the latest edition of
the "Illinois Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control" which is
hereby incorporated into this appendix by reference. Standards and specifications for BMPs shall follow
the requirements of this appendix and the criteria in the latest edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual" which
is hereby incorporated into this appendix by reference. The public works director may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to
show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this appendix. Permanent soil
erosion and sediment control features needed at the completion of any development site shall be
included in the submittal.
The submitted soil grading and drainage plan shall include:
(1) Mapping And Descriptions : The existing and proposed erosion and sediment control features of
the property and immediate vicinity including:
a. Items as required for the grading and drainage plan submittal.
b. Location of the slope disturbance line.
c. Location and description of the soil erosion and sediment control measures to be employed
during construction.
d. For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of the slope disturbance line, the
map shall include the limits of disturbance including: tree removal, soil erosion and sediment
control measures during construction, details of method(s) proposed for providing slope stability,
permanent storm water control measures, and permanent erosion and sediment control measures
all being certified by a registered professional engineer or a "certified professional erosion control
specialist".
e. The predominant soil types on the site, their location, and their limitations for the proposed use
as defined by the USDA natural resources conservation service (NRCS).
f. Location and description, including standard details, of all sediment control measures and
specifics of sediment basins and traps, including outlet details.
g. Location and description (specification) of all soil stabilization and erosion control measures,
including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation (type and
extent of tillage, weed control, planting equipment, etc.), expected seeding dates, type, method
and rate of lime and fertilizer application (soil fertility testing required), kind and quantity of
mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures, and types of
nonvegetative stabilization measures.
h. Location and description of all runoff control measures, including diversions, waterways, and
outlets.
(2) Larger Sites : Larger sites, at the discretion of the public works director, and those requiring a
storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3), may also require the following:
a. Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment off site including
construction entrance details, as appropriate.
b. Description of dust and traffic control measures.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 723/735
c. Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and frequency of maintenance,
easements, and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
d. Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of soil erosion control structures and measures during development
and after development is completed. (Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 4-10. Site Development Requirements:
On site sediment control measures, as specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed as
specified in the referenced handbooks, and functional prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating or fill activities on the site:
(1) For new developments or redevelopments of more than one acre but less than five (5) acres, a
sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the
disturbed area.
(2) For new developments or redevelopments of one acre or greater than five (5) acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed
area.
(3) Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both "dry" detention and "wet"
detention sediment storage. The detention storage shall be composed of equal volumes of "wet"
detention storage and "dry" detention storage and each shall be sized as regulated in this appendix.
The release rate of the basin shall be that rate as regulated in this appendix. The elevation of the
outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage.
(4) The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site
over the duration of the construction period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume or
sediment generated in one year. For construction periods exceeding one year, the one year sediment
load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
(5) To the extent possible or as otherwise regulated in this appendix all desirable trees eight inches
(8") in diameter and larger shall be protected for their present and future value for erosion protection
and other environmental benefits. Trees that have been selected for preservation shall be protected
following criteria from "Illinois Urban Manual" prior to the beginning of any clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, or filling of the site. A "no" construction zone shall be established and marked at the
perimeter of the dripline of each tree which is to be preserved.
(6) Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and diversions, and the outlets of
all channels and pipes shall be designed and constructed as regulated in this appendix. All
constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the
following standards and as required in the referenced handbooks:
a. For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with mulch, erosion blanket, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the
bottom of the channel.
b. For grades of four (4) to eight percent (8%), sod or an equivalent control measure shall be
applied in the channel.
c. For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an equivalent control measure shall
be applied over filter fabric or other type of soil protection, or the grade shall be effectively reduced
using drop structures.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 724/735
(7) Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where possible, or as regulated
by this appendix. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
a. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum extent
practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary, temporary crossings shall be constructed
of nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
b. The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a minimum. The stream
channel, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel
disturbance is completed, interrupted, or stopped.
c. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be constructed under dry
conditions and fully stabilized before flow is diverted, incorporating meanders, pool and riffle
sequence, and riparian planting.
(8) Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting
accepted design standards and specifications.
(9) Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of material shall not be located with a
downslope drainage length of less than fifty feet (50') to a roadway, drainage channel, or abandoned
mine. Filter barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed immediately
surrounding the perimeter of the pile.
(10) If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All pumped
discharges shall be routed through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent
and shall not be deposited into an abandoned mine.
(11) Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access drives, and parking areas
of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
ARTICLE V. FEES
Sec. 5-1. Fees Regulated:
(a)Grading and drainage permits $10.00
(b)Appeal to the storm water
board of appeals80.00
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
ARTICLE VI. SAMPLE FORMS
Sec. 6-1. Letter Of Credit:
SAMPLE
LETTER OF CREDIT
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 725/735
(name of bank)
(City bank's located) , (State)
Irrevocable Credit No. Date: , 20
City of Rock Island, Illinois All drafts must be marked:
, Illinois"Drawn under Credit No. ,
dated ______, 20
Gentlemen:
We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of
($ ) in your favor for the account of
(Developer), the developer of (name of project) ,
proposed in the City of Rock Island , Illinois,
or within its territorial jurisdiction, for the benefit of the City of Rock Island.
Said money hereunder shall be available by your drafts at sight drawn on us drawn in the name of the
City of Rock Island, Illinois. All drafts so drawn must be marked "Drawn under (name of bank) , Credit
No. dated , 20 ."
Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the Public Works Director of the City of Rock
Island, Illinois, that the request is for the installation or construction of improvements required pursuant
to the plans, specifications, and cost estimates dated , 20 , and approved by the City of Rock Island,
Illinois, and on file with the Public Works Director. Further, all requests for disbursements under this
Letter of Credit made prior to (must be 2 years after filing) , 20 , shall be submitted by developer and
accompanied by a certified estimate of units and value of work completed with contractor's sworn
statement and waiver of mechanics' liens, all approved by the Developer's engineer and the Public
Works Director of the City of Rock Island, Illinois. It is understood as to all disbursements that the Public
Works Director shall approve partial drawings only as long as there remains a sufficient balance to the
Credit to cover his then current estimate of costs for the required improvements which at that time
remain to be completed but in no case shall his approval exceed ninety percent (90%) of the value of
work completed.
In the event that all of the work for the improvements is not completed to the satisfaction of the
City/County on or before (1 day short of 2 years after filing) , 20 , the funds remaining under this Letter of
Credit shall be available to the City of Rock Island, Illinois upon presentation of their draft at sight drawn
on us in the name of the City of Rock Island, Illinois. This draft so drawn must be marked "Drawn under
(name of bank) , Credit No. , dated , 20 ." Further, such draft shall be accompanied by a signed
statement by the Public Works Director of the City of Rock Island, Illinois as follows: "I, (name) , Public
Works Director for the City of Rock Island, Illinois, do hereby certify that work on required improvements
for the project named has not been completed to the satisfaction of the City of Rock Island, Illinois on or
before (one day short of two years after filing) , 20 .
This Credit shall expire on (2 years after filing) , 20 ; provided, however, the undersigned shall notify the
Public Works Director by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 90 days prior to expiration date
that this Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided, however, in no event shall this Credit expire
except upon prior written notice, it being expressly agreed by the undersigned that the above expiration
date shall be extended as shall be required to comply with this notice provision.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 726/735
The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force and effect and pertain to any
and all amendments or modifications which may be made from time to time to the specifications, and
agreements for the project, without notice from the City/County of the amendments or modifications.
All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this Irrevocable Letter of Credit have
been completed.
We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of drafts, drawn under and in
compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same shall be honored upon presentation to the drawer.
This Credit must accompany any draft which exhausts the Credit and must be surrendered concurrently
with the presentation of such draft.
We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this Credit will be honored
upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date any demand made in conformity with this Credit is
presented, we fail to honor same, we agree to pay all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses
incurred by the City/County of in enforcing the terms of this Credit.
Dated: , 20 .
(name of bank)
By
(title)
Attest:
(title)
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 6-2. Performance Bond:
SAMPLE
PERFORMANCE BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that , as
PRINCIPAL, , as SURETY, and ,
as ADDITIONAL SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto the City/County of ,
Illinois, as OBLIGEE, in the sum of
($ ) lawful money of the United States, for the payment whereof to the Obligee, the Principal and the
Surety, and Additional Surety bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and
assigns, jointly and severally, firmly to these presents:
SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED, THIS day of , 20 .
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 727/735
WHEREAS, application was made to the Obligee for approval of a project entitled " " , located in the
City/County of , Illinois, filed with the Public Works Director of the City of Rock Island, Illinois, on , 20 ,
said project may be approved upon certain conditions, one of which is that a performance bond in the
amount of
($ ) , to be filed with the City/County Clerk to guarantee certain improvements in said project.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that if the above named
Principal shall within two (2) years from the date hereof will and truly make and perform the required
improvements and construction of public improvements in and adjacent to said project in accordance
with the specifications of the City of Rock Island and the Storm Water Regulations of the City of Rock
Island, then this obligation to be void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that any required improvements have not been
installed as provided aforesaid within the term of this Performance Bond, the City Council of the City of
Rock Island may thereupon declare this bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining payable
thereunder and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the City of Rock Island shall install such
improvements as are covered by this bond and commensurate with the extent of development that has
taken place in said project but not exceeding the amount of such proceeds.
Principal
By: Principal
Surety
By:
Attorney in Fact
Additional Surety
Approved as to Form:
By:
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 6-3. Covenant For Storm Water Detention Basin:
Covenant To Be Included In Subdivision Covenants
Storm Water Detention Basin
A storm water detention basin has been constructed within the subdivision, in accordance with the
requirements of the municipal storm water ordinance, and is so designated as "Detention Basin" on
subdivision plat. The detention basin shall provide for the temporary detention of storm water runoff from
the subdivision to meet release rates as required by the municipality.
The real estate upon which the detention basin is located, designated as Outlot A on the Plat, shall be
deeded from the Developer to the Homeowner's Association upon the sale of 75% of the lots within the
Subdivision.
The Developer as owner, and subsequent to the conveyance of title, the Homeowners Association as
owner, shall be responsible for the following:
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 728/735
a. An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the checklist, designated below, shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director.
b. At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Illinois. A report of this inspection shall be submitted to the Public Works Director within sixty
(60) days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist items in the
checklist below. An annual report is not required the year the five-year report is due.
c. The Developer, as owner, shall notify the Homeowners Association of its maintenance responsibilities
and transfer basin maintenance records to the Homeowners Association.
Each owner of an improved lot within the Subdivision shall be assessed by the Homeowners Association
for the cost of maintaining the Detention Basin and for the cost of complying with the requirements of
these covenants and the requirements of the municipality. The Declaration regarding the establishment
of a Homeowners Association and the procedures for the assessment and collection of dues for the cost
of maintaining the detention basin shall be filed and recorded by the Developer as a separate document.
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIVE AND PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND CONDITIONS
REGARDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION FOR THE STORM
WATER DETENTION BASIN SYSTEM AS LOCATED WITHIN
Dated
Filed
To
The Public
This Declaration, made on the date hereinafter set forth by , hereinafter referred to as "Declarant".
WITNESSETH:
Whereas, Declarant is the owner of certain property in the City of , Rock Island County, Illinois, which is
more particularly described as:
NOW, THEREFORE, Declarant hereby declares that all of the properties described above shall be held,
sold and conveyed subject to the following easements, restrictions, covenants and conditions, all of
which are for the purpose of enhancing and protecting the value, desirability and attractiveness of the
real property, and for the purpose of complying with storm water retention requirements of the City of .
These covenants, restrictions and conditions shall run with the real property and shall be binding on all
parties having or acquiring any right, title or interest in the described property or any part thereof, and
shall inure to the benefit of each owner thereof.
ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 729/735
1. "Association" shall mean and refer to Homeowners Association of , Inc., an Illinois nonprofit
corporation, its successors and assigns.
2. "Properties" shall mean and refer to that certain real property hereinbefore described, more
particularly described as: Lots through of , City of , Illinois, and such additions thereto as may hereafter
be brought within the jurisdiction of the Association.
3. "Lot" shall mean and refer to any plot of land shown upon any recorded subdivision map or plat of the
properties.
4. "Member" shall mean and refer to every person or entity who hold membership in the association.
5. "Owner" shall mean and refer to the record owner, whether one or more persons or entities, of a fee
simple title to any lot which is a part of the Properties, including contract sellers, but excluding those
having such interest merely as security for the performance of an obligation.
6. "Declarant" shall mean and refer to , to successors and assigns, if such successors or assigns should
acquire more than one undeveloped lot from the Declarant for the purpose of Development.
7. "Developer" shall mean the same as "Declarant".
ARTICLE II
MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS
Every person or entity who is a record owner of a fee or undivided fee interest in any Lot which is subject
by covenants of record to assessment by the Association, including contract Sellers, shall be a member
of the Association. The foregoing is not intended to include persons or entities who hold an interest
merely as security for the performance of an obligation. No owner shall have more than one
membership. Membership shall be appurtenant to and may not be separated from ownership of any lot
which is subject to assessment by the Association. Ownership of such lot shall be the sole qualification
for membership.
ARTICLE III
ESCROW FUND FOR MAINTENANCE
The primary source of funds for maintenance of the master storm water detention system shall be an
escrow fund. Declarant shall establish the Escrow Fund at some local banking institution at such time as
the first lot in The Properties is transferred to an owner other than the Declarant. The Association shall
have the power to expend the escrow fund for maintenance authorized in accordance with the provisions
of Article V.
ARTICLE IV
COVENANT FOR MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT
1. Creation of the lien and Personal Obligation of Assessments. The Declarant, for each improved Lot
owned within the Properties, hereby covenants, and each Owner of any Lot by acceptance of a Deed
therefore, whether or not it shall be so expressed in such Deed, is deemed to covenant and agree to pay
to the Association: (1) annual assessments or charges, such assessments to be established and
collected from time to time as hereinafter provided. The term "improved Lot" shall mean any Lot having a
building erected thereon and ready for occupancy as approved by the City of , Illinois. The annual
assessments, together with interest, shall be a charge on the land and shall be a continuing lien upon
the property against which each such assessment is made. Each assessment together with interest,
costs and reasonable attorney's fees for collection, shall also be the personal obligation of the person or
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 730/735
entity who was the owner of such property at the time the assessment fell due. The personal obligation
for delinquent assessments shall not pass to his successors in title unless expressly assumed by them.
2. Purpose of Assessments. The assessments levied by the Association shall be used exclusively to
maintain the storm water detention basin system, as provided for under the Restrictive and Protective
Covenants of . The Board of Directors of the Association shall establish a budget by January 1st of each
year and shall levy an assessment upon each improved Lot without the Subdivision by February 1st of
each year, payable by the 1st day of May.
3. Notice and Quorum for Any Action Authorized Under Section 3. Written notice of any meeting called
for the purpose of establishing the budget and making the assessment shall be sent to all members not
less than 15 days nor more than 30 days in advance of the meeting. At the first such meeting called, the
presence of Members or of proxies entitled to cast 50% of all votes of each class of membership shall
constitute a quorum. If the required quorum is not present, another meeting may be called subject to the
same notice requirement, and the required quorum at the subsequent meeting shall be one-half of the
required quorum at the preceding meeting. No such subsequent meeting shall be held more than 60
days following the preceding meeting.
4. Uniform Rate of Assessment. Annual assessments must be fixed at a uniform rate for all improved
Lots and shall be collected on an annual installment basis, except as hereinafter provided.
5. Date of Commencement of Annual Assessments; Due Dates. The annual assessments provided for
herein shall commence as to all improved Lots on the first day of the month following the conveyance of
any such improved Lot. The first annual assessment shall be adjusted according to the number of
months remaining in the calendar year. The Board of Directors of the Association shall fix the amount of
the annual assessment against each lot at least 30 days in advance of each annual assessment period.
Written notice of the annual assessment shall be sent to every Owner subject thereto. The annual
assessment shall be paid in one annual payment, and the due dates and delinquency dates shall be
uniformly established by the Board of Directors of the Association. The Association shall, upon demand,
and for a reasonable charge, furnish a certificate signed by an officer of the Association setting forth
whether the assessments on a specified Lot are current or delinquent. Such certificate shall be
conclusive evidence of payment of any assessment therein stated to have been paid.
6. Effect of Non-payment of Assessments: Remedies of the Association. Any annual payment not paid
within 30 days after the due date shall bear interest from the date of delinquency at the rate of 10% per
annum. The Association may bring any action at law against the Owner personally obligated to pay the
same, or foreclose the lien against the property by an action in equity. In any such action, interest, costs
and reasonable attorneys fees shall be added to the amount of the delinquent assessment and collected
as part of said judgment. In the event of such foreclosure, if the Association waives any and all rights to
a deficiency judgment against the Owner, the period for redemption as provided by the statutes of the
State of Illinois shall be reduced to six months from the date of foreclosure sale. Any lot ultimately
acquired by the Association through Judges Deed after such a foreclosure shall be sold by the
Association within a reasonable time either at public or private sale, and any surplus remaining after the
payment of assessments, interest, costs and attorney's fees shall be paid over to the former Owner of
said Lot. No Owner may waiver or otherwise escape liability for the assessments provided for herein by
non-use of the Detention Basin or by abandonment of his Lot.
7. Subordination of the Lien to Mortgages. The lien of the assessments provided for herein shall be
subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage placed upon any Lot. Sale or transfer of any Lot shall not
affect the assessment lien. However, the sale or transfer of any lot pursuant to Mortgage foreclosure or
any assessments as to payments which became due prior to such sale or transfer, provided that such
sale or transfer shall not extinguish the personal obligation of the prior Owner or his heirs, successors or
assigns, for payment of such assessment. No sale or transfer shall relieve such Lot from liability for any
assessments thereafter becoming due or from the lien thereof.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 731/735
ARTICLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Enforcement. The Association, or any Owner shall have the right to enforce by any proceeding at law
or in equity all restrictions, conditions, covenants or reservations now or hereafter imposed by the
provisions of this Declaration. The Association shall have the sole right to enforce, by proceedings at law
or in equity, the liens and charges now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of this Declaration. Failure
by the Association or by any Owner to enforce any covenant or restriction herein contained shall in no
event be deemed a waiver of the right to do so thereafter.
2. Severability. Invalidation of any one of these covenants or restrictions by judgment or Court Order
shall in no wise affect any other provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
3. Duration. The covenants and restrictions of this Declaration shall run with and bind the land, for a term
of 21 years from the date this Declaration is recorded, after which time they shall be automatically
extended for successive periods of 10 years each.
4. Amendment. This Declaration may be amended during the first 21 years period by an instrument
signed by not less than 75% of the Lot owners and thereafter by an instrument signed by not less than
65% of the Lot Owners, provided, however, that no such amendment shall be valid or effective until is
has been, and a certified copy of said resolution, and a certified copy of the amendment adopted by the
Lot Owners, having both been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Rock Island, Illinois.
By:
OWNER AND DECLARANT
By:
OWNER AND DECLARANT
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)
Sec. 6-3. Covenant For Storm Water Detention Basin:
Covenant To Be Included In Subdivision Covenants
Storm Water Detention Basin
A storm water detention basin has been constructed within the subdivision, in accordance with the
requirements of the municipal storm water ordinance, and is so designated as "Detention Basin" on
subdivision plat. The detention basin shall provide for the temporary detention of storm water runoff from
the subdivision to meet release rates as required by the municipality.
The real estate upon which the detention basin is located, designated as Outlot A on the Plat, shall be
deeded from the Developer to the Homeowner's Association upon the sale of 75% of the lots within the
Subdivision.
The Developer as owner, and subsequent to the conveyance of title, the Homeowners Association as
owner, shall be responsible for the following:
a. An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the checklist, designated below, shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 732/735
b. At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Illinois. A report of this inspection shall be submitted to the Public Works Director within sixty
(60) days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist items in the
checklist below. An annual report is not required the year the five-year report is due.
c. The Developer, as owner, shall notify the Homeowners Association of its maintenance responsibilities
and transfer basin maintenance records to the Homeowners Association.
Each owner of an improved lot within the Subdivision shall be assessed by the Homeowners Association
for the cost of maintaining the Detention Basin and for the cost of complying with the requirements of
these covenants and the requirements of the municipality. The Declaration regarding the establishment
of a Homeowners Association and the procedures for the assessment and collection of dues for the cost
of maintaining the detention basin shall be filed and recorded by the Developer as a separate document.
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIVE AND PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND CONDITIONS
REGARDING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION FOR THE STORM
WATER DETENTION BASIN SYSTEM AS LOCATED WITHIN
Dated
Filed
To
The Public
This Declaration, made on the date hereinafter set forth by , hereinafter referred to as "Declarant".
WITNESSETH:
Whereas, Declarant is the owner of certain property in the City of , Rock Island County, Illinois, which is
more particularly described as:
NOW, THEREFORE, Declarant hereby declares that all of the properties described above shall be held,
sold and conveyed subject to the following easements, restrictions, covenants and conditions, all of
which are for the purpose of enhancing and protecting the value, desirability and attractiveness of the
real property, and for the purpose of complying with storm water retention requirements of the City of .
These covenants, restrictions and conditions shall run with the real property and shall be binding on all
parties having or acquiring any right, title or interest in the described property or any part thereof, and
shall inure to the benefit of each owner thereof.
ARTICLE I.
DEFINITIONS
1. "Association" shall mean and refer to Homeowners Association of , Inc., an Illinois nonprofit
corporation, its successors and assigns.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 733/735
2. "Properties" shall mean and refer to that certain real property hereinbefore described, more
particularly described as: Lots through of , City of , Illinois, and such additions thereto as may hereafter
be brought within the jurisdiction of the Association.
3. "Lot" shall mean and refer to any plot of land shown upon any recorded subdivision map or plat of the
properties.
4. "Member" shall mean and refer to every person or entity who hold membership in the association.
5. "Owner" shall mean and refer to the record owner, whether one or more persons or entities, of a fee
simple title to any lot which is a part of the Properties, including contract sellers, but excluding those
having such interest merely as security for the performance of an obligation.
6. "Declarant" shall mean and refer to , to successors and assigns, if such successors or assigns should
acquire more than one undeveloped lot from the Declarant for the purpose of Development.
7. "Developer" shall mean the same as "Declarant".
ARTICLE II
MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS
Every person or entity who is a record owner of a fee or undivided fee interest in any Lot which is subject
by covenants of record to assessment by the Association, including contract Sellers, shall be a member
of the Association. The foregoing is not intended to include persons or entities who hold an interest
merely as security for the performance of an obligation. No owner shall have more than one
membership. Membership shall be appurtenant to and may not be separated from ownership of any lot
which is subject to assessment by the Association. Ownership of such lot shall be the sole qualification
for membership.
ARTICLE III
ESCROW FUND FOR MAINTENANCE
The primary source of funds for maintenance of the master storm water detention system shall be an
escrow fund. Declarant shall establish the Escrow Fund at some local banking institution at such time as
the first lot in The Properties is transferred to an owner other than the Declarant. The Association shall
have the power to expend the escrow fund for maintenance authorized in accordance with the provisions
of Article V.
ARTICLE IV
COVENANT FOR MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT
1. Creation of the lien and Personal Obligation of Assessments. The Declarant, for each improved Lot
owned within the Properties, hereby covenants, and each Owner of any Lot by acceptance of a Deed
therefore, whether or not it shall be so expressed in such Deed, is deemed to covenant and agree to pay
to the Association: (1) annual assessments or charges, such assessments to be established and
collected from time to time as hereinafter provided. The term "improved Lot" shall mean any Lot having a
building erected thereon and ready for occupancy as approved by the City of , Illinois. The annual
assessments, together with interest, shall be a charge on the land and shall be a continuing lien upon
the property against which each such assessment is made. Each assessment together with interest,
costs and reasonable attorney's fees for collection, shall also be the personal obligation of the person or
entity who was the owner of such property at the time the assessment fell due. The personal obligation
for delinquent assessments shall not pass to his successors in title unless expressly assumed by them.
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 734/735
2. Purpose of Assessments. The assessments levied by the Association shall be used exclusively to
maintain the storm water detention basin system, as provided for under the Restrictive and Protective
Covenants of . The Board of Directors of the Association shall establish a budget by January 1st of each
year and shall levy an assessment upon each improved Lot without the Subdivision by February 1st of
each year, payable by the 1st day of May.
3. Notice and Quorum for Any Action Authorized Under Section 3. Written notice of any meeting called
for the purpose of establishing the budget and making the assessment shall be sent to all members not
less than 15 days nor more than 30 days in advance of the meeting. At the first such meeting called, the
presence of Members or of proxies entitled to cast 50% of all votes of each class of membership shall
constitute a quorum. If the required quorum is not present, another meeting may be called subject to the
same notice requirement, and the required quorum at the subsequent meeting shall be one-half of the
required quorum at the preceding meeting. No such subsequent meeting shall be held more than 60
days following the preceding meeting.
4. Uniform Rate of Assessment. Annual assessments must be fixed at a uniform rate for all improved
Lots and shall be collected on an annual installment basis, except as hereinafter provided.
5. Date of Commencement of Annual Assessments; Due Dates. The annual assessments provided for
herein shall commence as to all improved Lots on the first day of the month following the conveyance of
any such improved Lot. The first annual assessment shall be adjusted according to the number of
months remaining in the calendar year. The Board of Directors of the Association shall fix the amount of
the annual assessment against each lot at least 30 days in advance of each annual assessment period.
Written notice of the annual assessment shall be sent to every Owner subject thereto. The annual
assessment shall be paid in one annual payment, and the due dates and delinquency dates shall be
uniformly established by the Board of Directors of the Association. The Association shall, upon demand,
and for a reasonable charge, furnish a certificate signed by an officer of the Association setting forth
whether the assessments on a specified Lot are current or delinquent. Such certificate shall be
conclusive evidence of payment of any assessment therein stated to have been paid.
6. Effect of Non-payment of Assessments: Remedies of the Association. Any annual payment not paid
within 30 days after the due date shall bear interest from the date of delinquency at the rate of 10% per
annum. The Association may bring any action at law against the Owner personally obligated to pay the
same, or foreclose the lien against the property by an action in equity. In any such action, interest, costs
and reasonable attorneys fees shall be added to the amount of the delinquent assessment and collected
as part of said judgment. In the event of such foreclosure, if the Association waives any and all rights to
a deficiency judgment against the Owner, the period for redemption as provided by the statutes of the
State of Illinois shall be reduced to six months from the date of foreclosure sale. Any lot ultimately
acquired by the Association through Judges Deed after such a foreclosure shall be sold by the
Association within a reasonable time either at public or private sale, and any surplus remaining after the
payment of assessments, interest, costs and attorney's fees shall be paid over to the former Owner of
said Lot. No Owner may waiver or otherwise escape liability for the assessments provided for herein by
non-use of the Detention Basin or by abandonment of his Lot.
7. Subordination of the Lien to Mortgages. The lien of the assessments provided for herein shall be
subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage placed upon any Lot. Sale or transfer of any Lot shall not
affect the assessment lien. However, the sale or transfer of any lot pursuant to Mortgage foreclosure or
any assessments as to payments which became due prior to such sale or transfer, provided that such
sale or transfer shall not extinguish the personal obligation of the prior Owner or his heirs, successors or
assigns, for payment of such assessment. No sale or transfer shall relieve such Lot from liability for any
assessments thereafter becoming due or from the lien thereof.
ARTICLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12/20/2019 Code Book Viewer
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/IL/Rock Island/index.htm 735/735
1. Enforcement. The Association, or any Owner shall have the right to enforce by any proceeding at law
or in equity all restrictions, conditions, covenants or reservations now or hereafter imposed by the
provisions of this Declaration. The Association shall have the sole right to enforce, by proceedings at law
or in equity, the liens and charges now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of this Declaration. Failure
by the Association or by any Owner to enforce any covenant or restriction herein contained shall in no
event be deemed a waiver of the right to do so thereafter.
2. Severability. Invalidation of any one of these covenants or restrictions by judgment or Court Order
shall in no wise affect any other provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.
3. Duration. The covenants and restrictions of this Declaration shall run with and bind the land, for a term
of 21 years from the date this Declaration is recorded, after which time they shall be automatically
extended for successive periods of 10 years each.
4. Amendment. This Declaration may be amended during the first 21 years period by an instrument
signed by not less than 75% of the Lot owners and thereafter by an instrument signed by not less than
65% of the Lot Owners, provided, however, that no such amendment shall be valid or effective until is
has been, and a certified copy of said resolution, and a certified copy of the amendment adopted by the
Lot Owners, having both been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Rock Island, Illinois.
By:
OWNER AND DECLARANT
By:
OWNER AND DECLARANT
(Ord. 33-2004, § 1, 3-22-2004)